THE COMMENTARIES of M. JOHN CALVIN upon the Acts of the Apostles, Faithfully
translated out of Latin into English for the great profit of our
countrie-men, By Christopher Fetherstone student in Divinity.

LONDINI, Impensis G. Bishop.

1585.

To the right Honorable the Lord Henry, Earl of Huntington, Lord Hastings,
etc. Knight of the most honorable order of the Garter, and Lord President of
the Queens Majesty's Counsel established in the North parts: Christopher
Fetherstone wishes increase of spiritual gifts, long life, and happy days.
IF that (right Honorable) I should prefixe any long and tedious Preface
before this work in commendation of your Honor, I should of some be suspected
of flattery: If in praise of these learned Commentaries, it should seem a
thing superfluous, seeing they sufficiently commend themselves: If in excuse
of those faults which are by me in translating hereof committed: some
censuring Cato would condemn me, because I would take in hand a work so
weighty, being not able to be without fault, and by craving pardon for
faults, lay open my folly. Omitting thefore these things which might carry
with them such inconveniences, I hasten unto that whereof I am chiefly to
speak: namely to lay open the causes moving me to dedicate this my simple
translation unto your Honor. Your deserts of Gods church, your singular zeal,
your unfeigned faith, your sincere profession, your especial care to advance
Gods glory, and to root out papistrie, your faithfulness toward your Prince
have been such, that this Realm generally, but my countriemen in the North
parts, my native soil specially, have and shall have great cause to praise God
for you in the day of their visitation, even when it shall please God of his
great mercy to behold them with favorable countenance, and to take from them
in greater measure that blindness and superstition, wherein they had been long
time nousled, and being fast bred by the bone, is not yet (through want of
means) gotten out of the flesh. Seeing all these virtues are in you to be
found: seeing both this church and country have found you so beneficial, whom
ought not these things to provoke to show all thankfulness toward your honor?
Again, when this history of the Acts of the Apostles was first penned in Gr^
by Luke, it was dedicated to noble Theophilus: When M. Calvin did the second
time publish his Commentaries thereupon in Latin, he presented them unto one
who was in mind a noble Theophilus. Least therefore this work now published
in English, should by dedication be any whit debased, I have made choice of
your honor, being no less a noble Theophilus than those before mentioned.
Another thing which is not so much a cause as an encourageme^t, is that
courtesy which your honor shows to those, which present unto you any
exercises of learning how simple soever they be; whereof I have had full good
experience, even in my tender years: namely, at such time as I was trained up
in the city of Carlisle, under that man in his calling painful, and to the
commonwealth profitable, M. Hayes, whom for that duty which to him I owe, I
name. At which time though those exercises which unto your honor we then
presented were simple, yet were they so courteously of you received, that the
remembrance thereof does even now encourage me to presume to offer unto you
some weightier matter. The last, but not the least, is, the consideration of
that great and undeserved kindness, which all my friends in general, but
especially, my brother your Honors servant, have found at your hands, which to
rip up at large, would be too tedious. In their behalf therefore (right
Honorable) as also in mine own, as a small testimony of a thankful heart, I
present unto your honor this work; simple, if you respect the translation,
but most excellent if you consider the matter. And thus humbly craving pardon
for my boldness, and much more humbly beseeching the Lord to bless you in
the reading hereof, I conclude, fearing, prolixitie. The Lord of heaven bless
you, and grant that as you have been heretofore a good Theophilus, so you may
continue to the glory of God, the increasing of his church, and the profit of
this common wealth.

From Maighfield in Sussex this 12. of October. 1585. Your Honors most humble
and obedient, and in Christ at commandment, Christopher Fetherstone.

The Epistle to the Reader.
THou have at length (Christian Reader) through the blessing of God wherewith
he has blessed my labors, those learned Commentaries of M. Calvin upon the
Acts of the Apostles, though simply, yet faithfully turned into English: and
though of many I was the vnmeetest to attempt this travel; yet such was the
earnest request of my godly friends, that unless I should have taken it in
hand, I should have seemed void of courtesy, and also of care to profit God
his Church. I will not stand to rip up those commodities, which thou by reading
these Commentaries may reap, but I leave them to thine own experience. What
my travel has been in this work, those who have endured like toil, can best
judge. And forasmuch as I know well that after great pains taken, some things
have escaped me, I beseech thee (gentle reader) condemn me not rashly, but
rather amend them friendly. If thou shall grow forward in knowledge by
reading this work, then praise God, who has by this means made thee profit.
God give thee good success in reading, that thereby thou may both be
better learned and also better lived.

Thine in the Lord, Christopher Fetherstone.

To the most renowned Prince the L. Nicolas Radziwill, duke in Olika, County
Palatine of Vilna, chief Marshall and head Chauncellar of the great Dukedom
Lethuania, etc. his Lord highly to be reverenced, John Calvin.
Whereas I have made mention of the names of those kings unto whom I had
dedicated these my Commentaries: least the change incur the crime of
lightness among certain unskillful men, I must briefly render some reason
thereof. For although both the remembrance of the father who is dead, does
retain that reverence with me which it deserves; and I do also as becomes
me reverence the son: yet the importunatenes of certain did enforce me to
put out their names in this second edition, who being incensed against me with
a furious hatred and fear, least the majesty of kings do purchase some favor
to my writings, do boast abroad that they did conceive sore displeasure, that
their name was mixed with the doctrine of the sacraments which they them selves
disalow. I leave it indifferent whether that be true or no, neither do I
pass: forasmuch as I did neither hunt after any private gain, ne yet seek
to win favor. But because it seemed to me an indecent and filthy thing, to
enforce those books upon men which are unwilling to entertain them, which do
find willing readers enough, it was worth the declaring now, that I never did
think any thing less: but that I did hope for more courtesy than I found. In
that truly there can be no offense, if withdrawing my self from the contempt
of those who loath my dutifulness, I suffer them to enjoy those delights of
theirs which they desire, and wherein they delight. Of you (most famous prince)
have I made choice not without good cause, whom I might put in the place of
two: both because I think you most worthy, to have your name appear in the
spiritual building of Christ's temple: neither do I fear but that my book
shall find the same friendship at your hands, which you did vouchsafe to
declare toward me in your most gentle letters. But omitting at this time the
respect of private good will, I will stay in another thing. Moreover I may full
well apply unto you that speech which I had before with another. Neither am I
determined in this place to commend those most excellent virtues wherewith you
have purchased great authority and singular favor with the king of Polonia: I
am rather bent unto an exhortation, the sum whereof shall be this, that with
the like readiness and joyfulness wherewith you have at the beginning received the
pure doctrine of the Gospel, that with the like stoutnes of courage wherewith
you have hitherto endeavored to maintain the true worship of God, you do with
the same constancy prosecute this course unto the end. It was surely a point
of rare virtue, that whereas you did know that many did have nothing more then,
than the frank profession and free study of godliness, yet so soon as the
truth of the Gospel of Christ did once shine and appear unto you, you did
not fear by giving your name to provoke their hatred against you. Neither do
those offices and good turns deserve small praise, which you did not cease to
bestow upon the cherishing and increasing of the first beginnings of the
Church: although this your diligence did purchase unto you great envy amongst
many noble men, which did not allow the same. But because you have no less
hard straites to pass through, you must oftentimes stir up and encourage
your self to overcome them all, until you have finished the last act: And so
much the more carefully, because many princes, although they see the estate of
the Church filthily corrupt, yet dare they attempt no remedy: because that
danger which they fear will proceed from innovation, when euilles must be
driven out of their old and quiet possession, does hinder and keep them back
from doing their duty. Other some think it to be an absurd and foolish
thing, to touch or set hand to diseases which are incurable. Other some (I
cannot tell through what frowardness) do fly from and abhor all manner of
reformation. But to entreat of those lets wherewith you are enuironned on
every side, it were superfluous, especially seeing you know them well
enough: Yet howsoever Satan does assault you, and with what combats soever he
does exercise you, you can not without great wickedness be weary of this
holy warfare, which you have professed under Christ his banner. Furthermore,
although you be forward enough of your self: yet I hope it will neither be
troublesome, neither yet unprofitable for you to have your prosperous course of
your earnest study, helped and furthered with this help which God does offer
unto your hands by me. So often as we see things tossed to and fro, and as
it were turned topsie turuie in the world, there can no more fit and sure
proppe be found to establishe and stay our weak consciences, than when as
setting before our eyes the kingdom of Christ, as it does now appear, we
consider what has been the estate and condition of the same from the
beginning. When we speak of the kingdom of Christ, we must respect two
things: the doctrine of the Gospel, whereby Christ does gather unto himself a
church, and whereby he governs the same, being gathered together: Secondly,
the society of the godly, who being coupled together by the sincere faith of
the gospel, are truly accounted the people of God. Both which things how
lively they are expressed by Luke in the Acts of the Apostles, it is better to
know by the reading of the whole book, than to believe either my commendation
or the commendation of any man else. For although the son of GOD has always
reigned, even from the first beginning of the world: yet after that being
revealed in the flesh, he published his Gospel, he began then to erect a
more famous Tribunal seat than before, whence he does now appear most
plainly and to be also most glorious. If we turn our eyes hither, they shall be
fed, not with a vain picture (as Virgil says of his Aeneas) but with the
sound knowledge of those things from which we must fetch life. And to the end I
may return unto that whereof I determined to speak; this is the best refuge
for the conscience of men, where they may quietly rest amidst these troublesome
tempests, wherewith the world is shaken. Finally, this meditation alone shall
bring to pass, that that shall never befall us, which too too many experiments
do prove to have been truly spoken by Ennius in times past of the more part of
men, that wisdom is driven away so often as the matter is handled by
violence. For if in the greatest and most vehement heat of combats, the sweet
harmony of instruments was of such force amongst the Lacedaemonians, that it
did aswage that furiousnes and fearcenes which was engendered in that warlike
people, and did temper that violence, which does then out of measure rage in
those natures, which are otherwise impatient: how much more shall the kingdom
of Christ do this, by the heavenly pleasant tune of the holy Ghost, which does
not only tame most cruel beasts, but makes also Lambs of Wolves, Lions, and
Bears; which turns spears into hooks, and swords into ploughshares?
Therefore seeing that (most noble Prince) I offer unto you such kind of
temperature as the necessity of times requires, I hope that this duty of
mine shall not be unwelcome to your highness: so that indeed you shall perceive
this kind of confirmation to be very profitable and fit, to look into the
beginning of the Church, as it is described of Luke, wherein appears both
wonderful power of God under the reproach of the cross, and also most valiant
patience of the servants of God, under the huge burden of troubles, and the
success it self incredible to the judgment of the world, brings forth
most plentiful fruit of both. But that I may omit other things which you had
better set out by reading of Luke himself, I will touch one thing which is
proper to earthly princes, and the chief governors of kingdoms and
countries: To wit, that seeing that (the power of the whole world gainesaying,
and al men which were then in authority being armed to oppress the Gospel) a
few men, obscure, unarmed and contemptible, trusting only to the aid of the
truth and the spirit, did labor so stoutly in spreading abroad the faith of
Christ, did refuse no pains nor danger, did stand stoutly against all
assaults, until at length they gat the victory: there remains no excuse for
Christian nobles, who are of any dignity, seeing God has furnished them with
the sword to defend the kingdom of his son, unless they be at least as
constant and bold to take upon them such an honorable office. Furthermore, it
is not my part to declare how faithfully and vprightlie I have behaved my self
in interpreting this history. I hope surely my labor shall be fruitful to
all men. And as for you (most worthy prince) I must again request and beseech
you, that you do both privately addict your self wholly unto Christ his
government, as you have of late happily begun: and that you would also become
not only a faithful helper, but also a most stout and valiant standerdbearer
in furthering the kingdom of Christ, unto so many noble men, whom not only
the renown of their stock and lineage, but also the excellency of their
virtues does commend. God has vouchsafed to bestow upon the realm of Polonia
a singular privilege of honor, that the better part of the nobility bidding
adue to wicked superstitions, which are as many corruptions and pollutions of
the worship of God, should desire with one consent a true form of godliness,
and a well framed and reformed order of the Church. It is well known that
these men were not a little aided by your authority. But there remain more
cumbats both for you, and also for them, than that like ouerworne soldiers,
you should give your selves to idleness and rest. First, although no foreign
enemy trouble you, you shall have business enough to withstand those evils which
are at home with you. You have sufficiently tried with how many sleights Satan
is furnished, that he may work some policy to overthrow that holy concord
amongst brethren, wherein consists the safety of the Church. That befalls
you which is common every where, for troublesome men to thrust in themselves
when things are out of order: who whilst they see a few, and those weaklings
troubled by a great multitude, and that they do with much ado defend the
truth, which is covered with the thick clouds of false accusations, they do
more easily come upon them unawares. And by this subtlety does that chief
worker of all disceite and guile, seek the ruin of the Church, not only by
cutting, mangling, and pulling in pieces the unity of the faith, but by
burdening the name of Christ with false envy: because the companies of the
godly amongst whom these wicked knaves mix themselves, seem to be certain
receptacles and sinkes of all filthiness. So whilst that Stancharus, a man of
a troublesome nature, does through that ambition wherewith he is wholelie set
on fire, spread abroad amongst you his dotings, hereupon brake out that
contention which threatens some scattering abroad: and you were laid open
unto the slanders of many, because it was thought that his sect did spread it
self farther. Behold on the other side a certain Physician called George
Brandata worse than Stancarus, because his error is more detestable, and
because he has in his mind more secret poison. For which cause these also
are the more worthy to be reproved, at whose hands the ungodliness of
Seruetus has found such favor of such a sudden. For although I am
persuaded, that they are far from those perverse and sacriligious opinions:
yet they should have taken better heed and not have suffered this fox
craftily to creep into their company, because such plagues will never be
wanting; neither will Satan ever cease to bring abroad into the forefront such
champions as have given over themselves to serve him, that he may trouble the
beginninges of the Gospel, it is for you to be continually in a readiness: and
to the end you may prevent greater evils, you must set down a right and godly
manner of government, which is the faithful keeping of holy peace. For as it
is manifest that purity of doctrine is the soul of the Church: so we may
full well compare Discipline unto the Sinowes, wherewith the body being bound
and knitte together does maintain his strength. Now on the otherside the
ungodliness of other enemies ought to sharpen your studdie and earnestness, I
mean the preachers of Antichrist of Rome, who to the end they may disceiue the
ignorant do continually with shrill voice sound out the name of the Church.
There is no controversy amongst us about the Church, but all grant that the
authority thereof ought to be reverenced of all the children of God: save
only that they under false color of honor do make the shadowish name of the
Church, subject to their lusts: we do so reverence the Church from our heart,
that we account it great wickedness to profane the sacred name thereof. That
I may omit other godly ministers of pure and sound doctrine, I my self have
again and again heretofore in many places handled this question: when
mention is made of the Church, whose head is the son of God: and which he,
who is the fountain of life eternal, does always quicken by his spirit: how
ridiculous a thing it is to bring forth a body without an head, and secondly
a dead carcass. The hireling flatterers of the Pope, do cry out that they
have the Church. But we can know by no means better, whither this be true or
no, than when we look unto the head. As for that, it is manifest, that it is
cut off by their sacrilegious violence. For how shall Christ retain the place
of the head, being dispoiled of all his power, thrown down from his
government, deprived of his dignity? Upon this condition has the heavenly
father made him the head of the Church, that he may govern all men from the
greatest to the least, by the doctrine of his Gospel: that he may be the
only priest, to reconcile the father continually, as he has once appeased
his wrath by the sacrifice of his death: that his death may continually purge
our sins: that his blood may be the only washing: that his obedience may be a
perfect satisfaction: that he may be a continual and sole intercessour,
through whose means our prayers may be heard: that he may be a faithful
defendour and tutour, that he may by his aid defend us: that (the vices of
our flesh being tamed) he may refourme us unto righteousness and holiness:
that he alone may begin and finish in us a blessed life. If the Papists
have left him any of these things, let them have the Church on their side. But
if the Pope oppressing men's consciences with his fearce and more than cruel
tyranny, have disanulled and taken away Christ his government: if he have
brought in a form of government, altogether contrary to the doctrine of the
Gospel: if he have invented a new and strange priesthood, that he may
thrust in himself being but a mortal man, to be the mediator between GOD
and the world: if he have forged daily Sacrifices, that he may put them in
Christ's place: if he have invented a thousand satisfactions for sins: if
he have brought fained washings from the lake of hell, to make dry the blood
of the son of God: if he have put in his place infinite patrons: if he have
torn in a thousand pieces that righteousness which must be set wholly from
him: if in steed of the holy Ghost he have erected man's freewill: it is
without all question that the true Christ is banished far from papistrie. For
this cause have I said that the Papists make boast of a dead carcass in
steed of the lively body of Christ, because though they have extinguished the
Doctrine of the Gospel (which is the true soul of the Church, and which duly
does quicken the same) yet they do greatly boast of a shadowish and trifling
kind of church. We make it full well known how corrupt the purity of
doctrine is amongst them, yea with what monstrous errors it is polluted. They
do not only cover all their corruptions under the shadow of the Church: but
also complain that we do great injury to the Church, because we say that the
same does err. But they should first have examined the doctrine, that the
Church might thereby be known. These just and honest judges will have the
feigned title of doctrine to have sufficient force of prejudice to cover and
suppress the difference, and that not to disceiue men. For with what sleights
and leigerdemaine would they assaie to bleare even daseling eyes in so great
light? But because they account this liberty of lying a part of their
tyranny, they think they reign not as they would, unless they reprochfully
mock miserable souls. That we may fet an example no farther, we have seen
in our times, sometime the Tridentine Fathers, sometimes the Fathers of
Bononia, who although they were even at daggers drawing among themselves, yet
did they foam out their vain Canons on both sides. And surely if men assent to
their principles, the triumph shall be prepared on both sides. There sit there
I cannot tell how many Bishops, and Abbats peradventure an hundred horned
beasts. If the most fine flower of all the nation should shine there, yet
should it be nothing else but a wicked conspiracy against God. And now after
that the Pope has gathered together the branne and chips of his unclean and
filthy rotten flock, shall the representative Church suddenly appear there?
And are they not yet ashamed to call that, an holy, general, and lawful Council
which does not deserve so much, as to be called a vain and Comicall visure of
a Council? But as for us to whom the promise is made, that Antichrist, who
sits in the temple of God, shall be destroyed with the breath of the Lords
mouth: let not us (I say) cease to refute this filthy and whorish impudency,
with that most sacred word, which they so boldly mock: that al men may see
what difference there is between the chaste spouse of Christ, and the stinking
whore of Beliall: between the sanctuary of God, and the Brothelhouse of
Satan: between the spiritual house of the godly, and the stie of hogs: and
finally between the true Church, and the court of Rome. There can no more
certain or plain demonstration be brought concerning this matter either by
Euclide, either yet by Archimedes, then if the Church, as Luke describes it,
be compared with the popish Synagogue. Neither am I so streit, that I would
have that confused lump, being altogether repugnant unto the order of nature,
and manner of humanity, to be agreeable in all points to the rule of the
Apostles, which is Angelical and heavenly. If they can show any thing wherein
they are like unto them, they may triumph for me. But for as much as all things
are contrary, and although the more part of men become blind willingly: (at
leastwise seeing the whole heavens do allow us) we may not only contemn
their brain sick pride without any fear, but also freely speak evil of the
same. In the mean season we have no small consolation to support us: that
howsoever the Papists do set against us with stern countenance, the name and
title of the Church, yet we know that we fight only against the professed
enemies of Christ. We ought above all things to desire, that the most renowned
king, who according to his wisdom has long ago spied out the subtle
sleights of the Romish court, commanding those vain Bulls to avoid, wherein the
Council boasts a far off, may at length more freely apply his mind unto
the earnest and perfect restoring of the Church. Yet ought no lingering to
keep you back, but every one of you must with might and maine endeavor to
enlarge and spread abroad those beginnings which are begun to arise so
happily.

Farewell most excellent Lord, and right renowned Prince: The Lord always
govern you with his spirit, amplify by all means your dignity: and bless
your godly enterprises even unto the end.

At Geneua, the first of August, 1560.
The argument upon the Acts of the Apostles.
TO the intent that all godly men may with more diligence read this history,
and also be more desirous thereof: it shall not be without profit, briefly to
note what commodity they shall reap thereby. This is the chiefest praise that
a profane history has, namely, that it is the maistres of life. If that
narration of famous deeds which only teaches men what they ought to follow,
or what they ought to eschew in their common actions, deserve such a title: of
how great praise are the divine histories worthy, which do not only frame the
outward life of man that he may win praise by virtue; but also (which it
more) which declare unto us, that God from the beginning has had a special
regard always of his Church, and faithful congregation: that he has been
always a most just revenger of all wrongs done unto those, that have betaken
themselves unto his tuition, and have committed themselves unto his custody:
that he has showed himself favorable and merciful unto most miserable and
wretched sinners: and lastly by teaching us faith, hoised us high above the
heavens? I say nothing of this, that they do every where set forth the
providence of God, that they distingush the true worship of God from the false,
they never err in the difference of vice and virtue. Although I omit now also
those worthy praises which use most commonly to be attributed unto the sacred
histories, intending only shortly to touch those, which are proper to this
book, which we have taken in hand. Those things which Luke sets before us
in this place to be learned, are not only great, but also of rare profit: For
first in that he shows that the spirit of God was sent unto the Apostles, he
does not only prove that Christ was faithful and true in keeping his promise,
made unto his Apostles: but also he certifieth us, that he is always mindful
of his, and a perpetual governor of his Church: because the holy spirit did
discende from heaven to this end, whereby we learn that the distance of place
does no whit hinder Christ from being present with those that be his, at all
times. Now here is most lively painted out, the beginning of Christ's
kingdom, and as it were the renewing of the world. For although the son of
God had gathered together by his preaching, a certain Church, before such time
as he departed out of the world yet nevertheless, that was the best form of
the Church which began then, when as the Apostles having new power given them
from above, began to preach, that that only sheapherd did both die and also
rise again, that through his conduct all those which were dispersed far and
wide, upon the face of the whole earth, might be gathered unto one
sheepefolde. Here is therefore set down both the beginning, and also the
increasing of ^he Church of Christ, after his ascension, whereby he was
declared to be king both of heaven and earth. Furthermore therein appears as
well the merueilous power of Christ, as the great force and efficacy of the
Gospel it self: for in that Christ by a sort of simple souls and of no
reputation amongst men, being endued also with no eloquence at al, has subdued
the whole world so easily by the only voice of the Gospel, whereas
notwithstanding Satan did resist him with so many lets: he has showed a most
manifest token of his divine power and might therein. And also we see in the
same, the incredible force of the Gospel, that it did not only come forth and
show it self, although the whole world did say nay, but also with great glory
and majesty, make all that which did seem stubborn, to be obedient unto
Christ. Therefore these few and simple creatures, did more prevail against the
troublesome tumults of the world, with the base and simple sound of their
mouth, than if God should openly have thrown down lightnings from heaven. And
on the other side, the spirit of God teaches us, that the kingdom of Christ
begins never sooner to flourish, but by and by Satan opposes himself most
furiously against the same, and uses all his engines either utterly to
overthrow, or sore to shake the same. Neither are we only taught, that Satan
does resist Christ as an enemy, but also that the whole world does furiously
rage together against him, that he may not reign over them. Yea, furthermore
that is to be set down as a thing most certain, that wicked men whiles they
do so rage against the Gospel, do both fight under Satan's banner, and are
pricked forward by him into so blind fury. Hereupon do arise so many vprores,
so many plaguie conspiracies, so many devilish endeavors of the reprobate, to
overthrow the Gospel, and to hinder the free passage of the same, which Luke
sets down almost in every place. Lastly, like as the Apostles have indeed
tried, that the doctrine of the Gospel is a fire and a sword, so may we learn
by their experience that it will always come to pass, not only by the
obstinate malice of Satan, but also by the fatal stubbornnes of men, that the
Gospel shall suffer many conflicts, and that thereby many tumultes shall be
raised. But on the other side he declares that the Apostles with a stout
stomach, with a lively courage, and invincible valiantness of mind, did
notwithstanding execute the office which they knew was enjoined them by God:
and also what innumerable troubles they suffered with great perseverance, what
werisomnes they passed over, how patiently they sustained most cruel
persecution; and lastly how meekely they suffered reproach, sorrow, and calamity
of all sorts. And we must learn patience by such examples, seeing the son
of God has pronounced that the cross and tribulation shall always accompany
his Gospel: we must not pamper and cherish our selves with a vain hope, as
though the state and condition of the Church should be quiet, prosperous, and
flourishing here upon earth. Let us therefore address our selves to suffer the
like things. And that is added as no small comfort for us, that as God has
merueilously delivered his Church in times past, being afflicted, and oppressed
so many ways: so he will at this day be present with us also: For surely
seeing that in this book is declared how that God by his mighty hand and
outstretched arm alone, does continually defend his Church, being amidst
continual deaths: God himself by this means sets before our eyes his
continual providence in procuring the safety thereof. Furthermore here are
set down certain sermons of the Apostles, which entreat in such sort of the
great mercies of God, of the grace of Christ, of the hope of blessed
immortality, of the calling upon God, of repentance and the fear of God, and
also of other principal points of Christian doctrine, that we need not seek
the whole sum of godliness any where else. But that I may now omit the
declaration of sound and pure doctrine: If that be a thing most needful to be
known, namely: to understand how the Church of Christ first began: how the
Apostles began to preach the Gospel; what success they had in the same, what
cruel combats they suffered, how manfully they passed through so many lets, and
impediments, how courageously they triumphed over all the pride of the world,
under the reproach of the cross, how wonderfully God was present with them:
then must we highly esteem of this Book, which unless it were extant, the
knowledge of so great things should either be quite buried, or greatly
obscured, or wrapped in diverse doubts. For we see that Satan used all his
engines that he might, to bring to pass, that never any of the acts of the
Apostles might come to light, but such only as were mixed with lies; to the
end he might bring into suspicion what thing soever was spoken of them, and so
by that means might pluck out of the minds of the godly, all the remembrance
of that age. For he always raised up, either doting fools, or crafty
flowters, that they might spread abroad a sort of filthy fables, under the
names of other men; the blockishnes whereof did much discredit even the true
histories. So in those books of Peter and Paul which are feigned to be of
Linus his doing, are contained such a sort of stinking trifles, that they cause
the wicked to laugh at them, and the godly to loath them. So that feigned
disputation of Peter with Simon Magus, is so ridiculous, that it does
discredit the name of a Christian. The same opinion must we have of all that
mingle mangle which is set before the recognitions and councels of Clement, and
recited of Gratianus in his fragments, they beguile the unskillful under color
of ancient names, the wicked boast of those as of oracles, no less boldly than
impudently, when as in deed they are filthy toies. Satan did use such
liberty to lie, that we might have no certain thing left us, after Christ's
ascension. So that unless this work of Luke were extant, it might seem that
Christ being taken up into heaven, left no fruit of his death or resurrection
upon earth. For all should have vanished away with his body. We should not
know that Christ was so received into his celestial glory, that nevertheless
he bears rule in all the world: we should not know that the Gospel was
published by the Apostles, and so came from them unto us, though by the means
of others: we should not know that they were inspired by the holy Ghost, least
they should teach any thing but that which was divine, to the end our faith
might be grounded only upon the infallible verity of God. Last of all we
should not know that that Prophecy of Esaias was fulfilled, wherein he
foretold that the law should come out of Sion, and the word of the Lord out of
Jerusalem. Seeing this book proceeding no doubt from the spirit of God,
takes from us all doubting of these things, we must count the same as a
great treasure, as I have said before not without cause, and now again
confirm the same.

The Commentaries of M. Jo. Calvin upon the Acts of the Apostles.
CHAP. I.
1 THe former speech truly have we had, o Theophilus, of al things which Jesus
began to do and teach,

2 Even until that day, wherein after he had given commandment by the holy
Ghost to the Apostles, which he had chosen, he was taken up.

1 THat he may pass over unto those things which followed the ascension of
Christ: he briefly gathers the sum of all those, which before he had handled
in the former book, that he may annexe this thereunto. And he briefly sets
down this description of the history of the Gospel, that it is a narration of
those things which Christ did and said so long as he was conversant upon
earth. Furthermore whereas they interpret this commonly, that there was first
in Christ purity of life, before such time as he began to preach, it makes
nothing unto Luke his mind. Truth it is, that the manners of a good and godly
teacher ought so to be framed, that he speak first with his life, then with
his tongue, otherwise he should differ nothing from a stage plaier. Luke 24.19.
But Luke has respect rather unto that which he had said about the end of his
Gospel, namely, that Christ was a prophet mighty in deed and word, that is,
such a one as did excel no less in deeds than in words: Although there be but
small difference betwixt these two places. For the mightines of works which is
commended there, does belong unto his miracles, but this, To do, does reach
further in my opinion, namely, that under the same are comprehended all the
famous acts which were proper unto his ministry, wherein his death and
resurrection are the chiefest. For the office of the Messiah did not only
consist in doctrine, but it was also behoueful that he should make peace
between God and man, that he should be a redeemer of the people, a restorer of
the kingdom, and an author of everlasting felicity. Al these things, I say,
as they were promised of the Messiah, so were they looked for at his hands. Now
we see that the sum of the Gospel consists of these two parts, namely of the
doctrine of Christ, and of his acts: for as much as he did not only bring unto
men that embassage which was given him in charge of his father: but also
performed al things that could be required of the Messiah. He began his
kingdom, he pacified God with his sacrifice, he purged man's sins with his own
precious blood, he subdued death and the devil, he restored us unto true
liberty, he purchased righteousness and life for us. And to the end, that
whatsoever he either did or said might be certain, he proved himself by
miracles to be the son of God. So that this word to Do, is extended unto
his miracles also: but it must not be restreined only unto the same. Here
must we note that those which have only the bare knowledge of the history,
have not the Gospel: unless the knowledge of the doctrine which makes
manifest the fruits of the Acts of Christ, be adjoined thereunto. For this is
a holy knot which no man may dissolve. Therefore whenever mention is made of
the doctrine of Christ, let us learn to adioyne thereunto his works, as
seals whereby the truth thereof is established and confirmed, and the effect
declared. Furthermore that we may reap commodity by his death and
resurrection, and also that miracles may have their use, we must always have
respect unto him that speaks. For this is the true rule of Christianity.

Of all things which he began. I do not greatly mislike the interpretation
which some give of this place, that Luke said rather of all, then all, because
it is possible in some measure, to entreat of the works and doctrine of Christ.
But to set down the whole course, that the narration may be perfect, were a
matter of great weight. Like as John does declare that the world could not
contain the books. John. 21.25.
That is also to be noted, that Luke says, that he began his history at the
beginning of the works of Christ. But so soon as he has declared the nativity
of Christ, he passes over unto the twelfth year of his age: Luke. 2.42.
and after he had briefly spoken of his disputation had in the temple with the
doctors, passing over XVIII. years without speaking any thing of them, he
enters the just narration of the works of Christ. It is therefore manifest
that those works and sayings only, which make any thing unto the sum of our
salvation, are noted in this place. For after that Christ came abroad into the
world clothed with our flesh, he lived privately at home until he was XXX.
years of age, at which time his Father put upon him another manner of person.
God would have him to lead the former part of his life obscurely, to this
end, that the knowledge of these things might be more excellent which do
edify our faith.

The former speech. It seemed good to me, to translate this on this wise,
because logon poiesdhai, is the same with the Grecians which verba facere, or,
to speak, is with the Latins, as Budaeus does note. And we must understand the
contrariety of the second part, which he takes in hand, that we may know
that the Evangelist determined with himself afresh, to write, having new
matter whereupon to write.

Even until that day. Therefore the ascension of Christ is the end of the
history of the Gospel. For he has ascended, says Paul, that he might
fulfill all things. Ephesians. 4.10
Our faith gathers other fruit thereby: but it shall be sufficient to note
in this place, that our redemption was fully complete and finished then, when
Christ did ascend unto his Father: and therefore that Luke did fully perform
his duty in this narration, as touching the doctrine and works of Christ.
And he is said to be taken up, that we may know that he is truly departed out
of this world, least we should consent unto their dotings, who think, that in
his ascension there was no alteration of place made.

Commandment by the holy Ghost. Luke shows in these words, that Christ did
not so depart out of the world, that he did no longer care for us: for in that
he has ordained a perpetual government in his Church, he thereby declares
that he had a care to provide for our salvation: Mat. 28.20.
yea he has promised that he will be present with his, to the end, like as in
deed he is always present by his ministers. Luke therefore does show unto
us, that Christ did no sooner depart hence, but straight way he provided for
the government of his Church: whence we may gather, that he is careful for our
salvation: and this his providence has Paul plainly noted in the place lately
cited, when he says, that he has fulfilled all things, making some Apostles,
some Evangelists, some pastors, etc. But these commandments which the
Evangelist says, Christ gave unto his disciples; do I interpret of the
preaching of the Gospel: like as ambassadors use to be instructed with certain
precepts, before they go of their embassage, least they should rashly attempt
any thing contrary to his will and mind that sends them. And all this is
spoken in commendation of that doctrine which the Apostles taught. The which
that it may appear more manifestly, every thing is to be marked in order as it
lies. First of al he says, they were elect and chose^ of Christ, that we may
be certain of their calling unto that function. Neither does he in this place
set Gods election against man's merits, but only affirms that they were
raised up by God, and that they did not rashly take upon them this function.
That is true in deed, that they were freely chosen: but now have we to
inquire what is Lukes drift in this place. I say that he has respect unto
nothing else, but that we may be certain of the calling of the Apostles, that
we may learn not to have respect unto men, but unto the son of God, the author
thereof, because this must always be a maxim in the Church, that No man
usurp any honor. Secondly, he says, that they were instructed of Christ what
they should do. As if he should say, that they uttered not their own
inventions, but they delivered that sincerely and faithfully, which was
enjoined them by their heavenly Master. And to the end that that which Christ
taught them might be the more reverenced, he adds this, that this was done
by the direction of the holy Ghost. Not because the son of God had any need
to be guided by any other, who is eternal wisdom: but because he was also
man, least any man should think that he did deliver those things unto his
disciples, which he delivered by man's wit and reason, he calls us back
expressly unto the divine authority. Like as the Lord himself does so often
affirm that he taught nothing but that which he had received of his Father:
and therefore he says, that his doctrine was not his own. Therefore he
signifies that in the preaching of the Gospel there is nothing which issues
from man's brain: but that it is the divine ordinance of the spirit, whereunto
the whole world must be subject.

3 To whom also he showed himself alive, after that he had suffered, in many
proofs, whiles that he is seen of them by the space of forty days, and he
entreats of the kingdom of God.

4 And when he had gathered them together, he commanded them that they should
not depart from Jerusalem: but that they should wait for the promise of the
Father: whereof, says he, ye have heard of me:

5 Because John truly baptized with water: but you shall be baptized with the
holy Ghost, after a few days.

3 Unto whom etc. He adds this, that he might make the resurrection to be
believed, as a thing most necessary to be known, and without the which the
whole Gospel falls flat to the ground, neither remains there any more
faith. And that I may omit to speak of other discommodities that come by being
ignorant of the resurrection of Christ: the Gospel loses his whole authority,
unless we know and be also fully persuaded that Christ being alive, speaks
unto us from the heavens. Whereunto Luke has chiefest respect in this place.
Therefore that the truth hereof might not be called in question, he says that
it was proved by many signs and tokens. Those which Erasmus, following an old
interpreter, does call arguments, I have translated proofs. For Aristotle
does call that Tecmerion in the first book of his Rhetorikes, which is
necessary in signs. This is therefore that which I said before, that Christ
did make manifest his resurrection unto his Apostles by evident tokens which
did serve instead of necessary proofs, least they should doubt of the same.
Furthermore he does not reckon up those tokens and signs: saving only that he
says, that Christ did appear unto them about the space of a month and one
half oftentimes. If he had but once appeared unto them, it might have bin
somewhat suspicious: but in showing himself so often unto them, he dissolueth
all doubts which might arise in their minds, and by this means also he
puts away the reproach of the ignorance, which he said was in the Apostles,
least it discredit their preching.

He entreats of the kingdom of God. He tells us again that the Apostles
themselves were well taught, before such time as they took upon the^ to teach
others. Therefore whatsoever things they uttered and brought to light, either by
word or by writing, touching the kingdom of god, they are those speeches which
Christ himself uttered. And hereby does he briefly set down the end of the
doctrine of the Gospel: namely, that God may reign in us. Regeneration is the
beginning of this kingdom, and the end thereof is blessed immortality: the
middle proceedings are in a more ample going forward and increase of
regeneration. But that this thing may appear more evidently, we must first
note, that we are borne, and that we live aliants and strangers from the
kingdom of God, until such time as god does fashion us again unto a new life.
Therefore we may properly set the world, the flesh, and whatsoever is in man's
nature, against the kingdom of God, as contrary to it. For the natural man is
wholly occupied about the things of this world, and he seeks felicity here.
In the mean season we are as it were banished from god, and he likewise from
us. But Christ by the preaching of the gospel does lift us up unto the
meditation of the life to come. And to the end he may the better bring this to
pass, he reformeth all our earthly affections, and so having stripped us out of
the vices of our flesh, he separateth us from the world. And like as eternal
death is prepared for all those which live after the flesh; so in as much as
the inward man is renewed in us, that we may go forward in the spiritual life,
we draw nearer unto the perfection of the kingdom of God: which is the
society of the glory of God. Therefore God will reign in and amongst us now,
that he may at length make us partakers of his kingdom. Hereby we gather that
Christ did principally entreat of the corruption of mankind; of the tyranny of
sin, whose bondslaues we are; of the curse and guiltines of eternal death,
whereunto we al are subject, and also of the means to obtain salvation, of
the remission of sins; of the denying of the flesh, of spiritual righteousness,
of hope of eternal life, and of such like things. And if we will be rightly
instructed in Christianity, we must apply our studies to these things.

4 Gathering them together he commanded, etc. They had before done the duty of
Apostles; but that lasted but a while: and secondly so far forth that they
might with their preaching awake the Jews to hear their master. And so that
commandment to teach, which Christ had given them whiles he lived with them
upon earth, was as it were a certain entrance into their Apostleship which was
to come, for which they were not yet ripe. Therefore their ordinary function
was not laid upon them, until such time as Christ was risen again: but they
stirred up their nation, as (I have said) like criers, that they might give
care to Christ. And then at length after the resurrection they were made
Apostles, to publish abroad throughout the whole world, that doctrine which was
committed to the^. And whereas after they were made Apostles, Christ commands
them as yet to abstain from their office, that is done not with out just
cause; yea many causes may be alleged why it should be so. That filthy
forsaking of their master was yet fresh: many notes and tokens of unbelief
were yet fresh. Whereas they had bin so thoroughly taught and had so suddenly
forgotten al, they showed a manifest token of their great dulnes of wit.
Neither were they free from sluggishnes, which could not otherwise fitly be
purged, than by deferring the promised grace, that he might the more sharpe^
their desire. But this cause is chiefly to be noted, that the Lord did appoint
a certain time for the sending of the Spirit, that the miracle might be the
more apparent. Again he suffered them to rest a while, that he might the better
set forth the greatness of that business which he was about to commit unto them.
And thereby is the truth of the gospel confirmed, because the Apostles were
forbidden to addres themselves to preach the same, until they should be well
prepared in succession of time.

And they were commanded to stay together, because they should all have one
spirit given them. If they had bin dispersed, the unity should not have bin
so well known. Though they were scattered abroad afterward in diverse places,
yet because they brought that which they had from one and the same fountain, it
was al one, as if they always had had alone mouth. Furthermore it was
expedient that they should begin to preach the Gospel at Jerusalem, that the
Prophecy might be fulfilled, There shall a law go out of Syon, Esai. 2.3.
and the word of the Lord out of Jerusalem. Although the participle
sunalizomenos may be diversely translated: yet Erasmus his translation did
please me best, because the signification of gathering together, will agree
better with the text.

They should wait for the. It was meet that these should be accustomed to obey
first, who should shortly after lay Christ's yoke upon the neck of the world.
And surely they have taught us by their example, that we must work and rest at
the Lords pleasure alone. For if during our life we go on warfare under his
banner, and conduct: surely he ought to have no less authority over us, than
any earthly captain has in his army. Therefore as warlike discipline
requires this, that no man wagge, unless he be commanded by the captain:
so it is not lawful for us either to go out, or to attempt any thing until
the Lord give the watchword: and so soon as he blows the retreat, we must
stay. Moreover we are taught that we are made partakers of the gifts of God
through hope. But we must mark the nature of hope as it is described in this
place. For that is not hope, which every man feigneth to himself unadvisedly,
but that which is grounded in the promise of God. Therefore Christ does not
suffer his Apostles to look for whatsoever they will, but he adds
expreslie, The promise of the Father. Furthermore, he makes himself a
witness thereof: because we ought to be so sure and certain, that although
all the engines of hell gainestande us, yet this may remain surely fixed in
our minds, that we have believed God, 2. Tim. 1.12
I know says Paul whom I have believed. And here he puts them in mind
of those things which are written in John the 14. and 15. and 16. I will pray
the father, and he shall give you another comforter, that he may continue
with you: I say the Spirit of truth, John. 14.16.14.25. John. 15.26. John.
16.7. John. 7.38.
etc. Again, I have spoken these things unto you, whiles I am with you. And
the Spirit whom my Father shall send in my name, shall teach you all things,
etc. And again, When the Spirit of truth shall come, whom I will send from
my father, he shall bear witness of me. And again, If I shall go hence, I
will send you the comforter, who shall reprove the world. And he had said long
before, He which believes in me, out of his belly shall flow rivers of
living water.

5 Because John truly. Christ repeateth this unto his Apostles out of John's
own words. For some part of them had heard that at John's mouth, which the
Evangelists report, I truly baptize you with water: but he that comes
after me, shall baptize you with the holy Ghost and with fire. Now Christ
pronounces that they shall well perceive that that is true in deed which he
said. Furthermore this serves greatly to confirm the sentence next going
before. For it is an argument drawn from the office of Christ. And that thus:

John was sent to baptize with water, he fulfilled his function, as it became
the servant of God. The son of God is sent to baptize with the holy Ghost: it
remains therefore that he do his duty. Neither can it be otherwise, but he
must do that which his father has commanded him to do, and for which also he
came down into the earth. But it seems a very absurd thing to restreine
that unto the visible sending of the holy Ghost, which was spoken universally
of regeneration. I answer, that Christ did not then only baptize with the
holy Ghost, when as he sent him under the form of fyrie tongues: for he had
baptized his Apostles before this: and he baptiseth all the elect thus daily.
But because the sending of the holy Ghost after so glorious a sort, was a token
of the hidden grace, wherewith he does daily inspire his elect, he does fitly
apply thereunto the testimony of John. And truly this was as though it had
been the common baptism of the Church. For besides that the Apostles did not
receive the spirit for themselves only, but for the use of all the faithful:
there was also declared the universal favor of Christ toward his Church,
whiles that he poured out thereupon the gifts of his spirit in great
abundance. Although, therefore he does daily baptize the elect of his father,
yet was this no let why he might not show forth this token, to be remembered
above all other: that the Apostles might know that they were only entered by
John: and that not in vain, seeing their perfection was hard at hand. And
that is frivolous which some gather out of this place most commonly, namely,
that the baptism of John, and the baptism of Christ were diverse. For here
does not he dispute in this place of baptism, but makes only a comparison
betwixt the person of John and the person of Christ. When as John did say that
he did baptize with water only, he did not reason of what sort his baptism
was; but what he himself was: least he should arrogate that unto himself,
which was proper to Christ. As also the ministers in these days ought not to
speak otherwise of themselves: but they must acknowledge Christ to be the
author of all those things, which they do prefigure in the outward baptism,
and leave nothing to themselves, save only the outward administration. For
when as these titles are attributed unto baptism, namely, that it is the lauer
of regeneration, a washing away of sins, the fellowshippe of death, Tit. 3.5.
Romans 6.4
and burying with Christ, and a graffing into the body of Christ: it is not
declared what man, being the Minister of the outward sign does; but rather
what Christ does, who only gives force and efficacy unto the signs. We
must always hold fast this distinction, least whiles we deck man too much, we
take from Christ. But here may a question be moved why he does rather name
John here, than any other. Firsts, it is manifest enough that John did profess
himself to be the minister of the outward sign, namely, of water, and that
Christ was the author of the spiritual baptism. Secondly because it was meet
that John should decrease, and Christ increase. And thirdly because the
Apostles did so much esteem of John, John. 3.30.
it might have been that thereby the glory of Christ might have been
obscured. Therefore Christ to the end he might reclaim them to himself,
tells them that John did only minister unto them the external baptism:
notwithstanding he confirms them also, least they should doubt of the
promise.

For they did attribute very much unto John, and therefore were they persuaded
that the Baptism which they had received by him, was not in vain. Now if that
the verity and force thereof must be looked for at Christ his hands, then
ought the Apostles, to hope that that shall surely be fulfilled which John
prefigured.

So must we in like manner think, that we are not in vain baptized with
water, by men; because Christ, who commanded the same to be done, will
fulfill his office, and baptize us with the spirit. So faith draws a
consequent from the outward sign, unto the inward effect; yet does it not
attribute any more than is meet, either to the sign, or to the minister
thereof; because in the sign it only looks unto the promise, which is
Christ's, and does acknowledge him to be the only author of grace. Let us
therefore use such a mean that we do in no part diminish Christ's honor: and
yet nevertheless let us hope for that fruit by our baptism which is noted in
this place. By assigning so short a time, our savior makes them more joyful
to hope well. Whereupon it follows that that death was not to be lamented,
which brought with it presently so precious fruit. And let us note this also,
that this word baptism is used improperlie in this place, that the
contrariety may be full. Romans 3.26.
After the same sort, Paul in his Epistle unto the Romans, after he has set
down the law of works, to the end that the contrary may answer on the
other side, he uses the law of faith, for faith it self.

6 And when they were gathered together, they asked him, saying, Lord, do
thou at this time restore the kingdom unto Israel?

7 And he said unto them, It is not for you to know the times and seasons which
the father has placed in his own power.

8 But you shall receive power when as the spirit shall come upon you; and you
shall be witnesses unto me as well at Jerusalem, as in all Jury, and in
Samaria, and unto the farthest part of the earth.

6 He shows that the Apostles were gathered together when as this question
was moved, that we may know that it came not of the foolishnes of one or two,
that it was moved, but it was moved by the common consent of them al. But
merueilous is their rudenes, that when as they had bin diligently instructed by
the space of three whole years; they bewray no less ignorance, than if they had
heard never a word. There are as many errors in this question as words. They
ask him as concerning a kingdom: but they dream of an earthly kingdom,
which should flow with riches, with dainties, with external peace, and with
such like good things. And whiles they assign the present time to the
restoring of the same: they desire to triumph before the batell. For before
such time as they begin to work, they will have their wages. They are also
greatly deceived herein, in that they restrain Christ his kingdom unto the
carnal Israel, which was to be spread abroad, even unto the uttermost parts
of the world. Furthermore, there is this fault in all their whole question,
namely, that they desire to know those things which are not meet for them to
know. No doubt they were not ignorant what the prophets did prophecy
concerning the restoring of David's kingdom: they had oftentimes heard their
master preach concerning this matter. Lastly it was a saying common in every
man's mouth, that in the most miserable captivity of the people, they should
all be comforted, with the exspectation of the kingdom that should be. Now
they hoped for the restoring hereof at the coming of the Messiah. And
hereuppon was it, that so soon as the Apostles saw their master Christ risen
from the dead, they straightway began to think thereupon: but in the mean
time they declared thereby, how bad scholars they were under so good a master.
Therefore does Christ briefly comprehend in this short answer, all the
errors whereinto they fell in this their question, as I shall straightway
declare. To restore, in this place does signify, to set up again that which
was fallen, and through many ruins grown out of fashion: for out of the dry
stock of Isai, should spring a branch, and the tabernacle of David, which
was laid waste, should be erected and set on foot again.

7 It is not for you to know, etc. This is a general reprehension of all the
whole question, for it was too curious for them to desire to know that whereof
their master would have them ignorant. But this is the true means to become
wise: namely, to go as far forward in learning, as our master Christ goes
in teaching: and willingly to be ignorant of those things, which he does
conceal from us. But forasmuch as there is naturally engendered in us a
certain foolish and vain curiosity, and also a certain rash kind of
boldness: we must diligently observe this admonition of Christ, whereby he
corrects both these vices. But to the end we may know what his meaning is
hereby, we must mark the two members which he ioineth together. It is not for
you (says he) to know those things which the father has placed in his own
power. He speaks in deed of the times and seasons: but seeing there is the
like reason in other things, we must think this to be an universal precept:
that being contented with the revelation of God, we think it an heinous crime
to enquire any further: this is the true mean between the two extremes. The
Papists, that they may have somewhat wherewith to cloak their gross
ignorance, say for themselves, that they omit the hidden mysteries of God: as
though our whole faith and religion did consist upon any thing else, than upon
the hidden mysteries of god. Then may we take our leave of Christ and his
Gospel, if we must abstain utterly from the hidden mysteries of God. But we
must keep, as I said before, a mean herein. For we must be desirous to learn,
so far as our heavenly master does teach us: but as for such things, as he
will have us ignorant of, let none be so bold as to enquire after them, that
we may be wise with sobriety. Therefore so often as we are vexed with this
foolish desire of knowing more than we ought, let us call to mind this saying
of Christ, It is not for you to know. For unless we will burst in against his
will and commandment: this shall have force and strength enough to restrain
the outragiousnesse of our wits. Now as touching the foreknowledge of times,
Christ condemns only the searching out thereof, which reaches beyond the
measure of Gods revelation, and that is to be noted out of the second member,
as before I have said: which the father has placed in his own power. Truth
it is that God has in his own power, Winter and Summer, and the rest of the
seasons of the year, cold and heat, fair wether and foul. But because he
has testified that the course of the years shall be perpetual, he is said not
to have placed that in his own power, which he has revealed unto men. What
thing soever the philosophers or husbandmen do comprehend or understand by
Art, by learning, by judgment, Genesis 8.22.
or experience, all that does God not retain unto himself, because he has
after a certain sort reueiled it unto them. The same opinion must we have of
the prophets: for it was their office to know those things which God did
reveal. But we must be ignorant of the secret euentes of things, as
touching the time to come. For there is nothing which may make us more slack in
doing our duties, than too careful an inquisition herein. For we will always
take counsel according to the future event of things, but the Lord by hiding
the same from us, does prescribe unto us what we ought to do. Here arises a
conflict, because we will not willingly suffer God to have that which is his
own: namely, the sole government and direction of things which are to come:
but we cast our selves into a strange and inordinate carfulness. To
conclude, Christ forbids us to apply those things unto our selves, which
God does challenge as proper to himself alone. Of this sort is the
foreknowledge of those things which god has taken to himself to govern and
direct, according to his own pleasure, far contrary to our opinion, and
otherwise than we could invent.

You shall receive power. Our savior Christ does here call them back as well
unto the promise of god, as also unto his commandment, which was the readiest
way to bridle their curiosity. Curiosity does rise almost always either of
idleness or else of distrust: distrust is cured by meditating upon the promises
of god. And his commandments do tell us how we ought to occupy our selves and
employ our studies. Therefore he commands his disciples to wait for the
promise of God, and to be diligent in executing their office whereunto God had
called them. And in the mean season he notes their great hastiness, in that
they did preposterously catch at those gifts which were proper unto the holy
Spirit, whenas they were not as yet endued with the same. Neither did they take
the right way herein, in that being called to go on warfare, they desire
(omitting their labor) to take their case in their ynne. Therefore when he
says you shall receive power: he admonishes the^ of their imbecillitie, least
they follow before the time, those things whereunto they cannot attain. It may
be read very well either way, You shall receive the power of the spirit: or,
The spirit coming upon you: yet the latter way seems to be the better,
because it does more fully declare their defect and want, until such time as
the Spirit should come upon them.

You shall be my witnesses. He corrects two errors of theirs in this one
sentence. For first he shows that they must fight, before they can triumph:
and secondly, that the nature of Christ his kingdom was of another sort than
they judged it to have been. Therefore faith he, You shall be my witnesses: that
is, the husbandman must first work before he can reap his fruits. Hence may
we learn, that we must first study how we may come unto the kingdom of God,
before we begin to dispute about the state of the life to come. Many there
be, which do curiously enquire what manner blessedness that shall be, which
they shall enjoy after they shall be received into the everlasting kingdom of
heaven: not having any care how they may com to enjoy the same. They reason
concerning the quality of the life to come, which they shall have with
Christ. 2. Tim. 2.11
But they never think that they must be partakers of his death, that they may
live together with him. Let every man therefore apply himself in his work,
which he has in hand: let us fight stoutly under Christ his banner: let us go
forward manfully and courageously in our vocation, and God will give fruit in
due time and tide. There follows another correction, when he says, that they
must be his witnesses. For hereby he meant to drive out of his disciples minds
that fond and false imagination, which they had conceived of the terrestrial
kingdom, because he shows unto them brieflye, that his kingdom consists
in the preaching of the Gospel. There was no cause therefore why they should
dream of riches, of external principality, or any other earthly thing,
whilst they heard that Christ did then reign, when as he subdueth unto
himself all the whole world by the preaching of the Gospel. Whereupon it
follows that he does reign spiritually, and not after any worldly manner. And
that which the Apostles had conceived of the carnal kingdom, proceeded from the
common error of their nation. Neither was it marvel if they were deceived
herein. For when we measure the same with our understanding, what else can we
conceive, but that which is gross and terrestrial? Hereupo^ it comes, that
like brute beasts we only desire that which is commodius for our flesh, and
therefore we rather catch that which is present. Wherefore we see that those
which held opinion, that Christ should reign as a king in this world a
thousand years, fell into the like folly. Hereupon also they applied al such
prophesies as did describe the kingdom of Christ figuratively by the similitude
of earthly kingdoms unto the commodity of their flesh: whereas notwithstanding
it was gods purpose to lift up their minds higher. As for us, let us learn to
apply our minds to hear the Gospel preached, least we be entangled in like
errors, which prepares a place in our hearts for the kingdom of Christ.

In all Judea. Here he shows first that they must not work for the space of
one day only, whlie that he assigns the whole world unto them in which they
must publish the doctrine of the gospel. Furthermore he refuteth the opinion
which they had conceived of Israel. They supposed those to be Israelites only,
which were of the seed of Abraham according to the flesh. Christ testifies,
that they must gather thereunto all Samaria: which although they were nigh in
situatio^, yet were they far distant in mind and heart. He shows that al
other regio^s far dista^t and also profane, must be united unto the holy
people, that they may be al partakers of one and the same grace. It is evident
John. 4. John. 4..9
how greatly the Jews did derest the Samaritans. Christ co^ma^deth that (the
wall of separation being broken down) they be both made one body, Ephe. 2.14.
that his kingdom may be erected every where. By naming Judea and Jerusalem,
which the Apostles had tried to be full of most deadly enemies: he foretells
them of the great business and trouble which was prepared for the^, that he may
cause them to cease to think upon this triumph which they hoped to have been so
nigh at hand. Neither could they be a little afraid to come before so cruel
enemies, more to inflame their rage and fury. And here we see how he gives
the former place unto the Jews, Exodus 4.22. Ephe. 2.11.
because they were as it were the first begotten. Notwithstanding he calls
those Gentiles one with another, which were before strangers from the hope of
salvation. Hereby we learn that the Gospel was preached every where by the
manifest commandment of Christ, that it might also come unto us.

9 And when he had spoken these things, while they beheld, he was taken up on
high, and a cloud received him out of their sight.

10 And while they looked up steadfastly into heaven, as he went, behold, two
men stood by them in white apparel.

11 Which also said: Ye men of Galile, why stand ye gazing up into heaven?
this same Jesus which is taken up from you into heaven, shall so come as you
have seen him go into heaven.

9 The readers may learn out of our institutio^s what profit we reap by the
ascension of Christ Notwithstanding because it is one of the chefest points of
our faith, therefore does Luke endeavor more diligently to prove the same: yea
rather the Lord himself meant to put the same out of al doubt, when as he has
ascended so manifestly, and has confirmed the certainty of the same by other
circumstances. For if so be it he had vanished away secretly, then might the
disciples have doubted what was become of him: but now since that they being in
so plain a place, saw him taken up, with whom they had been conversant, whom
also they heard speak even now, whom they beheld with their eyes, whom also
they see taken out of their sight by a cloud, there is no cause why they
should doubt whither he was gone. Furthermore the angels are there also to
bear witness of the same. And it was needful that the history should have
been set down so diligently for our cause, that we may know assuredly, that
although the son of God appear no where upon earth, yet does he live in the
heavens. And this seems to be the reason, why the cloud did ouershadow him,
before such time as he did enter into his celestial glory: that his
disciples being content with their measure might cease to enquire any further.
And we are taught by the^ that our mind is not able to ascend so high, as to
take a full view of the glory of Christ: therefore let this cloud be a mean to
restrain our boldness, as was the smoke which was continually before the door
of the tabernacle Or, under the law.
in the time of the law.

10 Two men, He calls them so, by reason of their form. For although it
might be that they had the bodies of men in deed, concerning which thing I will
not greatly stand in defense of either part, yet certain it is, they were not
men. But because this Metonymia is commonly used in the scriptures, especially
in the first book of Moses: I will not greatly stand thereupon. Their white
garments were a token of rare and excellent dignity. For God meant by this, as
by an evident token to distinguish them from the common sort of people, that
the disciples might give better care unto them: and that at this day we also
may know that this vision was showed them of God.

Ye men of Galilee, etc. I am not of their opinion, who think that this name
was given the Apostles after an opprobrious sort, as if the Angels meant to
reprehend the slounes and dulnes of the apostles. In my opinion it was rather
to make them more attentive, in that men whom they did never see before did
name them, as though they had perfectly known them. But they seem to be
reprehended without cause, for looking up into heaven. For where should they
rather seek for Christ, than in heaven? Does not the scriptures also
oftentimes exhort us thereunto? I answer, that they were not therefore
reprehended, because they looked up toward heaven; but because they coueted
to see Christ, when as the cloud, which was put between them and him, did
keep them from seeing him with their bodily senses: Secondly, because they
hoped that he would return again straight way, that they might enjoy the
sight of him again, when as he did ascend to stay in the heavens, until
such time as he should come to judge the world. Wherefore let us first learn
out of this place, that we must not seek Christ either in heaven, either upon
earth, otherwise the^ by faith: and also that we must not desire to have him
present with us bodily in the world: for he that does either of those two, shall
oftentimes go farther from him. So this their admiration is reprehended, not
simply, but inasmuch as they were astonished at the strangeness of this matter:
like as we are oftentimes carried unadvisedly into a wonderful great wondering
at Gods works: but we never apply our selves to consider for what end and
putpose they were done.

Jesus, which is taken up into heaven. There are two members in this one
sentence. The first is, that Christ was taken up into heaven, that they may
not hence forth foolishly desire, to have him any longer conversant with them
upon earth. The other is straightway added as a consolation, concerning his
second coming. Out of these two jointly and also severally is gathered a firm,
stable, and strong argument, to refute the Papists, and all other which imagine
that Christ is really present in the signs of bread and wine. For when it is
said that Christ is taken up into heaven: here is plainly noted the distance
of place. I grant that this word heaven, is interpreted diverse ways, sometime
for the air, sometime for the whole connection of the spheres, sometimes for the
glorious kingdom of God, where the majesty of God has his proper seat,
howsoever it does fill the whole world. After which sort Paul does place Christ
above all heavens, because he is above all the world, and has the chiefest
room in that place of blessed immortality, because he is more excellent than
all the Angels. Ephe. 1.22. and. 4.15.
But this is no let why he may not be absent from us bodily, and that by this
word heavens, there may not be signified a separation from the world. Let
them cavil as much as they will, it is evident that the heaven wherinto Christ
was received, is opposite to the frame of the world: therefore it does
necessarily follow, that if he be in heaven, he is without the world. But first
we must mark what the purpose of the Angels was: for thereby we shall more
perfectly know what the words mean. The angels intent was to call back the
apostles from desiring the carnal presence of Christ. For this purpose was it
that they said that he should not come again, until he came to judge the world.
And to this end serves the assigning of the time, that they might not look for
him in vain before that same time. Who sees not that in these words is
manifestly showed, that he was bodily absent out of the world? who sees not
that we are forbidden to desire to have him upon the earth. But they think they
escape safe with that crafty answer, when as they say that then he shall come
visibly: but he comes now inuisibly daily. But we are not here to dispute
of his form, only the Apostles are taught, that Christ must abide in heaven,
until such time as he appear at the latter day. For the desiring of his
corporal presence is here condemned as absurd and perverse. The Papists deny
that he is present in the Sacrament carnally, while that his glorious body is
present with us after a supernatural sort, and by a miracle: but we may well
enough reject their inuentio^s concerning his glorious body, as childish and
frivolous toies. They feign unto themselves a miracle not confirmed with any
testimony of scripture. The body of Christ was then glorious, when as he was
conversant with his disciples after his resurrection. That was done by the
extraordinary and secret power of God: yet notwithstanding, the angels do
forbid to desire him afterward after that sort, and they say that he shall not
come unto men in that sort before the latter day. Therefore according to their
commandment, let us not go about to pull him out of the heavens with our own
inventions: neither let us think that we can handle him with our hands, or
perceive him with our other senses, more than we can see him with our eyes. I
speak always of his body. For in that they say it is infinite, as it is an
absurd dream, so is it safely to be rejected. Nevertheless I willingly confess
that Christ is ascended, that he may fulfill al things: but I say that he is
spread abroad every where by the power of his spirit, not by the substance of
his flesh. I grant furthermore that he is present with us both in his word,
and in the sacraments. Neither is it to be douted, but that al those which do
with faith receive the signs of his flesh and blood, are made truly partakers
of his flesh and blood. But this partaking does nothing agree with the dotings
of the Papists. For they feign that Christ is present in such sort upon the
Altar, as Numa Pompilius did call down his Jupiter Elicius: or as those
witches did set down the Moon from heaven with their inchauntments. But Christ
by reaching us the bread in his supper, does will us to lift up our hearts into
heaven, that we may have life by his flesh and blood. So that we do not eat his
flesh grossly, that we may live thereby, but he powers into us by the secret
power of his spirit, his force and strength.

He shall so come. I have said before that by this consolation all sorrow
which we might conceive, because of Christ's absence, is mitigated, yea vterly
taken away, when as we hear that he shall return again. And also the end, for
which he shall come again, is to be noted: namely, that he shall come as a
redeemer, and shall gather us with him into blessed immortality. For as he does
not now sit idle in heaven (as Homer signifies that his gods be busied only
about their bellies:) so shall not he appear again without profit. Therefore the
only looking for Christ's coming, must both restrain the importunate desires of
our flesh, and support our patience in all our adversities: and lastly it must
refresh our wearines. But it works this only in the faithful, which believe
that Christ is their redeemer. For it brings unto the wicked nothing but
dread, horror, and great fearfulnes. And howsoever they do now scoff and jest
when as they hear of his coming, yet shall they be compelled to behold him
sitting upon his tribunal seat, who^ now they will not vouchsafe to hear
speak. Furthermore it were but frivolous to move any question about his
apparel, wherewith he was the^ clothed, August. ad Con. epist. 146.
whether he shall com again being clothed with the same or no. Neither am I now
determined to refute that which Augustine in his Epistle unto Consentius does
touch: notwithstanding it is better for me to omit that thing which I cannot
unfold.

12 Then they returned unto Jerusalem from the mountain which is called
Oliuets, which is nigh unto Jerusalem, being dista^t about a Sabbath days
journey.

13 And coming in, they went up into an upper chamber, where abode Peter and
James, John and Andrew, Philip and Thomas, Bartholomew and Matthew, James the
son of Alpheus, and Simon Zelotes, and Judas the brother of James.

14 These all abode together with one accord in prayer and supplication with
the Or, women.
wives, and Mary the mother of Jesus, and with his brethren.

12 That he may pass over unto another history, he shows that the disciples
being returned unto Jerusalem, dwelt together in one parlor. For it was the
upper part of the house, which used to be let out unto those which did hire
houses: for the most commodious places were reserved unto them that were
masters of the house for their own use. Wherefore by this word, Luke does
signify that they were driven into a strait room: and yet notwithstanding
though this commodity were great, yet they did not depart asunder. They might
have been more commodiouslie asunder, yet might they not part company before
they had received the Spirit. In that he notes here the distance of place, it
brings credit unto the history. Unless peradventure he meant hereby to
declare, that they were not terrified with any fear of danger, but that they
did all return and kept company together in one house, which was not so
large, but that the company being greater than the place could well co^tain, it
might breed some rumor or noise. A Sabbath days journey was two miles, and
that account does well agree with the place of John. chap. 11.18. where he
says, Ioh. 11.18.
that Jerusalem was distant from Bethanie almost fifteen furlonges, which
contains about a thousand and nine hundredth paces. And the mount Oliuet was
at the side of Bethanie. There was no Sabbath days journey prescribed in the
Law: for the Lord does command them simply, to rest upon the Sabbath day in
the Law. But because the Jews could not easily be ruled, but that they would
run abroad about their business upon the Sabbath day: (as the Lord himself
does complain, Ier. 17.24.
that they did bear burdens out at the gates) therefore it is to be thought
that it was determined by the Priests (to the end they might restrain such
enormities) that no man should travail upon the Sabbath day, above two miles.
Although Ierom in his answers unto Algasia, does say that this tradition did
come from two Rabines, namely, from Atriba, and from Simon Heli.

13 Where they aboade. Some translate it, Where they did abide: as though they
did use to dwell there. But I am of that opinion, that they did then first of
all use that hired room to dwell together in, until such time as the holy
Spirit was come upon them. Too too ridiculous are the Papists which go about
to prove Peter his supremacy hereby, because he is reckoned up first of all
the Apostles. Although we do grant that he was the chiefest of the apostles,
yet it does not follow hereupo^ that he was the chiefest ruler of all the
world. But if he be therefore the chief of all the Apostles, because his name
is first in the catalogue of the apostles names: I will again conclude that
the mother of Christ was inferior unto all the rest of the women, because she
is recknoned the last, which they will in no case admit, as in deed it were a
thing too to absurd. Wherefore unless they will set their papacy to be
laughed at of al men, as hitherto they have done, they must leave of to adorn it
with such folish toys. But what is their intent? Forsooth they will prove out
of the scriptures, that there was a secondarie head of the Church, inferior to
Christ: whereas there is no syllable in the scripture, which is co^senting unto
this their foolish invention. No marvel is it therefore, if they do snatch
here and there certain places, which although no man smite them out of their
hands, they will let fall of their own accord. But omitting the^, let us mark
what is Luke his purpose in this place. Because the disciples had fallen away,
and filthily fled from their master Christ, every man whither fear did drive
him: they did deserve like forsakers of their masters, or runnagates, Mat.
26.56.
to be deprived of honor. Therefore that we may know that by the appointment
of the Lord they were gathered together again, and restored to their former
degree: Luke reckons up all their names.

14 With their wives. Some translate it, Women, and they think that he speaks
of those which accompanied Christ. As I will not contend with any man
concerning this matter: so have I not doubted to prefer that which I thought
was more probable. I grant that the word which Luke uses, may be interpreted
both ways. But this is my reason, why I do think that he speaks rather of
wives: because seeing that they used afterward to carry their wives about with
them, 1. Cor. 9.5.
as Paul does testify: it is not likely that they were then asunder. For they
might more easily rest together in one place, tha^ by wandering too and fro,
oftentimes to change their abiding^ and secondly, seeing that they did look for
the coming of the holy ghost, which was even then at hand, what reason was
there, why they should deprive their wives of so great goodness? Peter his
wife was about to be a helper unto him shortly after: which we must also
think of the rest of the wives. These women had need of heroical fortitude
and constancy, least they should faint. Who would therefore think that they
were excluded from their husbands, whiles they look for the coming of the
Spirit? But if they will stick to the general word, it stands with
reason, that there were married women in the company. Howsoever it be, it is
Luke his mind to tell us by the way how greatly they had changed their
minds. For whereas before the men being afraid, had fled away, the women are
gathered together with them now: neither do they fear any danger. He does
reckon up the mother of Jesus with the other women, whom notwithstanding John
is said to have kept at his own house. But as I have said before, they met
altogether now only for a short season. For it is not to be doubted but that
they departed one from another afterward. It is well known that amongst the
Hebrews, all kinsfolk are comprehended under this word brethren.

All these did continue. Here he shows that they did diligently look for
the coming of the holy Spirit. For this was the cause of their Prayer, that
Christ would send his Spirit, as he had promised. Whereupon we may
gather, that that is the true faith, which stirs us up to call upon God.
For the security of faith does much differ from sluggishnesse. Neither does
God therefore assure us of this grace, that our minds may straight way become
careless: but that he may rather sharpen our desire to pray. Neither is
prayer any sign of doubting, but rather a testimony of our sure hope and
confidence: because we ask those things at the Lord his hands, which we
know he has promised. So it becomes us also (after their example) to be
instant in prayer, and to beg at Gods hands that he will increase in us his
holy Spirit: increase (I say) because before we can conceive any prayer, we
must needs have the first fruits of the Spirit. For as much as he is the
only master, which teaches us to pray aright, Romans 2.25.
who does not only give us utterance, but also govern our inward
affections. Furthermore, Luke does express two things which are proper to
true prayer: namely that they did persist, and that they were all of one mind.
This was an exercise of their patience, in that Christ did make them stay a
while, when as he could straightway have sent the holy Spirit. So God does
oftentimes drive off, and as it were suffer us to languishe, that he may
accustom us to persevere. The hastiness of our petitions is a corrupt, yea a
hurtful plague, wherefore it is no marvel if God do sometime correct the
same. In the mean season (as I have said) he does exercise us to be constant
in prayer. Therefore if we will not pray in vain, let us not be wearied with
the delay of time. As touching the unity of their minds, it is set against
that scattering abroad, which fear had caused before. yet notwithstanding we
may easily gather, even by this, how needful a thing it is to pray generally,
in that Christ commands every one to pray for the whole body, and
generally for all men, as it were in the person of all men: Our Father, Mat.
6.9.
Give us this day, etc. Whence comes this unity of their tongs, but from one
Spirit? Wherefore when Paul would prescribe unto the Jews and Gentiles a
right form of prayer: Romans 15.6.
he remooueth far away all division and dissension. That we may (says
he) being all of one mind, with one mouth glorify God. And truly, it is
needful that we be brethren, and agree together like brethren; that we
rightly call God Father.

15 In those days Peter standing up in the midst of the disciples, said
(and the company of names together, was almost an hundredth and twenty.)

16 Men and brethren, it was expedient that this scripture should be
fulfilled: which the holy Ghost foretold by the mouth of David, concerning
Judas which was guide unto them which took Jesus.

17 Which was adopted into the number of us, and had obtained Lot
part of this ministry,

18 (And he truly has Or gotten.
possessed a field with the reward of iniquity, and being hanged, he burst
in sunder in the middle, and all his bowels gushed out.

19 And this was known unto all the inhabitaunts of Jerusalem, so that that
field is called in their tongue Hacheldima, that is, the field of blood.)

20 For it is written in the book of the Psalms, Let his habitation be
void, and let there be none to dwell therein, and let another man take his
bishoprike.

21 Of all those therefore which were gathered together with us all that time,
wherein the Lord Jesus went in and out amongst us,

22 Beginning from the baptism of John until that day wherein he was taken
up from us, must one be made a witness together with us of his
resurrection.

15 It was meet that Matthias should be chosen into the place of Judas, least
through the treachery of one man, all that might seem to have been made of
none effect, which Christ had once appointed. He did not unadvisedly choose
the twelve in the beginning, as principal Preachers of his Gospel. Luke. 6.13.
John. 6.70.
For when he says that they should be judges of twelve tribes of Israel, he
shows here, that it was done of set purpose that they might gather together
the tribes of Israel unto one faith. But after that the Jews had refused the
grace offered unto them, it was behouefull that the Israel of God should be
gathered together out of all countries.

This therefore was as it were a holy number, which if it should have been
diminished through the wickedness of Judas, then should the preaching of the
Gospel, both have had, and also have less credit at this day: if the
beginning thereof had been imperfect. Although therefore Judas would (as much
as in him lay) have disappointed the purpose of Christ, yet nevertheless it
stood firm and stable. He perished as he was worthy: yet did the order of the
apostles remain whole and sound.

The company of names. It is uncertain whether he means the men who only
have the name properly, seeing the women are comprehended under the name of the
men: or whether he takes names simply, for all the heads, as the Hebrews call
them souls. This may also be called in question, whether they were wont
daily to frequent that parlour, in which the Apostles did dwell, or they did
continually dwell there with them. For the place was scarce able to contain so
great a multitude, to serve them for all necessary uses. Surely it seems to
me a thing more like to be true, that Luke does in this place express the
number of them, that we may know that they were all gathered together, when
Peter made this Sermon. Whereby we may guess, that they were not always
present there. Although I dare not affirm any certain thing concerning this
matter, yet being moved with a probable conjecture, I do rather lean unto
this part, that the Church was gathered together then, because they had to
entreat of a serious matter, and to this end also tends this word rising.

16 It was meet that the scripture should be fulfilled. Because Peter does
speak in this their assembly, therefore the Papists will have him to be the
head of the church. As though no man might speak in any assembly of the
godly, but he should straightway be Pope. We do grant, that as in every
assembly there must be some which must be chief: so in this assembly the
Apostles did ascribe this honor unto Peter. But what makes this unto the
proouing of their Papacy? Wherefore bydding them adue, let us consider what
the Spirit does speak by the mouth of Peter. He says, That the Scripture
must needs have been fulfilled, least any man's mind should be troubled with
that horrible fall of Judas. For it seemed a strange thing, that he which was
chosen by Christ unto so excellent a function, should so filthilie fall in the
beginning of his course. Peter remooueth this stone of stumbling, when he
says, that it was foretold by the scripture. Whence we may gather an
admonition very necessary for daily practice: namely that we ought to
attribute this honor unto the Prophesies of the scriptures, that they are able
to appease all such fear as we conceive of the sudden event of things. For
there is nothing which does more trouble us, then when we stay still in our
own sense and understanding, and prcure unto our selves lets and doubts, which
the Lord would be ready to cure, if so be that we would hold fast this one
thing, that nothing is absurd which he has foreseen, appointed, and
foretold that he might make us more strong. Neither was Judas therefore
excusable because that which befell him was foretold, seeing that he fell
away, not being compelled by the Prophecy, but only by the malice of his own
heart. The oration of Peter has two parts. For in the first place he puts
away the offense, which godly minds might have conceived, by reason of the
fall of Judas: whence also he gathers an exhortation, that the rest may
learn to fear God. Secondly, he celleth them that it remains that they
choose an other into his place, both which he proves by testimony of
Scripture,

Which the holy Ghost foretold. Such manner of speeches bring greater reverence
to the scriptures, whiles we are taught by them, that David and all the rest
of the prophets did speak only as they were directed by the holy Ghost: so
that they them selves were not the authors of their prophesies, but the
Spirit which used their tongues as an instrument. Wherefore seeing that our
dullness is so great, that we ascribe less authority unto the scriptures
than we ought: we must diligently note such manner of speeches, and acquaint
our selves with them, that we may oftentimes remember the authority of God to
confirm our faith withal.

17 Adopted. It is word for word Reckoned. And he says that he was one of the
number, that he might signify unto them, that it was needful that the empty
place should be filled, to the end that the number might continue whole. And
to this purpose serves that which follows, that he had obtained a part in
the ministry. For thereupon it does follow, that the body should be as it were
lame, if that part should be wanting. Surely it was a thing which might make
them greatly amassed, that he whom Christ had extolled unto so high dignity,
should fall headlong into such destruction. Which circumstance does increase
the cruelty of the fact, and teaches the rest to take heed unto themselves.
Neither is it to be doubted, but that the disciples did remember Judas with
great grief and sorrow. But Peter does here express by name the excellency
of his function, that he might make them more attentive and more careful to
provide a remedy.

18 And he truly. It seems unto me a thing like to be true, that this
narration of the death of Judas was put in by Luke: therefore it seemed good to
me to include it within a Parenthesis, that it may be separated from Peter his
Sermon. For to what end should Peter here reckon up unto the Disciples those
things which they already knew well enough?

Secondly, it should have been an absurd thing to have spoken after this among
them, that the field which was bought with the money that was given to betray
Christ, was called of the Hebrews in their own mother tongue Acheldima. But
whereas some do answer that Peter spoke this unto the Galileans, whose speech
did disagree with the Jewish tongue, it is but vain and frivolous. In very
deed they did somewhat disagree in pronunciation: yet not so much, but that
they did well understand one another: like as do those of Paris and the men of
Roan.

Furthermore how could this be a fit word for Jerusalem, where Peter made
his sermon? To what end should he interpret in Greek among the Hebrews,
their own mother tongue? Therefore does Luke of himself put in this sentence
concerning the death of Judas, least Peter his words might seem strange
through ignorance of that history.

He possessed a field. This word has a double signification, which in my
opinion does rather signify in this place to possess, than to get yet be^^e
it skilleth little whether way we read it, I leave it indifferent. And he
speaks after this sort, not because Judas had the use of the field, or that
he himself did buie it, seeing it was bought after his death. But Luke his
meaning was, that his burial with the perpetual note of ignominy, was the
reward which he had for his falsehood and wicked act, Neither did he so much
sell Christ for thirty pence, as his Apostleship. He enjoyed not the money: he
only possessed the field. Furthermore it came to pass through the marvelous
providence of god, that the very common name of the field should be a note
of infamy for the Priests, which had bought the innocent blood, of the
Traitor. He says that the Hebrews did call it by that name in their tongue,
because he himself was a Grecian borne; And he calls that the Hebrewe
tongue, which the Jews did use after the captivity of Babylon, namely, such
as was mixed of the Assyrians tongue and of the Chaldeans tongue.

It is written in the book of Psalms. He takes away by authority of
scriptures, all offense which might have happened by reason of the falling away
of Judas. Yet might this place seem to be greatly wreasted: First in that
David did not wish that these things might befall any particular person, but
(in the plural number) he wishes them unto his enemies. Secondly, it seems
that Peter does apply these things amiss unto Judas, which were spoken of
the enemies of David. I answer that David does there speak after this sort of
him self, that he may describe the condition and state of Christ his
kingdom.

In that Psalm (I say) is contained the common image of the whole church,
which is the body of the Son of God. Therefore the things which are there set
down must needs have been fulfilled in the head, which are indeed fulfilled,
as the Evangelists do testify. Now if any man object that those things which
there were spoken against the enemies of David, do not fitly agree unto Judas:
we may easily gather, that they do so much the rather agree with him, because
David does not respect himself as being separated from the body of the church:
but rather as he was one of the members of Christ, and so taking upon him his
image, he steppeth forth in his name.

Whosoever shall mark that this singular person was attributed unto David,
that he should be a figure of Christ, will not marvel if all these things be
applied unto him, which were prefigured in David. Although therefore he does
comprehend the whole church, yet he begins at the head thereof, and does
especially describe what things Christ should suffer by the hands of the
wicked. For we learn out of Paul his doctrine, that whatsoever afflictions
the godly suffer, they are part of the afflictions of Christ, and serve to
the fulfilling of the same. Col. 1.14.
This order and connection did David observe, or rather the Spirit of God, who
meant by the mouth of David to instruct the whole Church. But as touching the
persecutors of Christ, all that which is commonly spoken of them, is by good
right referred unto their standard bearer: whose impiety and wickedness, as
it is most famous, so his punishment ought to be made known unto all men. If
any man do object again, that that which is recited in the Psalm, is only
certain cursings, and not prophesies: and that therefore Peter does gather
improperly that it was of necessity that it should be fulfilled, it is soon
answered. For David was not moved with any perverse or corrupt affection of the
flesh, to crave vengeance: but he had the holy Spirit to be his guide and
directer. Therefore what things soever he prayed for there, being inspired with
the holy Ghost, they have the same strength which prophesies have, because the
Spirit does require no other thing than that, which God has determined with
himself to perform, and will also promise unto us. But whereas Peter does cite
out of the scriptures two diverse testimonies: by the first is meant, that Judas
together with his name and family should quite be extinguished, that his
place might be empty: the other, which he fetches out of the hundredth and
ninth Psalm, tends to this end, that there should be an other chosen to supply
his place. These seem at the first to be contrary: namely, a waste habitation
and succession. Yet because the Spirit says, only in the former place, that
the adversaries of the Church should be taken away, that their place might be
empty, and without one to dwell therein, in respect of themselves: this is no
let why another may not afterward supply their empty place. Yea this does also
augment their punishment, in that the honor, after it is taken from him that
was unworthy thereof, is given to another.

And his bishopric. The Hebrewe word could not be translated more fitly.
For Pecudah does signify a jurisdiction or government, so called of the
ouerseeing, and beholding of things. For as for those which interpret it Wife,
the text refuteth them. For it follows in the next verse, of his wife, That
she may be made a widow. Therefore after that he has wished that the wicked
may be deprived of his life, he adds moreover, that he may be spoiled of
his honor: neither does he stay here, but also he desires that an other may
succeed him, whereby as I have said before, his punishment is doubled. In the
mean while he notes by the way that this false treacher and wicked person
whereof he speaks, should not be some one of the common sort, but such an one
as should be endued with honor and dignity: from which nevertheless he shall
fall. And out of this place must we learn, that the wicked shall not escape
scot free, which have persecuted the church of God. For this miserable and
wretched end is prepared for them all.

21 We must therefore. This which he brings in, might seem at the first
sight to be far fet. For if so be it David did speak of transposing Judas
his Bishopric, it did not thereupon straightway follow that, the disciples
should choose another to be his successor: yet because they knew that they had
this charge given them to order the church, so soon as Peter had told them,
that it did please the Lord that it should be so, he gathers thereuppon,
that they ought to do it. For whenever God will use us as means to
maintain the government of his church, so soon as we know what his will is,
we must not linger, but stoutly perform whatsoever is required in our
ministry and function. That was without all controversy, what was the duty
of the Church. Like as at this day, when we hear that those must be put from
their office which behave themselves vngodlilie, and wickedly, and that other
must be chosen in their rooms, the church must take this charge in hand.
Wherefore it was superfluous to move any question about a thing that was not to
be doubted of. Therefore let us always remember to consider what we have to do,
that we may be ready to obey the Lord. Furthermore, when as he entreats of
the making of an Apostle, he says he must be a witness of the resurrection.
Which signifies, that the Apostleship is not without the preaching of the
Gospel. Whence it may appear how vain and frivolous the Popish bishops are,
which having on only dumb visors, brag that they are the successors of the
Apostles. But wherein are they like unto them? I grant that Peter does here
require such a witness, as saw the Lord after his resurrection, of which
sort John does profess himself to be one, when he says, John. 19.35
He which saw it, bears witness. For this did serve for the confirmation of
faith: yet nevertheless Peter makes it a thing necessary in him and the rest
of his fellows in office, that they should teach, while he makes them and
himself preachers or witnesses of the resurrection.

He names the resurrection, not because they must bear witness thereof
alone: but because first under this is comprehended the preaching of the death
of Christ: secondly, because we have the end of our redemption therein, and
the accomplishment thereof, and also it brings with it the celestial
government of Christ, and the power of the Spirit in defending his, in
establishing justice and equity, in restoring order, in abolishing the
tyranny of sin, and in putting to flight all the enemies of the church. 1.
Cor. 15.17.
Let us know therefore that those things are not excluded by this word, which
are necessarily knit together. Nevertheless, let us note that the
resurrection is here named before other things, as being the chief point of
the Gospel, as also Paul teaches.

But were the Apostles alone witnesses of the resurrection? Was not this also
common to the rest of the disciples? For Peter seems to challenge this as
proper only to the Apostles. I answer that this title is therefore attributed
unto the^: because they were chosen peculiarly unto that function, and because
they had the chief room amongst those which did bring this embassage:
therefore though they were the chief of those which were assigned: yet were not
they only appointed thereunto.

All that time. He begins at that time when Jesus began to show himself
unto the world. Which is diligently to be observed, as before I have said.
For he lived privately until such time as he was almost thirty years of
age. For he would not make himself known further, than was needful for our
salvation. Therefore when the time was come wherein he must go about that
business which his Father had appointed him: he came aborode like a new man,
and one that was but lately borne. Every man may easily perceive what great
force this has to bridle our curiosity. The whole life of Christ might have
been a mirror most marvelous of more than absolute perfection: and yet
notwithstanding that he might keep us occupied in the study and meditation
of those things which were most needful to be known, he would lead the
better part of his life obscurelie and in secret. Who dare now wander without
Christ, seeing that he does apply the knowledge of himself to the edifiyng
of faith.

John. 10, 9.
The Hebrews take this, to go in and out, for to be conversant and to lead
the life among men. In which sense citizens are said to go in and out, by the
gates of their city. So John 10.9: If any man enter in by me, he shall go
in and out, and shall find pasture. Although in the second book of the
Chronicles, the first chapter, and tenth verse, it seems to be a token of
rule and government.

23 Then they presented two, Joseph, whose surname was Barsabas, which was
called Iustus, and Matthias.

24 And when they had prayed, they said, Thou Lord which know the hearts of
men, show whether of these two thou have chosen,

25 That he may take the room of this ministry and apostleship, from which
Judas is fallen, that he might go unto his place.

26 And they gave in their lots, and the lot fell upon Matthias: and he was by
common consent counted with the eleven Apostles.

23 They were to choose one only into the room of Judas: they present two.
Here may a question be asked, Why they were not contented with one only? Was
it because they were so like, that they could not discern whether was more
fit? This truly had been no sufficient reason why they should suffer it to be
decided by lottes. And also it seems that Joseph was of greater estimation
otherwise. Or was it because they were diversely affectioned? But this seems
scarce probable, neither is this to be admitted as true, because of that most
excellent testimony which Luke did give a little before of their unity and
agreement. Lastly, it had been very absurd for them to have polluted the
election of the Apostle with such strife and contention. But for this cause did
they use the casting of lots, that it might be known that Matthias was not
only chosen by the voices of men, but also that he was made by the
determination and judgment of God.

For there was this difference between the Apostles and the pastors: that the
Pastors were chosen simply by the Church, the Apostles were called of God. In
which respect Paul in the preface of his epistle to the Galathians, Galath. 1.2.
does profess himself to be an Apostle, neither of men, neither made by man.
Therefore like as the dignity of this function was excellent: so was it meet
that in the choosing of Matthias, the chief judgment should be left unto God,
howsoever men did their duty. Christ by his own mouth did appoint the rest:
therefore if Matthias had been chosen only by man, to be one of them, he
should have had less authority than they. This was very orderly done, that
the disciples should present unto God those whom they thought to be the best:
and he should choose to himself whom he knew to be most fit. So that God by
the fall of the lot, does pronounce that he did allow of the Apostleship of
Mathias. But the Apostles might seem to have dealt very rashly and disorderly,
which laid so great and weighty a matter upon a lot. For what certainty could
they gather thereby? I answer, that they did it only as they were moved
thereunto by the holy spirit. For although Luke does not express this: yet
because he will not accuse the disciples of rashness, but rather does show that
this election was lawful and approved of God: I say therefore, that they went
this way to work, being moved by the spirit. Like as they were directed in
all the action by the same Spirit. But whic do they not pray that God would
choose whom he would out of the whole multitude? Why do they restrain his
judgment unto two? Is not this to rob God of his liberty, when as they tie
him, and as it were make him subject unto their voices and consents? But
whosoever shall quietly ponder the matter, shall plainly perceive by the
drift of Luke, that the disciples durst do nothing, but that which they knew
was their duty to do, and was commanded them by the Lord. As for the
contentions, let them go shake their ears.

24 In praying they said. Word for word it is, Having prayed, they said. But
there is no obscurity in the sense: because his meaning was to speak as
follows, that they prayed. And yet he does not reckon up all the words,
being content briefly to show the sum. Therefore although they were both of
honest conversation, yea although they did excel in holiness and other
virtues: yet because the integrity of the heart, whereof God is the alone
knower and judge, is the chief, the disciples pray, that God would bring that
to light which was hidden from men. The same ought to be required even at this
day in choosing Pastors. For howsoever we are not to appoint two for one, yet
because we may oftentimes be deceived, and the discerning of spirits comes
of the Lord, we must always pray unto God, that he will show unto us what
men he will have to be ministers, that he may direct and govern our purposes.
Here we may also gather what great regard we must have of integrity and
innocence in choosing Pastors, without which both learning and eloquence, and
what excellency soever can be invented, are as nothing.

26 They gave in their lots. We will not in this place make any long disputation
about lots. Those men who think it to be wickedness to cast lots at al,
offend partly through ignorance, and partly they understand not the force of
this word. There is nothing which men do not corrupt with their boldness and
vanity. Whereby it is come to pass that they have brought lots into great
abuse and superstition. For that divination or conjecture which is made by
lots, is altogether devilish. But when magistrates divide provinces amongst
them, and brethren their inheritance, it is a thing lawful. Which thing
Solomon does plainly testify, when he makes God the governor of the event.
The lots (says he) are cast into the bosom, Pro. 16.33.
and the judgment of them comes forth from the Lord. This ordinance or
custom is no more corrupt and depraved by corruption, than the corrupt vanity
of the Chaldeans does corrupt true and natural Astrology. Whilst the
Chaldeans go about with the name of Astrology to cloak and color their
wicked curiosity, they defame a science both profitable and praiseworthie. The
same do those which tell men their destinies (as they call them) by casting
lots: but it is our duty to discern the lawful use from the corruption. He
says the lots were given, that being put into a pot, or one of their lappes,
they might afterward be drawn out. And here we must also note that this word
Lot is diversely taken in this place. For when he said before, that Judas had
obtained a lot of the ministry, his meaning was (according to the common
custom of the scripture) that he had a portion given him of the Lord. He
speaks afterward properly and without any figure of a lot. Yet is it likely,
for as much as the word Goral is commonly used by the Hebrews for both
things, that Peter meant to allude unto that which they were about to do: and
that Luke had respect unto the self same thing,

Of the ministry and Apostleship. Because the word Ministry was base, he
adds Apostleship, wherein there is greater dignity. Although the sense shall
be more plain if you expound it, The ministry of the Apostleship. For the
figure Hypallage is common in the Scriptures. Assuredly Luke meant to join
with the burden, the excellency of the office, that it might have the greater
reverence and authority: and yet this was his intent also, to declare that the
Apostles are called unto a painful function.

The lot fell upon Matthias. It came to pass as no man would have looked for:
for we may gather by that which goes before, that there was not so great
account made of Matthias, as of the other: For besides that Luke gave him the
former place, the two sirnames which Barsabas had, do show that he was in great
estimation. He was called Barsabas, that is the son of an oath, or of rest,
of the thing it self, as if he were some mirror either of faithfulness and
innocence, or of a quiet and modest nature. The other surname did import
singular honesty. This man therefore in men's judgment was the former: but God
did prefer Matthias before him. Whereby we are taught, that we must not glory
if we be extolled unto the skies in the opinion of men, and if by their voices
and consents, we be judged to be most excellent men: but we must rather have
regard of this, to approve our selves unto God, who alone is the most lawful
and just judge, by whose sentence and judgment we stand or fall. And we may
oftentimes mark this also: that God passes over him which is the chiefest in
the sight of men, that he may throw down all pride which is in man. In that
he adds, that he was reckoned amongst the rest, he wipeth away all sinister
note of rashness from the casting of lots: because the Church did embrace him as
chosen by God, on whom the lot fell.

CHAP. II.
1 ANd when the day of Pentecost was fulfilled, they were all with one accord
gathered together:

2 And there was made from heaven suddenly a sound, as it were when a
violent wind breaks in, and it filled all the house where they sat:

3 And they saw cloven tongues as it were of fire, and it sat upon every one
of them.

4 And they were all filled with the holy Ghost, and they began to speak with
strange tongues, even as the spirit gave them to speak.

1 And when. To be fulfilled is taken in this place for to Come. For Luke
bears record again of their perseverance, when he says that they stood al
in one place until the time which was set them. Hereunto serves the aduerbe
with one accord. Furthermore we have before declared why the Lord did defer the
sending of his spirit a whole month and one half. But the question is why he
sent him upon that day chiefelie. I will not refute that high and subtle
interpretation of Augustine, that like as the law was given to the old people
fifty days after Easter, being written in tables of Stone, by the hand of
God: so the Spirit, whose office it is to write the same in our hearts, did
fulfill that which was figured in the giving of the law, as many days after
the resurrection of Christ, who is the true passover. Notwithstanding whereas
he urges this his subtle interpretation as necessary, in his book of
Questions upon Exodus, and in his second Epistle unto Ianuarius, I would wish
him to be more sober and modest therein. Notwithstanding let him keep his own
interpretation to himself. In the mean season, I will embrace that which is
more sound: upon the feast day, wherein a great multitude was wont to resort
to Jerusalem, was this miracle wrought, that it might be more famous. And
truly by means hereof was it spread abroad, even unto the uttermost parts
and borders of the earth. John. 2.5.7.10.12.
For the same purpose did Christ oftentimes go up to Jerusalem upon the holy
days, to the end those miracles which he wrought, might be known to many:
and that in the greater assembly of people, there might be the greater fruit
of his doctrine. Acts. 20.16.
For so will Luke afterward declare, that Paul made have that he might come to
Jerusalem before the day of Pentecost, not for any religions sake, but because
of the greater assembly, that he might profit the more. Therefore in making
choice of the day, the profit of the miracle was respected: First that it
might be the more extolled at Jerusalem, because the Jews were then more bent
to consider the works of God: and secondly that it might be bruted abroad,
even in far countries. They called it the fiftith day, beginning to reckon at
the first fruits.

2 And there was made. It was requisite that the gift should be visible, that
the bodily sense might the more stir up the disciples. For such is our
slothfulness to consider the gifts of God, that unless he awake al our
senses, his power shall pass away unknown. This was therefore a preparation
that they might the better know that the Spirit was now come, which Christ had
promised. Although it was not so much for their sakes, as for ours: even as in
that the cloven and fiery tongues appeared, there was rather respect had of us,
and of all the whole Church, in that, than of them. For God was able to have
furnished them with necessary ability to preach the Gospel, although he
should use no sign. They themselves might have known, that it came to pass
neither by chance, neither yet through their own industry, that they were so
suddenly changed: but those signs which are here set down were about to be
profitable for all ages, as we perceive at this day, that they profit us. And
we must briefly note the proportion of the signs. The violence of the wind did
serve to make them afraid. For we are never rightly prepared to receive the
grace of God, unless the confidence and boldness of the flesh be tamed. For as
we have access unto him by faith, so humility and fear sets open the
gate, that he may come in unto us. He has nothing to do with proud and
careless men. It is a common thing for the spirit to be signified by wind,
John. 20.22. Ezech. 1.4.
or a blast. For both Christ himself, when he was about to give the Spirit to
his Apostles, did breath upon them. And in Ezechiel his vision there was a
whirlewind and wind. Yea, the word Spirit it self is a translated word: For,
because that hypostacie or person of the divine essence, which is called the
Spirit, is of it self incomprehensible, the scripture does borrowe the word
of the wind or blast: because it is the power of God, which God does power
into all creatures, John. 1.32.
as it were by breathing. The shape of tongues is restrained unto the present
circumstance. For as the figure and shape of a Dove which came down upon
Christ, had a signification agreeable to the office and nature of Christ: so
God did now make choice of a sign which might be agreeable to the thing
signified: namely, that it might show such effect and working of the holy
Ghost in the Apostles, as followed afterward. The diversity of tongues did
hinder the gospel from being spread abroad any farther. So that if the preachers
of the Gospel had spoken one language only, al men would have thought that
Christ had been shut up in the small corner of Jury: but God invented a way
whereby it might break out, when he divided and cloue the tongues of the
Apostles, that they might spread that abroad amongst all people, which was
delivered to them. Wherein appears the manifold goodness of God: Gene. 11.7.
because a plague and punishment of man's pride was turned into matter of
blessing. For whence came the diversity of tongues, save only that the
wicked and ungodly counsels of men might be brought to naught? But God does
furnish the Apostles with the diversity of tongues now, Esai. 19.18. Romans
15.6.
that he may bring and call home into a blessed unity, men which wander here
and there. These cloven tongues made al men to speak the language of Canaan:
as Isaias foretold. For what language soever they speak, yet do they call
upon one Father, which is in heaven, with one mouth and one spirit. I said
that that was done for our sake, not only because the fruit came unto us, but
because we know that the Gospel came not unto us by chance, but by the
appointment of God, who to this end gave the Apostles cloven tongues, least
any nation should want that doctrine which was committed unto them. Whereby is
proved the calling of the Gentiles: and secondly hereby their doctrine does
purchase credit, which we know was not forged by man, seeing that we hear
that the Spirit did dwell in their tongues. Now it remains that we declare
what the fire means. Without all doubt it was a token of the force and
efficacy, which should be exercised in the voice of the Apostles. Otherwise,
although their sound had gone out into the uttermost parts of the world, they
should only have but the air without doing any good at all. Therefore the Lord
does show that their voice shall be fiery, that it may inflame the hearts of men:
that the vanity of the world being burnt and consumed, it may purge and renew
all things. Otherwise they durst never have taken upon them so hard^ a
function; unless the Lord had assured them of the power of their preaching.
Hereby it came to pass, that the doctrine of the Gospel did not only sound
in the air, but pearce into the minds of men, and did fill them with an
heavenly heat and burning. Neither was this force showed only in the mouth of
the Apostles, but it appears daily. And therefore we must beware least when
the fire burns, we be as stubble. Furthermore the Lord did once give the
holy Ghost under a visible shape, that we may assure our selves, that his
invisible and hidden grace shall never be wanting to the Church.

And it sat. Because the number is suddenly changed, it is to be doubted
whether he speaks of the fire. He said that there appeared tongues, as it
had been of fire. It follows by and by: And it sat upon them.
Notwithstanding I refer it unto the spirit. For the Hebrews use commonly to
express the substantive of the verb in the second member, which they did
omit in the former. Wherefore we have an example in this place: It sat upon
them, and they were all filled with the holy Ghost. And we know that although
Luke did write in Greek, yet is he full of those phrases which the Hebrews
use. Now whereas he calls the tongues, the holy Ghost, it is according to
the custom of the Scripture. For John calls the Dove by the same name: John.
1.32.
because the Lord would testify and declare the presence of his Spirit by
some such sign. If it were a vain sign, it should be an absurd naming, to
call the sign by the name of the thing signified: but where the thing is
annexed, the name of the thing is fitly given to the sign, which offers the
same unto our senses to be perceived. The fulness of the spirit, wherewith he
says every one w^^ replenished, does not express the equal measure of
gifts in eue^^e one, but that excellency which should be meet for such a
call^^g.

4 They began to speak. He shows that the effect did appear presently, and
also to what use their tongues were to be framed and applied. But, because Luke
sets down shortly after, that strangers out of diverse countries did
marvel, because that every one of them did hear the Apostles speaking in
their own tongue: some think that they spoke not in diverse tongues, but that
they did all understand that which was spoken in one tongue, as well as if they
should hear their natural tongue. Therefore they think that one and the same
sound of the voice was diversely distributed amongst the hearers. An other
conjecture they have, because Peter made one sermon in the audience of many
gathered together out of diverse countries: who could not understand his speech
and language, unless an other voice should come unto their ears, then that
which proceeded out of his mouth. But we must first note, that the disciples
spoke in deed with strange tongues: otherwise the miracle had not been wrought
in them, but in the hearers. So that the similitude should have been false,
whereof he made mention before: neither should the Spirit have been given so
much to them as to others. Again, we hear how Paul gives thanks to God, 1.
Cor. 14.18
that he speaks with diverse tongues. Truly he chalengeth to himself both
the understanding, and also the use thereof. Neither did he attain to this
skill by his own study and industry, but he had it by the gift of the Spirit.
In the same place he affirms, that it is an especial gift, wherewith all men
are not endued. I suppose that it does manifestly appear hereby, that the
Apostles had the variety and understanding of tongues given them: that they
might speak unto the Greeks in Greek, unto the Italians in the Italian tongue,
and that they might have true communication and conference with their hearers.
Notwithstanding I leave it indifferent, whether there was any second miracle
wrought or no, so that the Egyptians and Elamites did understand Peter
speaking in the Chaldean tongue, as if he did utter diverse voices. For there be
some conjectures which persuade me thus to think, and yet not so firm, but
that they may be refuted. For it may be that they spoke with diverse tongs, as
they light upon this man or that, and as occasion was offered, and as their
languages were diverse. Therefore it was a manifest miracle, when they saw them
ready to speak diverse languages. As touching Peter his sermon, it might be
understood of the more part of men wheresoever they were borne: For it is to be
thought that many of those which came to Jerusalem were skilful in the Chaldean
tongue. Again, it shall be nothing inconvenient, if we say that he spoke also in
other tongues. Although I will not much stand about this matter so that this be
out of doubt, that the Apostles changed their speech.

5 And there were at Jerusalem Jews abiding, godly men out of every nation of
those which are under heaven.

6 And when this was noised abroad, the multitude came together, and was
astonished: because every one heard them speak in his own tongue.

7 And they wondered all, and marueiled, saying amongst themselves, Behold,
are not all these which speak, men of Galilee?

8 And how do we every one hear them speaking in his own language, wherein we
were borne?

9 Partheans, and Medes, and Elamites, and inhabiters of Mesopotamia, Judea,
and Cappadocia, of Pontus and Asia,

10 And of Phrygia and Pamphilia, of Egypt, and of the parts of Lybia toward
Cyren, and strangers of Rome.

11 Jews and Proselites, Cretes and Arabians, we hear them speaking in our
own tongues, the wonderful works of God.

12 Therefore they were all amazed and marueiled, saying one to another: what
means this? Others mocking said: they are full of sweet wine.

5 And there were at Jerusalem. When he calls them godly or religious men,
he seems to give us to understand that they came to Jerusalem that they
might worship God: like as God in all ages after the scattering abroad, did
gather together into that City some seed which remained, having as is were
set up his banner: because as yet the Temple did serve to some use: yet
nevertheless he shows by the way, who those be which profit by those
miracles, whereby God does declare his power. For wicked and profane men, do
either laugh at them, or else pass not for them, as we shall see by and by.
Furthermore he meant to cite those as witnesses, which may the better be
believed for their religion and godliness. When he said, out of every nation,
he means out of diverse Countries, whereof one is far from another. For he
does also afterward reckon up those lands whereof one was far distant from
another, of which sort are Lybia and Pontus, Rome and Parthia, and Arabia and
such like. This serves to increase the greatness of the thing. For the
Cretians and men of Asia, dwelling so near together, might have some
likelihood and agreement in speech: but the same could not be betwixt the
Italians and the men of Cappadocia, betwixt the Arabians, and those of Pontus.
Yea, this was also a work of God worthy to be remembered, and wondered at,
that in so huge and horrible a scattering abroad of the people, he did
always reserve some relics, yea he caused certain strangers to adioyne
themselves unto a people which was in such misery and as it were quite
destroyed. For although they lived here and there in exile in far countries,
and being one far from another, did as it were inhabit diverse worlds, yet
did they hold among themselves the unity of faith. Neither does he call them
unadvisedly and without good consideration godly men and men fearing God.

6 When this was noysed abroad. Luke says thus in Greek, This voice being
made, but his meaning is that the fame was spread abroad, whereby it came to
pass that a great multitude came together. For if one after another in diverse
places, and at diverse times had heard the Apostles speaking in diverse
tongues, the miracle had not been so famous. Therefore they come all together
into one place, that the diversity of tongues may the better appear by the
present comparison. There is a further circumstance also here to be noted,
that the Country and native foil of the Apostles was commonly known, and
this was also commonly known that they never went out of their Country, to
learn strange tongues. Therefore forasmuch as one speaks Latin, another
Greek, another the Arabian tongue, as occasion was offered, and that
indifferently, and every one does also change his tongue, the work of God
appears more plainly hereby.

11 The wonderful works of God. Luke notes two things which caused the
hearers to wonder: first, because the Apostles being before ignorant and
private persons, borne in a base corner, did notwithstanding entreat profoundly
of divine matters, and of heavenly wisdom. The other is, because they have
new tongues given them suddenly. Both things are worth the noting, because to
huddle out words unadvisedly and foolishly, should not so much have served to
move their minds, and the majesty of the things ought the more to have moved
them to consider the miracle. Although they give due honor to God, in that that
they are astonished and amassed: yet the principal fruit of the miracle is
expressed, in this that they enquire: and thereby declare that they are
prepared to learn: for otherwise their amasednes and wondering should not have
done them any great good. And certainly we must so wonder at the works of
God, that there must be also a consideration, and a desire to understand.

12 Others mocking. Hereby it appears how monstrous as well the sluggishnes,
as also the ungodliness of men is, when Satan has taken away their mind. If
God should openly and visiblie descend from heaven, his majesty could scarce
more manifestly appear, than in this miracle. Whosoever has any drop of sound
understanding in him, must needs be stricken with the only hearing of it. How
beastly then are those men, who see it with their eyes, and yet scoff? and go
about with their jests to mock the power of God? But the matter is so. There
is nothing so wonderful, which those men do not turn to a jest, who are
touched with no care of God: because they do even upon set purpose, harden
themselves in their ignorance, in things most plain. And it is a just
punishment of God, which he brings upon such pride: to deliver them to Satan
to be driven headlong into blind fury. Wherefore there is no cause why we
should marvel, that there be so many at this day so blind in so great light,
if they be so deaf when such manifest doctrine is delivered, yea if they
wa^tonly refuse salvation when it is offered unto them. For if the wonderful
and strange works of God wherein he does wonderfully set forth his power, be
subject to the mockes of men: what shall become of doctrine, which they think
tastes of nothing, but of that which is common? Although Luke does signify
unto us that they were not of the worst sort, or altogether past hope, which
did laugh and mock: but he meant rather to declare how the common sort was
affected when they saw this miracle. And truly it has been always so in the
world, for very few have been touched with the true feeling of God, as often
as he has revealed himself. Neither is it any marvel: for religion is a rare
virtue, and a virtue which few men have: which is in deed the beginning of
understanding. Nevertheless howsoever the more part of men through a certain
hard stifneckednes, does reject the consideration of the works of God, yet are
they never without fruit. As we may see in this history.

14 But Peter standing with the eleven, lift up his voice, and spoke unto them.
Ye men of Judea, and all ye which dwell at Jerusalem, let this be known unto
you, and with your ears hear my words.

15 For these men are not drunk, as ye suppose: for it is the third hour of
the day.

16 But this is that which was spoken by the Prophet Joel:

17 And it shall be in the last days, says God, I will power out of my
Spirit upon all flesh, and your sons, and your daughters shall prophecy,
and your young men shall see visions, and your Elders shall dream dreams:

18 Verily I will power out of my Spirit in those days upon my servants, and
upon mine handmaids, and they shall prophecy.

19 And I will show wonders in heaven above, and signs upon the earth beneath,
blood and fire, and the vapor of smoke:

20 The sun shall be turned into darkness, and the moon into blood, before
the great and notable day of the Lord do come.

21 And it shall come to pass, that whosoever shall call upon the name of the
Lord, he shall be saved.

14 And Peter standing. By this word Standing, he did signify that there was
a grave sermon made in the assembly. For they did rise when they spoke unto
the people, to the end they might be the better heard. The sum of this
Sermon is this: he gathers that Christ is already revealed and given by the
gift of the holy Ghost, which they saw. Yet first he refuteth that false
opinon, in that they thought that the disciples were drunk. This refutation
consists upon a probable argument: because men use not to be drunk betimes
in the morning. For as Paul says, Those which are drunk, are drunk in the
night. 1. These. 5.6.
For they fly the light for shame. And surely so great is the filthiness of
this vice, that for good causes it hates the light. And yet this argument were
not always good. For Iesaias does inueigh in his time against those, which
did rise early to follow drunkenness. And at this day there be many, who
like hogs, so soon as they awake, run to quaffing. But because this is a
common custom amongst men, Peter says, that it is no likely thing. Those
which have but even small skill in antiquity, do know that the civil day,
from the rising of the Sun until the going down thereof, was divided into
twelve hours. So that the hours were longer in summer, and shorter in winter.
Therefore that which should now be the ninth before noone in winter, and in
somer the eight, was the third hour amongst the old people. Therefore,
whereas Peter does only lightly remove the opinion of drunkenness, he
does it for this cause, because it had been superfluous to have stood about
any long excuse. Therefore, as in a matter which was certain and out of doubt,
he does rather pacify those which mocked, than labor to teach them. And he
does not so much refute them by the circumstance of time, as by the testimony
of Joel. For when he says that that is now come to pass, which was
foretold, he touches briefly their unthankfulness, because they do not
acknowledge such an excellent benefit promised unto them in times past, which
they now see with their eyes. And whereas he vpbraideth the fault of a few
unto all, he does it not to this end, that he may make them all guilty of
the same fault: but because a fit occasion was offered by their mocking to
teach them all together, he does not for-slow the same.

17 It shall be in the last days. By this effect he proves that the Messiah
is already revealed. Joel. 2.29.
Joel in deed does not express the last days: but for as much as he
entreats of the perfect restoring of the Church, it is not to be doubted but
that that prophecy belongs unto the last age alone. Wherefore that which
Peter brings, does no whit dissent from Joel his meaning: but he does only
add this word for expositions sake, that the Jews might know, that the
Church could by no other means be restored, which was then decayed, but by
being renewed by the Spirit of God. Again, because the repairing of the
Church, should be like unto a new world, therefore Peter says that it shall
be in the last days. And surely this was a common and familiar thing among
the Jews, that all those great promises concerning the blessed and well
ordered state of the Church, should not be fulfilled, until Christ by his
coming should restore all things. Wherefore it was out of all doubt amongst
them, that that which is cited out of Joel, does appertain unto the last time.
Now by the last days or fullness of time is meant the stable and firm
condition of the Church in the manifestation or revealing of Christ.

I will power out of my Spirit. He intends to prove (as we have already
said) that the Church can be repaired by none other means, saving only by
the giving of the holy Spirit. Therefore for as much as they did all hope,
that the restoring drew near, he accuses them of sluggishnesse, because
they do not once think upon the way, and means thereof. And when the
Prophet says, I will power out, it is without all question, that he meant by
this word to note the great abundance of the Spirit. And we must take, I
will power out of my Spirit, in the same sense, as if he had said simply, I
will power out my Spirit. For these latter words, are the words of the
Prophet. But Peter followed the Grecians, who translate the Hebrew word eth,
hapo. Therefore some men do in vain more subtillie play the Philosophers:
because how soever the words be changed, yet must we still retain and keep
the prophet his meaning. Nevertheless when God is said to power out his Spirit,
I confess it must be thus understood, that he makes manifold variety and
change of gifts to flow unto men from his Spirit, as it were out of the only
fountain, the fountain which can never be drawn dry. For as Paul does
testify, there be diverse gifts, 1. Cor. 12.4.
and yet but one Spirit. And hence do we gather a profitable doctrine, that
we can have no more excellent thing given us of God than the grace of the
Spirit: yea that all other things are nothing worth, if this be wanting.
For when God will briefly promise salvation to his people, he affirms that
he will give them his Spirit. Hereupon it follows that we can obtain no
good things, until we have the Spirit given us. And truly it is as it were
the key, which opens unto us the door, that we may enter into all the
treasures of spiritual good things: and that we may also have entrance into
the kingdom of God.

Upon all flesh. It appears by that which follows, of what force this
generality is. For first it is set down generally, All flesh: after that the
partition is added, whereby the Prophet does signify that there shall be no
difference of age or kind, but that God admits al, one with another unto
the partaking of his grace. It is said therefore All flesh, because both
young and old, men and women, are thereby signified. Yet here may a question
be moved, why God does promise that unto his people, as some new and
unwonted good thing, which he was wont to do for them from the beginning
throughout all ages. For there was no age void of the grace of the Spirit.
The answer of this question is set down in these two words, I will power
out, and, Upon all flesh. For we must here note a double contrariety
between the time of the old, and new Testament. For the pouring out (as I
have said) does signify great plenty: when as there was under the Law a
more scarce distribution. For which cause John also does say that the holy
Ghost was not given until Christ ascended into heaven. All flesh does
signify an infinite multitude, where as God in times past did vouchsafe to
bestow such plenty of his spirit only upon a few.

Furthermore, in both comparisons we do not deny but that the Fathers under
the Law, were partakers of the selfsame grace whereof we are partakers: but
the Lord does show that we are above them, as we are in deed. I say, that
all Godly men sithence the beginning of the world, were endewed with the same
spirit of understanding, of righteousness, and sanctification, wherewith the
Lord does at this day illuminate and regenerate us: but there were but a
few which had the light of knowledge given them then, if they be compared
with the great multitude of the faithful, which Christ did suddenly gather
togithe^ by his coming. Again, their knowledge was but obscure and slender,
and as it were covered with a veil, if it be compared with that which we
have at this day out of the Gospel, where Christ the Sun of righteousness
does shine with perfect brightness, as it were at noone day. Neither does
that any whitte hurt or hinder, that a few had such an excellent faith, that
peradventure they have no equal at this day. For their understanding did
nevertheless smell, or savor of the instruction and Schoolemastershippe of
the Law. For that is always true, that godly kings and Prophets have not
seen, nor heard those things which Christ has revealed by his coming.
Therefore to the end the Prophet Joel may commend the excellency of the new
Testament, he affirms and foretells that the grace of the Spirit shall be
more plentiful in time thereof: Mat. 13.17. Luke 10.24.
and again, that it shall come unto more men.

And your sons shall prophecy. By the word Prophecy, he meant to note the
rare and singular gift of understanding. And to the same purpose tends that
partition which follows afterward: your young men shall see visions, and
your old men shall dream dreams. For we gather out of the twelfth Chapter of
Numbers, that these were the two ordinary ways whereby God did reveal
himself to the prophets. For in that place when the Lord exempteth Moses from
the common sort of Prophets, Number. 12.6.
he says: I appear unto my servants by a vision, or by a dream: but I
speak unto Moses face to face. Therefore we see that two kinds are put after
the general word, for a confirmation. Yet this is the sum, that they shall
all be Prophets so soon as the holy Ghost shall be powered out from heaven.
But here it is objected, that there was no such thing, even in the Apostles
themselves, neither yet in the whole multitude of the faithful. I answer,
that the prophets did commonly use to shadow under tropes most fit for their
time, the kingdom of Christ. When they speak of the worship of God, they
name the Altar, the Sacrifices, the offering of gold, silver, and
frankensence. Notwithstanding we know that the Altars do cease, the Sacrifices
are abolished, whereof there was some use in time of the Law: and that the
Lord requires some higher thing at our hands, than earthly riches. That is
true in deed. but the Prophets, whiles they apply their style unto the
capacity of their time, comprehend under figures (wherewith the people were
then well acquainted) those things, which we see otherwise revealed and
showed now, like as when he promises else where, Isaie. 66.21.
that he will make Priests of Levites, and Levites of the common sort of men:
this is his meaning, that under the kingdom of Christ every base person shall
be extolled unto an honorable estate. Therefore if we desire to have the true
and natural meaning of this place, we must not urge the words which are taken
out of the old order of the Law: but we must only seek the truth without
figures. And that is it, that the Apostles through the sudden inspiration of
the Spirit, did entreat of the heavenly mysteries. Propheticallie, that is to
say, diuinelie and above the common order. Therefore this word Prophecy
does signify nothing else, save only the rare and excellent gift of
understanding: as if Joel should say, Under the kingdom of Christ there shall
not be a few Prophets only, unto whom GOD may reveal his secrets: but
all men shall be endewed with spiritual wisdom, even to the prophetical
excellency. As it is also in Jeremy: Every man shall no longer teach his
neighbor, Iere. 13.34.
because they shall all know me from the least unto the greatest. And in
these words Peter inuiteth the Jews, unto whom he speaks, to be partakers
of the same grace. As if he should say, The Lord is r^adie to power out that
Spirit far and wide, which he has powered upon us. Therefore, unless you
your selves be the cause of let, ye shall receive with us of this fulness. And
as for us, let us know that the same is spoken to us at this day, which was
then spoken to the Jews. For although those visible graces of the Spirit be
ceased, yet God has not withdrawn his Spirit from his Church. Wherefore he
offers him daily unto us all, by this same promise, without putting any
difference. Wherefore we are poor and needy only through our own
sluggishnes: and also it appears manifestly that those are wicked and
sacrilegious enemies of the Spirit, which keep back the Christian common
people from the knowledge of God, and for as much as he himself does not
only admit, but also call by name unto himself women and men, young and old.

18 Upon my servants. In these words the promise is restrained unto the
worshipers of God. For God does not profane his Spirit: which he should do,
if he should make the same common to the unbelieving and despisers. It is
cetaine that we are made the servants of God by the spirit: and that therefore
we are not, until such time as we have received the same: but first, whom God
has adopted to be of his family, and whom he has framed by his Spirit to
obey him, those does he furnish with new gifts afterward. Again the Prophet
did not respect that order of time, but his meaning was to make this grace
proper to the Church alone. And for as much as the Church was only among the
Jews, he calls them honorably the servants and handmaids of God. But, after
that God did gather unto himself on every side a Church, the wall of separation
being pulled down, so many as are received into the society of the covenant,
are called by the same name. Only let us remember that the Spirit is appointed
for the Church properly.

19 And I will show wonders. We must first see what is meant by this great day
of the Lord. Some do expound it of the former coming of Christ in the flesh:
and othersome refer it unto the last day of the resurrection: I do allow
neither opinion. For in my judgment the Prophet comprehends the whole
kingdom of Christ. And so he calls it the Great day, after that the son of
God began to be revealed in the flesh, that he may lead us into the fulfilling
of his kingdom. Therefore he appoints no certain day, but he begins
this day at the first preaching of the Gospel, and he extends the same unto
the last resurrection. Those which restrain it unto the time of the Apostles,
are moved with this reason: because the Prophet joins this member, and that
which goes next before together. But in that, there is no absurdity at all,
because the Prophet does assign the time, when these things began to come
to pass, howsoever they have a continual going forward even until the end
of the world. Furthermore whereas he says that the sun shall be turned to
darkness, and the moon into blood, they are figurative speeches, whereby he
does give us to understand thus much, that the Lord will show tokens of his
wrath through out the whole frame of the world, which shall bring men even to
their wits end, as if there should be some horrible and fearful change of
nature wrought. For as the sun and moon are unto us witnesses of Gods
fatherly favor toward us, whiles that by course they give light to the
earth: so on the otherside, the Prophet says that they shall be messengers to
foreshewe Gods wrath and displeasure. And this is the second member of the
prophecy. For after that he had entreated of the spiritual grace which
should be abundantly powered out upon all flesh: least any man should
imagine that all things should be quiet and prosperous together,
therewithal he adds, that the estate of the world shall be troublesome,
and full of great fear under Christ. As Christ himself does more fully
declare, Math. 24. and Luke 21. But this serves greatly to the setting forth
of grace, that where as all things do threaten destruction, yet who so ever
does call upon the name of the Lord, is sure to be saved. By the darkness
of the Sun, by the bloody streaming of the Moon, by the black vapor of
smoke, the Prophet meant to declare, that whither so ever men turn their eyes,
there shall many things appear both upward and downewarde, which may make
them amassed and afraid, as he has already said. Therefore this is as much
as if he should have said, that the world was never in a more miserable
case, that there were never so many and such cruel tokens of Gods wrath.
Hence may we gather how inestimable the goodness of God is, who offers a
present remedy for so great evils: and again, how unthankful they are
toward God, and how froward, which do not fly unto the sanctuary of
salvation, which is nigh unto them; and does meet them. Again, it is out of
all doubt that God means by this so doleful a description, to stir up all
Godly men, that they may with a more fervent desire seek for salvation. And
Peter cites it to the same end: that the Jews may know that they shall be
more than miserable, unless they receive that grace of the Spirit which is
offered unto them. Yet here may a question be asked how this can hang
together, that when Christ is revealed, there should such a sea of miseries
ouerflowe and break out therewithal. For it may seem to be a thing very
inconvenient, that he should be the only pledge of Gods love toward
mankind, in whom the heavenly father does lay open all the treasure of his
goodness: yea he powers out the bowels of his mercy upon us, and that yet
by the coming of the same his son, his wrath should be more whot than it
was wont, so that it should as it were quite consume both heaven and earth at
once. But we must first mark, that because men are too slow to receive
Christ, they must be constrained by diverse afflictions, as it were with
whippes. Secondly, for as much as Christ does call unto himself all those
which are heavy laden and labor, Mat. 11.24.
we must first be tamed by many miseries, that we may learn humility. For
through great prosperity, men do set up the horns of pride. And he cannot
but despise Christ fiercely, who so ever he be, that seems to himself to
be happy. Thirdly because we are more than we ought, set upon the seeking of
the peace of the flesh: whereby it comes also to pass, that many tie the
grace of Christ unto the present life, it is expedient for us to be accustomed
to think otherwise, that we may know that the kingdom of Christ is
spiritual. Therefore to the end God may teach us that the good things of
Christ are heavenly, he does exercise us according to the flesh, with many
miseries. Whereby it comes to pass that we do seek our felicity without the
world. Moreover men do bring miseries upon themselves through their
unthankfulness. For the servant which knows his masters will, Luke 12.47.
and does not obey, is worthy of greater and more stripes: The more familiarly
that God does communicate with us in Christ, the more does our ungodliness
grow and break out into open contumacie: so that it is no marvel if when
Christ revealed, there appear many tokens of Gods vengeance on the other
side, for as much as me^ do hereby more grievously provoke God against them,
and kindle his wrath through wicked contempt. Surely in that the day of Christ
is fearful, it is an accidental thing, whether God will correct our
slouthfulnes, to bring us under which are yet unapt to be taught: or whether he
will punish our unthankfulness. For it brings with it of it self, nothing but
that which is pleasant. But the contempt of Gods grace does provoke him to
horrible anger not without cause.

21 Who so ever shall call upon. An excellent place. For as God does prick us
forward like sluggish Asses, with threatenings and terrors, to seek salvation:
so, after that he has brought darkness upon the face of heaven and earth, yet
does he show a means whereby salvation may shine before our eyes: to wit, if
we shall call upon him. For we must diligently note this circumstance. If God
should promise salvation simply, it were a great matter: but it is a far
greater, when as he promises the same amidst manifold dungeons of death.
Whiles that (says he) all things shall be out of order, and the fear of
destruction shall possess al things, only call upon me and ye shall be saved.
Therefore howsoever man be swallowed up in the goulfe of miseries, yet is there
set before him a way to escape. We must also note the universal word, who so
ever. For God admits all men unto himself without exception, and by this
means does he inuit them to salvation, Romans 10.20.
as Paul gathers in the tenth chapt. to the Romans, and as the prophet had
set it down before: Thou Lord, which hear the prayer, unto thee shall all
flesh come. Therefore for as much as no man is excluded from calling upon God,
the gate of salvation is set open unto all men. Neither is there any other
thing which keeps us back from entering in, save only our own unbelief. I
speak of all, unto whom God does make manifest himself by the Gospel. But
like as those which call upon the name of the Lord are sure of salvation, so we
must think that without the same we are thrice miserable and undone. And when
as our salvation is placed in calling upon God, there is nothing in the mean
season taken from faith, for as much as this invocation is grounded in faith
alone. There is also another circumstance no less worthy the noting: in that
the Prophet does signify, that the calling upon God does properly appertain
and agree unto the last days. For although he would be called upon in all
ages, notwithstanding since that he showed himself to be a Father, in Christ,
we have the more easy access unto him. Which thing ought both the more to
embolden us, and to take from us all sluggishnes. As he himself does also
reason, that by this privilege our forwardnes to pray, is doubled to us:
Hitherto have ye asked nothing in my name: ask, and ye shall receive: as if
he should say, Heretofore although I did not yet appear to be a mediator, and
advocate in the flesh, yet did ye pray: but now when you shall have me to be
your patron, with how much more courage ought ye to do that?

22 Ye men of Israel, hear these words: Jesus of Nazareth, a man showed
toward you of God, by powers and wonders, and signs which God did by him in
the midst of you, as you your selves know:

23 Him, I say, have ye taken, being delivered by the determinate counsel and
foreknowledge of God, by the hands of wicked men, and have slain him, having
fastened him to the cross.

24 Whom God has raised up, having loosed the sorrows of death, forasmuch as
it was impossible that he should be holden of it.

22 Jesus of Nazareth. Now does Peter apply unto his purpose the prophecy of
Joel: namely, that the Jews may thereby know that the time of restoring was
present: and that Christ was given them for this purpose. For this promise was
no otherwise to be fulfilled, save only by the coming of the mediator. And
this is the right use of all those gifts which we have by Christ, whiles that
they bring us unto Christ, as unto a fountain. But he comes hither by little
and little. For he does not by and by in the beginning affirm that Jesus was
Christ: but he says, only that he was a man, sent of God: and that does he
prove by his miracles. Afterward he adds, that he rose from death, when he
was slain. Whereby it appears more certainly and more fully, that he was
not some one of the Prophets, but the very son of God, who was promised to
be the repairer of all things. Let this therefore be the first member, that
Jesus of Nazareth was a man approved of God by manifest testimonies, so that he
could not be despised, as some base and obscure person. The old interpreter
did not evil translate hupodhedheigmenon, Approved. And Erasmus is deceived,
who thinks that he did read it otherwise. And he himself did not express
Luke his mind, when as he translateth it Given. For seeing that word does
signify among the Grecians to show: whereupon the Mathematicians also call
those arguments whereby they set a thing as it were before a man's eyes
apodexeis, or demonstrations: Luke meant to say that Jesus came not unknown,
and without any testimony or approbation: but that those miracles which God
showed by him, served to this end, that he might be famous and excellent.
Therefore he says, that he was showed toward the Jews: because God would
have his son to be accounted excellent and great amongst them. As if he should
say, that miracles were not appointed for other nations, but for the Jews:
that they might know that Jesus was sent unto them of God.

By great works. He calls miracles by these three names. And because God
does show forth his power in the^ after a new and unwonted sort, or does at
least procure greater admiration, they are for good causes called great works.
For we are commonly more moved when any extraordinary thing does happen. In
which respect they are also called Wonders: because they make us astonished. And
for this cause are they called signs: because the Lord will not have men's
minds to stay there, but to be lifted up higher as they are referred unto
another end. He put in three words, to the end he might the more extol
Christ his miracles, and enforce the people by this heaping and laying of
words together, to consider the same. Furthermore he makes not Christ the
chief author, but only the minister: because as we have already said, he
determined to go forward by degrees. Notwithstanding here may a question be
asked, whether miracles do suffice to be a sufficient and just approbation or
no: because by this means inchaunters might cause their legier-demaine, to be
believed. I answer, that the iuggling casts of Satan do much differ from the
power of God. Christ says elsewhere, that the kingdom of Antichrist shall be
in wonders, 2. These. 2.9.
but he adds by and by, in lying wonders. If any man object that we cannot
easily discern, because he says, that they shall have so great color that they
shall deceive (if it could be) the very elect: I answer again that this error
proceeds only from our own want of wit, because we are so dull. For God does
show his power manifestly enough. Therefore there is sufficient approbatio^ of
the doctrine and of the ministry, in the miracles which God does work, so
that we be not blind. And whereas it is not of sufficient force among the
wicked, because they may now and then be deceived with the false miracles of
Satan, this must be imputed unto their own blindness: but whosoever has a
pure heart, he does also know God with the pure eyes of his mind, so often
as he does show himself. Neither can Satan otherwise delude us, save only
when through the wickedness of our heart, our judgment is corrupt, and our
eyes blinded, or at least bleared through our own slothfulness.

23 Him have ye slain. He makes mention of the death of Christ for this
cause chiefly, that the resurrection might the more assuredly be believed. It
was a thing full well known among the Jews that Christ was crucified.
Therefore in that he rose again, it is a great and wonderful token of his
divine power. In the mean season, to the end he may prick their consciences
with the feeling of sin, he says that they slew him. Not that they
crucified him with their own hands, but because the people with one voice
desired to have him put to death. And although many of the hearers unto whom he
speaks, did not consent unto that wicked and ungodly cruelty, yet does he
justly impute the same to the nation: because all of them had defiled them
selves either with their silence, or else through their carelessness. Neither
has the cloak and color of ignorance any place, forasmuch as he was showed
before of God. This giltines therefore under which he brings the^ is a
preparation unto repentance.

By the determinate counsel. He remoueth a stumbling block: because it seems
at the first blush to be a thing very inconvenient, that that man whom God had
so greatly adorned, being afterward laid open to all manner mocking, does
suffer so reproachful a death. Therefore because the cross of Christ does
commonly use to trouble us at the first sight, for this cause Peter declares
that he suffered nothing by chance, or because he wanted power to deliver
himself, but because it was so determined and appointed by God. For this
knowledge alone; that the death of Christ was ordained by the eternal counsel
of God, did cut off all occasion of foolish and wicked cogitations, and did
prevent all offenses which might otherwise be conceived. For we must know
this, that God does decree nothing in vain or rashly. Whereupon it follows
that there was just cause, for which he would have Christ to suffer. The same
knowledge of gods providence, is a step to consider the end and fruit of
Christ his death. For this meets us by and by in the counsel of God, that
the just was delivered for our sins, and that his blood was the price of our
death. And here is a notable place touching the providence of God, that we may
know that as well our life as our death is governed by it Luke entreats in
deed of Christ. But in his person we have a mirror, which does represent unto
us the universal providence of God, which does stretch it self throughout the
whole world: yet does it specially shine unto us who are the members of
Christ. Luke sets down two things in this place, the foreknowledge, and the
decree of God. And although the foreknowledge of God is former in order
(because God does first see what he will determine, before he does in deed
determine the same) yet does he put the same after the counsel and decree of
God, to the end we may know that God would nothing, neither appointed any
thing, save that which he had long before directed to his end. For men do
oftentimes rashly decree many things, because they decree them suddenly.
Therefore to the end Peter may teach that the counsel of God is not without
reason, he coupleth also therewithal his foreknowledge. Now we must
distinguish these two, and so much the more diligently, because many are
deceived in this point. For passing over the counsel of God, wherewith he does
guide and govern the whole world, they catch at his bare foreknowledge.
Thence comes that common distinction, that although God does foresee all
things, yet does he lay no necessity upon his creatures. And in deed it is
true that God does know this thing or that thing before, for this cause,
because it shall come to pass: but as we see that Peter does teach that God
did not only foresee that which befell Christ, but it was decreed by him. And
hence must be gathered a general doctrine: because God does no less show
his providence in governing the whole world, than in ordaining and appointing
the death of Christ. Therefore it belongs to God not only to know before,
things to come, but of his own will to determine what he will have done. This
second thing did Peter declare, when he said, That he was delivered by the
certain and determinate counsel of God. Therefore the foreknowledge of god is
another thing tha^ the will of God, whereby he governs and orders all
things. Some which are of quicker sight, confess, that god does not only
foreknow, but also govern with his beck what things soever are done in the
world. Nevertheless they imagine a confused government, as if God did give
liberty to his creatures to follow their own nature. They say that the Sun
is ruled by the will of God, because in giving light to us, he does his duty,
which was once enjoined him by God. They think that man has free will after
this sort left him, because his nature is disposed or inclined unto the free
choice of good and evil. But they which think so, do feign that God sits
idle in heaven. The scripture teaches us far otherwise, which ascribes unto
God a special government in all things, and in man's actions. Notwithstanding it
is our duty to ponder and consider to what end it teaches this. For we must
beware of doting speculations, wherewith we see many carried away. The
scripture will exercise our faith, that we may know that we are defended by the
hand of God, least we be subject to the injuries of Satan and the wicked. It is
good for us to embrace this one thing: neither did Peter mean any thing else in
this place. Yea we have an example set before us in Christ, whereby we may
learn to be wise with sobriety. For it is out of question, that his flesh
was subject to corruption, according to nature. But the providence of God did
set the same free. If any man ask whether the bones of Christ could be broken
or no: it is not to be denied, that they were subject to breaking naturally,
yet could there no bone be broken, John. 19.36.
because God had so appointed and determined. By this example (I say) we are
taught so to give the chiefest room to gods providence, that we keep
ourselves within our bounds: and that we thrust not our selves rashly and
indiscreetly into the secrets of God, whither our eiesight does not pearce.

By the hands of the wicked. Because Peter seems to grant, that the wicked
did obey God; hereupon follows two absurdities: the one, either that God is
the author of evils: or that men do not sin what wickedness soever they
commit. I answer concerning the second, that the wicked do nothing less than
obey God, howsoever they do execute that which God has determined with
himself. For obedience springs from a voluntary affection. And we know that
the wicked have a far other purpose. Again, no man obeieth God, save he which
knows his will. Therefore obedience depends upon the knowledge of Gods will.
Furthermore God has revealed unto us his will in the law: wherefore those me^
do obey god, who do that alone which is agreeable to the law of god: And
again, which submit themselves willingly to his government. We see no such
thing in all the wicked, who^ god does drive hither and thither, they themselves
being ignorant. No man therefore will say that they are excusable under this
color, because they obey god: for as much as both the will of God must be
sought in his law: and they so much as in them lies, do covet to resist
God. As touching the other point, I deny that God is the Author of evil:
because there is a certain noting of a wicked affection in this word. For the
wicked deed is esteemed according to the end whereat a man aymeth. When men
commit theft or murder, they offend for this cause, because they are thieves
or murderers. And in the theft and murder, there is a wicked purpose. God who
uses their wickedness is to be placed in the higher degree. For he has
respect unto a far other thing, because he will chastise the one, and
exercise the patience of the other: and so he does never decline from his
nature, that is from perfect righteousness. So that, whereas Christ was
delivered by the hands of wicked men, whereas he was crucified, it came to pass
by the appointment and ordinance of God. But treason which is of it self
wicked, and murder which has in it so great wickedness, must not be thought
to be the works of God.

24 Having loosed the sorrows of death. By the sorrows of death I understand
some farther thing than the bodily sense or feeling. For those which duly
consider the nature of death: because they hear that it is the curse of God,
must needs conceive that God is angry in death. Hence comes marvelous
horror: wherein there is greater misery than in death it self. Furthermore,
Christ died upon this condition, that he might take upon him our
guiltiness. That inward fear of conscience, which made him so afraid, that he
swet blood, when he presented himself before the throne and tribunal seat of
God, did more vex him, and brought upon him greater horror, than all the
torments of the flesh. And whereas Peter says, that Christ did wrestle with
such sorrows, and does also declare that he had the victory: by this it
comes to pass, that the faithful ought not now to be afraid of death. For
death has not the like quality now which was in Adam: because by the victory
of Christ the curse of God is swallowed up. 1. Cor. 15.54.
We feel in deed yet the pricking of sorrows, but such as do not wholly
wound us, whilst that we hold up the buckler of faith against them. He adds
a reason, because it was impossible that Christ should be oppressed by death,
who is the author of life.

25 For David says of him, I saw the Lord before me always, because he is on
my right hand: least I should be moved.

26 For this my heart rejoiced, and my tongue was glad: moreover my flesh shall
rest in hope.

27 Because thou will not leave my soul in hell: neither will thou suffer thy
holy one to see corruption.

28 Thou have made known unto me the ways of life, thou shall fill me with
gladness, with thy face.

29 Men and brethren, seeing that I may boldly speak unto you of the Patriark
David, because he is both dead and buried, and his sepulcher remains with us
until this day.

30 Therefore seeing he was a Prophet, and did know that God had sworn unto
him with an oath, that it should come to pass, that Christ should rise of the
fruits of his loins, concerning the flesh, who should sit upon his throne.

31 He knowing this before, spoke of the resurrection of Christ, that his
soul was not left in hell, neither did his flesh see corruption.

25 The resurrection which was both declared and witnessed by certain and
evident testimonies, and which might also have been gathered out of the
continual doctrine of the prophets, was to be proved to the Jews as some new
and strange thing. And no marvel. For we see that although Christ had
oftentimes beat the same into his Disciples heads, yet did they profit but a
little. And yet did they retain certain principles of true doctrine, which
might have made a way for them unto the knowledge of Christ: as we shall see by
and by. Therefore because the gift of the Spirit was a fruit of the
resurrection of Christ, he proves by the testimony of David, that Christ
must needs have risen again, that the Jews may thereby know that he was
the author of the gift. For he takes it as a thing which all men grant, that
he was raised up from death, that he may live not for himself, but for his.
Now we see Peter his drift. That that ought to seem no strange thing, which
was foretold so long before. And that Jesus is also Christ, because David did
prophecy of him, as of the head of the church. First of all we must see
whether this place ought altogether to be understood of Christ, as Peter
affirms: that done, if there be any thing in the words worth the noting,
we will in order discuss it. Peter denies that that agrees with David,
which is said in this place: Thou shall not suffer thine holy one to see
corruption: Psalm. 16.6.
because David his carcass was corrupt in the grave. It seems at the first
blush to be but a light argument. For a man might easily object, That the word
is not to be urged, forasmuch as David meant nothing else, save only to exempt
himself from destruction. Therefore howsoever corruption did touch him, yet
does that no whit hinder, but that he may easily say that he was safe from the
danger thereof: because he knew that the Lord would deliver him. Yea it
seems to be a repetition of the former sentence, according to the common
custom of the Hebrewe tongue. Which if it be so, the sense shall be plain, that
God will not suffer him to be oppressed with death, or that death should
consume him. And this interpretation is confirmed by that that where we read,
hell, it is in Hebrewe Seol: where we read corruption, there it is Shachat.
Both these words do signify the grave. By this means David should say twice,
that he shall be delivered from death by the grace of God. Finally, he says the
same thing in this place, which he says, Psa. 49. God shall redeem my soul
from the hand of hell. Psalm. 49.16.
Like as on the other side, when he speaks of the reprobates, he is wont to
take, going down into the grave, for destruction. I answer briefly, that
there is some greater thing expressed in this place, than the common redemption
or deliverance of the godly. David in deed does promise that God will be his
eternal deliverer as well in life as in death. Neither had he been much
better for this, to have been once delivered from one danger, unless he had
hoped that he should be safe even unto the end through Gods protection: but he
speaks of such safety as is not common. And surely the words do sound that
he speaks of some new and singular privilege. Admit I grant that it is a
repetitio^, and that there is al one thing uttered in these two members, Thou
shall not leave my soul in hell and, Thou shall not suffer me to see
corruption: yet do I deny that it is simpy to be understood that God will
deliver his holy one from eternal destruction. For freedom from corruption
is promised by name. Neither do I pass for this, that Shachat does signify
the grave, as Seol, which is put in the former member. For although I do not
stand nor contend about the words, yet must we respect the Etymology.
Therefore for as much as the grave is called Shachat, because it does corrupt
man's body with rottenness, it is not to be doubted but that David meant to
note that quality. Therefore the place is not so much expressed by this word,
as the condition of rotting. So that the sense is, that God will not suffer him
of whom the Psalm speaks, To rot or corrupt in the grave. And forasmuch as
David was not free from this necessity, it follows that the prophecy was
neither truly nor perfectly fulfilled in him. And that the Psalm ought
altogether to be expounded of Christ, the thing it self does prove. Genesis 3.19.
For seeing that David was one of the sons of Ada^, he could not escape that
universal condition and estate of mankind, Dust thou art, and into dust thou
shall return: the grave stands open (I say) for all the children of Adam, that
it may swallow the^ up, and consume them: so that no man can exempt himself
from corruption. So that beholdding our selves apart from Christ, we see the
grave prepared for us, which threatens to us corruption. Wherefore if David be
separated from Christ, that shall not belong to him which is here said, that he
shall be preserved from the grave. Therefore when he boasts that he shall be free
from the grave, as touching corruption, without all doubt he places himself in
the body of Christ, wherein death was overcome, and the kingdom thereof
abolished. But and if David do promise himself exempting from the grave in
another respect, save only so far forth as he is a member of Christ, hereby it
appears that this freedom must begin at Christ as at the head. What man
soever shall be of sound judgment, shall easily know that this is a good
argument, God did put al mankind under corruption: Therefore David, inasmuch as
he was of the number of men, could not be free from the same. Neither is it to
be doubted, but that the Jews, before who^ this sermon was made, forasmuch as
without question that maxim was of force amongst the^, that they were to hope
for the restoring of things at the hands of Christ alone, did the more
readily stay themselves upon the words of Peter: because they saw that that
could no otherwise be which the words do import, unless they should apply it
to the Messiah. For they were not come to that point of impudency, at least
those of whom mention is made here, that they durst cauil in matters which
were evident. For god had then offered unto his disciples those which were
godly hearers, and apt to be taught. They sought the Messiah in the old
Testament. They knew that David was a figure of him. There was amongst them
some religion, and reverence of the scriptures then. But now the impudency of
all the whole nation almost is desperate. Howesoeuer they be urged, they wrench
themselves out one way or other. Where there is no way to escape, yet they break
through. Although they be overcome, yet will they not yield. Neither is it to be
douted, but that this their shameless frowardnes, is a punishment for their
ungodliness. But let us return unto Peter his sermon. Seeing that David does not
only affirm that God also shall be his deliverer, but does express a singular
way and means: namely, that he shall not be subject to the corruption of the
grave, Peter does for good causes gather, that that does not properly appertain
unto him for that his body was corrupt in the grave. And now because this had
been somewhat hard to be spoken among the Jews, he mollifieth the hardness with a
circu^locutio^. For he does not flatly deny in one word, that that was
fulfilled in deed in David, but does only by the way signify so much unto
the^, because he lies consumed in the grave after the common custom of other
men. And David did so prophecy of Christ, that he did both apply this
consolation unto himself privately, and also extend the same unto the whole
body of the church. For that which is sound and perfect in the head, is spread
abroad, being afterward powered out into all the members Neither is it to be
denied, but that David spoke of himself in this place: yet only so far forth
as he beheld himself in Christ, as in the mirror of life. First he has
respect unto Christ: after that he turns his eyes toward himself, and other
the faithful. So that we have a general doctrine prescribed unto us in this
place, concerning the nature of faith, the spiritual joy of conscience, and the
hope of eternal deliverance.

I saw. We must hold this principle, if we will have God present with us, we
must set him before our eyes: and that before he do appear: for the prospect of
faith pearceth far further than unto the present experience. Therefore faith
has this property, to set god always before it as a guide in all dangers and
co^fused matters. For there is nothing that does so much hold us up, as when we
know that God is present with us: as the opinion of his absence does often cast
us down, and at length quite discourage us. David adds, That he took not
heed in vain unto the direction of God. He is (says he) at my right hand:
whereby he does signify: that we need not to fear least we be deceived, when
as we set him before us as present: for we shall always feel his help most
ready. Faith in hoping for the help of God, ought to prevent and ouergoe al
experience, and whatsoever is perceived by the sense: but so soon as it shall
give this glory to God, that it does behold him in his word, although he be
absent, and so consequently, invisible, it shall be overcome with the effect of
the thing. For the measure of faith is not able to comprehend the infinite
greatness of the power and goodness of God. He draws a similitude from those
which when they will underprop the weak, or strengthen the fearful, do join
themselves unto their side. Not to be moved, is not to be thrown down from
their degree, but to remain firm in their estate: like as also Psalm. 46, Psalm.
46.6.
God is in the midst of it, therefore shall it not be moved. For although it
come to pass sometimes that the godly, be sore shaken, yet because they come
to themselves again, they are said to continue firm. Therefore there is no
cause why they should be afraid of falling, who are vpholde^ by the help of
God. Like as on the other side, those which place their strength any where else
save only in God, they shall be like to fall at every blast of wind, but at any
mean wind of temptation they shall fall to the ground.

For this my heart rejoiced. Joy of the soul, gladness of the tongue, and quietness
of all the whole body, do ensu upon sure hope and confidence for unless me^ be
quite past feeling, they must needs be careful and sorrowful, and so
consequently miserably tormented, so long as they feel themselves destitute of
the help of God. But that sure trust which we repose in God, does not only
deliver us from carfulness, but does also replenishe our hearts with
wonderful joy and gladness. That is the joy, which Christ promised to his
disciples, should be full in them; and which he testified could not be taken
from them. Ioh. 16.22. and 17.13.
John 16. and 17. He expresses the greatness of the joy, when he says, That
it cannot be kept in, but that it will break forth into the gladness of the
tongue. Cabod does signify in deed, glory, but it is taken in that place as in
many other for the Tongue. And so the Grecians have truly translated the same.
The rest of the flesh, does signify the quietness of the whole man, which we
have through the protection of God. Neither is this any let, because the
faithful are continually out of quiet and tremble: for as in the midst of
sorrows they do nevertheless rejoice: so there are no troubles so great that
can break the^ of their rest. If any man object that the peace of the faithful
does consist in the spirit, and that it is not of the flesh: I answer, that
the faithful do rest in body: not that they are free from troubles, but
because they believe that God cares for them wholly, and that not only their
soul shall be safe through his protection, but their body also.

27 Because thou shall not leave. To leave the soul in hell, is to suffer the
same to be oppressed with destruction. There be two words used in this place,
both which do signify the grave amongst the Hebricians. Because Shaal does
signify to Require, I suppose it is called Seol, because death is insatiable:
whence also comes that translation, Hell has enlarged her soul. Again, they
set open their mouth like hell. And because the latter Sahath, is derived and
fet from corruption or consumption, that quality is to be considered, as
David meant to note the same. Those things which are disputed in this place by
diverse, concerning the descending of Christ into hell, are in my judgment
superfluous: because they are far from the intent and purpose of the Prophet.
For the word anima or soul, does not so much signify the spirit being of an
immortal essence, as the life it self. For when a man is dead, and lies in the
grave, the grave is said to rule over his life. Whereas the Grecians translate
it holy, it is in Hebrew Chassith, which does properly signify meek, or,
gentle, but Luke did not much regard this, because it does not much appertain
unto the present purpose. Furthermore gentleness and meeknes is so often
commended in the faithful, because it behooves them to imitate and resemble
the nature of their Father.

28 Thou have made known. He means that he was restored from death to life
by the grace of God. For in that he was as it were a man raised from death to
life, 1. Cor. 15.20. 1. Cor. 15.42. Psa. 16.11. Psalm. 80.4.
he acknowlegeth that it was a great good gift of God. This was in such sort
fulfilled in Christ, that there wanted nothing unto perfection. As for the
members they have their measure. Therefore Christ was far from corruption, that
he may be the first fruits of those which rise from death. We shall follow him in
our order at length, but being first turned into dust. That which follows,
that he was filled with gladness, with the countenance of God agrees with
that: Show us thy face, and we shall be safe. And again, The light of thy
countenance is showed upon us: thou have put gladness in my heart. For it is
only the pleasantnes of Gods countenance, which does not only make us glad, but
also quicken us: again, when the same is turned away or troubled, we must
needs faint.

30 Therefore seeing he was a prophet. He shows by two reasons that it is no
marvel, if David do speak of things that should come to pass long after his
time: the former is, because he was a prophet. And we know that things to
come, and such as are removed far from the knowledge of men, are revealed unto
the Prophets. Therefore it were wickedness to measure their speeches
according to the common manner and order, which we use in measuring the
speeches of other me^, forasmuch as they go beyond the long courses of years,
having the Spirit for their directer. Whereupon they are also called Seers:
because being placed as it were upon an high tower, they see those things
which by reason of great distaunce are hidden from other men. Another reason
is, because Christ was promised to him peculiarly. This maxim was so common
amongst the Jews, that they had ever now and then the son of David in their
mouth, so often as there was any mention made of Christ. They be no such
arguments I confess, as do necessarily prove, that this prophecy is to be
expounded of Christ: neither was that Peter his intent and purpose: but first
he meant to prevent the contrary objection, whence David had such skill to
foretell a thing which was unknown. Therefore he says, That he knew
Christ, both by prophetical revelation, and also by a singular promise.
Furthermore, this principle was of great force amongst the better minded sort,
which Paul sets down, Romans 10.4.
that Christ is the end of the law. No man therefore did doubt of this, but
that this was the mark whereat all the Prophets did aim, to lead the Godly
unto Christ as it were by the hand. Therefore what notable or extraordinary
thing soever they did utter, the Jews were commonly persuaded that it did
agree with Christ. Furthermore we must note, that Peter does reason
soundely, when he gathers that David was not ignorant of that which was the
chiefest point of all revelations.

He had sworn with an oath. God swear, not only to the end he might make
David believe his promise, but also that the thing promised might be had in
greater estimation. And to this end in my judgment it is here repeated, that
the Jews may think with themselves, of what great weight the promise was,
which God did make so notable and so famous. The same admonition is profitable
for us also. For we need not to doubt of this, but that the Lord meant to set
forth the excellency of the covenant, by putting in a solemn oath. In the
mean season this is also a fit remedy for the infirmity of our faith, that
the sacred name of God is set forth unto us, that his words may carry the
greater credit. These words according to the flesh, do declare that there
was some more noble thing in Christ than the flesh. Therefore Christ did so
come of the seed of David as he was man, that he does nevertheless retain his
divinity: and so the distinction between the two natures is plainly
expressed: when as Christ is called the son of God, according to his eternal
essence, in like sort as he is called the seed of David according to the flesh.

32 This Jesus has God raised up: whereof we all are witnesses.

33 He being therefore exalted by the right hand of God, and having received
the promise of the holy Ghost of the Father, he has now shed forth that which
ye now see and hear.

34 For David is not ascended into heaven: But he says, The Lord said unto my
Lord, Sit at my right hand:

35 Until I make thine enemies thy footstool.

36 Therefore let all the house of Israel know for a surety, that God has
made this Jesus Lord, and the same Christ, whom ye have crucified.

32 This Jesus. After that he has proved by the testimony of David, that it
was most requisite that Christ should rise again, he says, that he and the
rest of his fellows were such witnesses, as saw him with their eyes after
his resurrection. For this text will not suffer this word raised up to be
drawn unto any other sense. Whereupon it follows that that was fulfilled in
Jesus of Nazareth, which David did foreshew concerning Christ. After that he
entreats of the fruit or effect. For it was requisite for him to declare that
first, that Christ is alive. Otherwise it had been an absurd and incredible
thing, that he should be the author of so great a miracle. Notwithstanding he
does therwithall teach us that he did not rise for his own sake alone, but that
he might make the whole church partaker of his life, having powered out the
Spirit.

33 He being therefore exalted by the right hand of God. The right hand is
taken in this place for the hand or power, in like sort it is taken every
where in the scripture. For this is his drifte, to declare that it was a
wonderful work of God in that he has exalted his Christ (whom men thought to
be quite destroyed by death) unto so great glory.

The promise of the Spirit, for the Spirit which was promised. For he had
oftentimes before promised the Spirit to his Apostles. Therefore Peter does
signify, that Christ had obtained power of God the Father to fulfill the
same. And he makes mention of the promise in plain words, to the end the
Jews may know that this came not to pass sodainlye, but that the words of
the prophet were now verified, which went long time before the thing it self.

Furthermore, whereas it is said, That he obtained it of the father, it is to
be applied to the person of the Mediator. For both these are truly said,
That Christ sent the Spirit from him self, and from the Father. He sent him
from himself; because he is eternal God: From the Father; because in as much
as he is man, he receives that of the Father which he gives us. And Peter
speaks wisely according to the capacity of the ignorant, least any man should
move a question out of season concerning the power of Christ. And surely
forasmuch as it is the office of Christ to direct us unto his Father, this is
a most apt form of speaking for the use of godliness, that Christ being
placed as it were in the midst between God and us, does deliver unto us with
his own hand, those gifts which he has received at the hands of his
Father. Furthermore, we must note this order that he says, that the Spirit
was sent by Christ after that he was exalted. This agrees with those
sentences: The Spirit was not yet given, because Christ was not yet
glorified. And again, Unless I go hence, the Spirit will not come. Ioh.
7.39. Ioh. 16.7.
Not because the Spirit began then first to be given, wherewith the holy
Fathers were endued since the beginning of the world: but because God did
defer this more plentiful abundaunce of grace, until such time as he had
placed Christ in his princely seat: which is signified by this word poured
out, as we saw a little before. For by this means the force and fruit of
Christ his death and resurrection is sealed: and we do also thereby know
that we have lost nothing by Christ his departing out of the world: because
though he be absent in body, yet is he present with us after a better sort,
to wit, by the grace of his holy Spirit.

34 For doubtless David. Although they might easily gather by the very effect
which they saw with their eyes, that the principality was granted and given
to Christ, yet to the end his glory may carry the greater credit, he
proves by David his testimony, that it was so appointed in times past by
God, that Christ should be lifted up unto the highest degree of honor. For
these words to sit at the right hand of God, import as much as to bear the
chief rule, as we shall afterward more at large declare. Yet before he
recites the prophecy, he says, That it agrees only to Christ. Therefore
to the end the sense may be more manifest, the sentence must thus run.
David pronounces that it was decreed by God that a king should sit at his
right hand. But this does not appertain unto David, who was never extolled
unto so great dignity. Therefore he speaks this of Christ. Furthermore that
ought to have seemed no strange thing unto the Jews, which was foretold by the
Oracle of the holy Ghost. Hereby it appears in what sense Peter denies,
that David ascended into heaven. He entreats not in this place of the soul
of David, whether it were received into blessed rest, and the heavenly
dwelling or no: but the ascending into heaven comprehends under it those
things which Paul teaches in the Epistle to the Ephesians, the fourth
Chapter, where he places Christ above all heavens, that he may fulfill al
things. Wherefore the disputation concerning the estate of the dead is
altogether superfluous in this place. For Peter goes about to prove no other
thing but this, that the prophecy concerning the sitting at the right hand of
God, was not fulfilled in David, and that therefore the truth thereof must be
sought elsewhere. And for as much as it can be found no where else save only
in Jesus Christ: it rests that the Jews do know that that is showed to
them in Christ, which was foretold them so long before. That is true indeed,
that David reigned, God being the author hereof, and in some respect he was
Gods vicegerent: yet not so that he might be above all creatures. Wherefore this
sitting agrees to none, unless he excel and be above all the whole world.

The Lord said unto my Lord. This is the most lawful manner of ruling, Psalm.
100.1. Heb. 5.5.
when as the king (or by what other title soever he be called) does know that
he is ordained of God, therefore David pronounces that the commandment to
reign, was given unto Christ by name As if he should say, He took not the
honor to himself rashly, but did only obey God when he commanded him. Now
must we see whether Peter his reason be sound enough or no. He gathers that
the words concern Christ, because the sitting at the right hand of God, does
not agree to David. It seems that this may be refuted, because David did
reign by the peculiar commandment, name, and help of God: which is to sit at
the right hand of God. But Peter takes that for a thing which all men grant,
which is true, and which I have already touched, that a greater and more royal
government is here spoken of, than that which David did enjoy. For howsoever
he was gods vicegerent, and did as it were represent his person in reigning,
yet is this power far inferior to that, to sit even at the right side of
GOD. For this is attributed to Christ, because he is placed above all
principality, and above every name that is named, both in this world, and in
the world to come. Seeing that David is far inferior to the Angels, he does
possess no such place that he should be counted next to God. For he must
ascend far above all heavens, that he may come to the right hand of God.
Wherefore no man is said to sit at it, rightly and properly, save only he
which does surpass all creatures in the degree of honor. As for him which is
resident amongst the creatures, although he be reckoned in the order of angels,
yet is he far from that highness. Again, we must not seek the right hand
of God amongst the creatures: but it does also surpass all heavenly
principalities. Furthermore there is great weight even in the sentence it
self. This king is commanded to bear the chiefest rule, until God have put
all his enemies under his feet. Surely, although I grant that the name of
such an honorable sitting may be applied unto earthly Lordeship, yet do I
deny that David did reign until such time as all his enemies were subdued.
For we do hereby gather that the kingdom of Christ is eternal. But the
kingdom of David was not only temporal, but also frail, and of a small
continuance.

Moreover, when David dyed, he left many enemies alive here and there. He got
many notable victories: but he was far from subduing al his enemies. He made
many of those people which were round about him tributaries to him: some did
he put to flight, and destroyed: but what is all this unto all? Finally, we
may prove by the whole text of the Psalm, that there can nothing else be
understood save only the kingdom of Christ. That I may pass over other
things, that which is here spoken touching the eternal Priesthood, is too
far disagreeing from David his person. I know what the Jews do prattle:
that kings sons are called elswher Cohenim. But he entreats here of the
priesthood, as it is ascribed by Moses to the king Melchisedech. And there is
established by a solemn oath, a certain new kind of priesthood. And
therefore we must not here imagine any common or ordinary thing. But it had
been wickedness for David to thrust himself into any part of the Priest his
office. How should he then be called Cohen greater than Aaron, and consecrated
of God for ever? But because I do not intend at this present to expound the
whole Psalm, let this reason suffice which Peter brings, That he is made
Lord of heaven and earth, which sits at the right hand of God. As touching
the second member of the verse, read those things which I have noted upon the
fifteenth Chapter of the former Epistle to the Corinthians, 1. Cor. 15.25.
concerning the putting of his enemies under his feet.

36 Therefore let all the house of Israel know. The house of Israel did
confess that that Christ should come which was promised: yet did they not know
who it was. Therefore Peter concludes, that Jesus whom they had so spitefully
handled, yea whose name they did so greatly detest, is he whom they ought to
acknowledge to be their Lord, and whom they ought to reverence. For (says he)
God has made him Lord and Christ: that is, you must look for none other, tha^
him whom God has made and given. Furthermore, he says, That he was made,
because God the Father gave him this honor. He joins the title Lord with the
word Christ, because it was a common thing among the Jews, that the Redeemer
should be anointed upon this condition, that he might be the head of the
church, and that the chiefest power over all things might be given him. He
speaks unto the whole house of Israel: as if he should say, whosoever will be
reckoned among the sons of Jacob, and do also look for the promise, let
them know for a surety, that this is he and none other. He uses the word
house, because God had separated that name and family from all other people.
And he says, asphalos, or for a surety, not only that they may repose their
sure confidence and trust in Christ but that he may take away all occasion of
doubting from those which do oftentimes willingly doubt even of matters which
are certain and sure. In the end of his oration he vpbraideth unto them again,
that they did crucify him, that being touched with greater grief of
conscience, they may desire remedy.

And now forasmuch as they know that Jesus is the anointed of the Lord,
the governor of the church, and the giver of the holy ghost, the accusation
has so much the more force. For the putting of him to death was not only full
of cruelty and wickedness, but also a testimony of outrageous disloyalty
against God, of sacrilege and unthankfulness, and finally, of Apostacy. But
it was requisite that they should be so wounded, least they should have been
slow to seek for medicine. And yet notwithstanding they did not crucify him
with their own hands: but this is more then sufficient to make them guilty,
in that they desired to have him put to death. And we also are accused by this
same voice, if we crucify him in our selves, Heb. 6.6.
being already glorified in heaven, making a mock of him, as says the
Apostle, Heb. 6.

37 And when they heard these things, they were pricked in heart, and said unto
Peter, and to the other Apostles: Men and brethren, what shall we do?

38 Peter said unto them, Repent, and be baptized every one of you in the
name of Jesus Christ, for the remission of sins, and ye shall receive the
gift of the holy Spirit.

39 For the promise appertains unto you, and unto your children, and unto all
which are far off: whomsoever the Lord our God shall call.

37 They were pricked in heart. Luke does now declare the fruit of the sermon,
to the end we may know that the power of the holy ghost was not only showed
forth in the diversity of tongues, but also in their hearts which heard. And
he notes a double fruit: first that they were touched with the feeling of
sorrow, and secondly that they were obedient to Peter his counsel. This is
the beginning of Repentance, this is the entrance unto godliness, to be sorry for
our sins, and to be wounded with the feeling of our miseries. For so long as
me^ are careless, they can not take such heed unto doctrine as they ought. And
for this cause the word of God is compared to a sword: John. 15.16. Heb. 4.12.
Genesis 4.13. Mat. 27.3.
because it does mortify our flesh, that we may be offered to God for a
sacrifice. But there must be added unto this pricking in heart, readiness to
obey. Cain and Judas were pricked in heart, but despair did keep them back
from submitting themselves unto GOD. For the mind being oppressed with
horror, can do nothing else but fly from god. And surely when David affirms
that a contrite spirit, and an humble heart is a sacrifice acceptable to God,
he speaks of voluntary pricking: forasmuch as there is fretting and fuming
mixed with the prickings of the wicked. Therefore we must take a good heart to
us, and lift up our mind with this hope of salvation, that we may be ready to
addict and give over our selves unto God, and to follow whatsoever he shall
command. We see many oftentimes pricked, who notwithstanding do fret and
murmr, or else frowardly strive and struggle, and so consequently go
furiously mad. Yea this is the cause why they go mad, because they feel
such prickings against their will. Those men therefore are profitablie pricked
alone, who are willingly sorrowful, and do also seek some remedy at Gods
hands.

38 Peter said. Hereby we see that those do never go away empty, which ask at
the mouth of the Lord, and do offer themselves unto him to be ruled and taught:
Mat. 7.7.
for that promise must needs be true, Knock, and it shall be opened unto you.
Therefore whosoever shall be rightly prepared to learn, the Lord will not suffer
his godly desire to be in vain: for he his a most faithful master, so that
he have scholars which are apt to be taught and studious. Wherefore there is
no cause why he should fear least he suffer us to be destitute of sound
counsel, if we be attentive and ready to hear him: and do not refuse to
embrace whatsoever we shall teach us. And let us suffer our selves to be
governed by the counsel and authority of those men, whom he offreth unto us
to teach us. For this ready obedience comes thence so suddenly in those,
which addict themselves unto the apostles, because they are persuaded that they
are sent of God to show them the way of salvation.

Repent. There is greater force in the Greek word: for it does signify the
conversion of the mind, that the whole man may be renewed, and made another man.
Which thing must be diligently noted, because this doctrine was miserably
corrupted in the time of Popery: for they translated the name of repentance
almost unto certain external rites. They babble somewhat in deed about the
feigned contrition of the heart, but they touch that part very slightly, and
they stand principally upon the external exercises of the body, which were
little worth: Yea though there were in the^ no corruption. But they urge nothing
else in a manner but feigned trifles, wherewith men are wearied in vain. Wherefore
let us know that this is the true Repentance, when a man is renewed in the
spirit of his mind, as Paul teaches, Romans 12. Neither need we to doubt of
this, Romans 12.1.
but that Peter did preach plainly of the force and nature of Repentance: but
Luke does only touch the chief points, and does not reckon up the words of the
oration which he made. We must therefore know thus much, that Peter did at the
first exhort the Jews unto repentance: and that done he lifted the^ up with
hope of pardon. For he promised the^ forgiveness of sins. Which two things are
the two parts of the gospel, as we know full well. And therefore when Christ
will briefly teach what the doctrine of the Gospel does co^tain, he says that
that repentance and remission of sins must be preached in his name.
Furthermore, because we are reconciled unto god, Luke 24.47.
only by the intercession of Christ his death, neither are our sins otherwise
purged, and done away, save only by his blood, therefore Peter calls us back
unto him by name. He puts Baptism in the fourth place, as the seal
whereby the promise of grace is confirmed. Wherefore we have in these few
words almost the whole sum of christianity, namely how a man renouncing
himself and taking his fare well of the world, may addict himself wholly to
God. Secondly how he may be delivered by free forgiveness of sins, and so
adopted into the number of the children of God. And forasmuch as we can obtain
none of all these things without Christ, the name of Christ is therwithall set
forth unto us, as the only foundation of faith and repentance. And we must
also note this, that we do so begin repentance when we are turned unto God,
that we must prosecute the same during our life. Therefore this sermon must
continually sound in the church, Repent: not that those me^ may begin the
same, who will be counted faithful, and have a place already in the church
but that they may go forward in the same: Mark. 1.15.
although many do usurp the name of faithful men, which had never any
beginning of repentance. Wherefore we must observe this order in teaching, that
those which do yet live unto the world and the flesh, may begin to crucify the
old man, that they may rise unto newness of life: and that those who are
already entered the course of repentance, may continually go forward toward the
mark. Furthermore, because the inward conversion of the heart, ought to bring
forth fruits in the life, repentance cannot be rightly taught, unless works
be required: not those frivolous works, which are only in estimation amongst
the Papists, but such as are sound testimonies of innocence and holiness.

Be baptized every one of you. Although in the text and order of the words,
Baptism does here go before remission of sins: yet does it follow it in
order: because it is nothing else but a sealing of those good things which we
have by Christ, that they may be established in our consciences. Therefore after
that Peter had entreated of Repentance, he calls the Jews unto the hope of
grace and salvation. And therefore Luke well afterward in Paul his sermon,
joins faith and repentance together in the same sense, wherein he puts
forgiveness of sins in this place. And that for good considerations. For the
hope of salvation consists in the free imputation of righteousness. And we are
counted just, freely before God, when he forgiueth us our sins. And as I said
before, that the doctrine of repentance has a daily use in the church, so must
we think of the forgiveness of sins, that the same is continually offered unto
us. And surely it is no less necessary for us during the whole course of our
life, then at our first entrance into the church. So that it should profit us
nothing, to be once received into favor by God, unless this embassage should
have a continual course. 2. Cor. 5.20.
Be reconciled unto God: because he which knew no sin, was made sin for us,
that we might be the righteousness of God in him. Moreover, the Papists do so
corrupt this other part of the Gospel: that they quite exclude the remission of
sins, which was to be obtained by Christ. They confess that sins are
freely forgiven in baptism, but they will have them redeemed with
satisfactions after baptism: and although they mix the grace of Christ
together therwithall, yet because they inwrap the same in men's merits, they do
by this means overthrow the whole doctrine of the gospel. For first they take
from men's consciences the certainty of faith: that done, forasmuch as they
part the forgiveness of sins between the death of Christ and our
satisfactions, they do altogether deprive us of Christ his benefit. For Christ
does not reco^cile us unto God in part, but wholly, neither can we obtain
remission of sins by him unless it be whole and perfect. But the papists are
much deceived therein who restrain baptism unto the nativity and former life,
as if the signification and force thereof did not reach even unto death. Let us
know therefore that forgiveness of sins is grounded in Christ alone, and that we
must not think upon any other satisfaction save only that which he has
performed by the sacrifice of his death. And for this cause as we have already
said, does Peter express his name, whereby he does signify unto us, that none
of all these things can be rightly taught, unless Christ be set in the midst,
to the end the effect of this doctrine may be sought in him. That needs no
long exposition, where he commands them to be baptized for the remission of
sins. For although God has once reconciled men unto himself in Christ, by not
imputing unto them their sins, and does now imprint in our hearts the faith
thereof by his Spirit: yet notwithstanding because baptism is the seal,
whereby he does confirm unto us this benefit, 2. Cor. 5.19.
and so consequently the earnest and pledge of our adoption, it is worthily
said to be given us for the remission of sins. For because we receive
Christ's gifts by faith, and Baptism is a help to confirm and increase our
faith, remission of sins which is an effect of faith is annexed unto it, as
unto the inferior mean. Furthermore we must not fet the definition of
baptism from this place, because Peter does only touch a part thereof. Our
old man is crucified by baptism, as Paul teaches, that we may rise unto
newness of life. Romans 6. And again, we put on Christ himself, 1. Cor. 12.
Romans 6.4.6. Galat. 3.27.
and the Scripture teaches every where, that it is also a sign and token of
repentance. But because Peter does not entreat in this place openly of the
whole nature of baptism, but speaking of the forgiveness of sins, does by
the way declare that the confirmation thereof is in baptism, there does no
inconvenience follow, if he do omit the other part.

In the name of Christ. Although Baptism be no vain figure, but a true and
effectual testimony: notwithstanding least any man attribute that unto the
element of water which is there offered, the name of Christ is plainly
expressed, to the end we may know that it shall be a profitable sign for us
then, if we seek the force and effect thereof in Christ: and know that we are
therefore washed in baptism, because the blood of Christ is our washing. And
we do also hereby gather, that Christ is the mark and end whereunto baptism
directs us. Wherefore every one profits so much in baptism, as he learneth
to look unto Christ. But here arises a question: Whether it were lawful for
Peter to change the form prescribed by Christ? The Papists do think, at least
feign so, and thence do they take a color of liberty, to change or abrogate
the institutions of Christ. They confess that nothing ought to be changed, as
touching the substance: but they will have the Church to have liberty to
change whatsoever it will in the form. But this argument may easily be
answered. For we must first know that Christ did not indite and rehearse unto
his Apostles magical words for inchaunting, as the Papists do dream: but he
did in few words comprehend the sum of the mystery. Again, I deny that
Peter does speak in this place of the form of baptism: but he does simply
declare that the whole strength of Baptism is contained in Christ. Although
Christ can not be laid hold on by faith without the Father, by whom he was
given us, and the Spirit, by the which he renews and sanctifies us. The
answer consists wholly in this, that he entreats not in this place of the
certain form of baptising, but the faithful are called back unto Christ, in
whom alone we have whatsoever baptism does prefigure unto us. For we are both
made clean by his blood, and also we enter into a new life by the benefit of
his death and resurrection.

Ye shall receive the gift of the Spirit. Because they were touched with
wondering, when they saw the Apostles suddenly begin to speak with strange
tongues: Peter says that they shall be partakers of the same gift, if they will
pass over unto Christ: Remission of sins, and newness of life were the
principal things: and this was as it were an addition, that Christ should show
forth unto them his power by some visible gift. Neither ought this place to be
understood of the grace of sanctification which is given generally to all the
Godly. Therefore he promises them the gift of the Spirit, whereof they saw a
pattern in the diversity of tongues. Therefore this does not properly
appertain unto us. For because Christ meant to set forth the beginning of his
kingdom with those miracles, they lasted but for a time: yet because the
visible graces which the Lord did distribute to his, did show as it were in a
glass that Christ was the giver of the Spirit, therefore that which Peter
says, does in some respect appertain unto all the whole Church: ye shall
receive the gift of the Spirit. For although we do not receive it, that we
may speak with tongues: Romans 10.10 John. 5.24.
that we may be prophets, that we may cure the sick, that we may work
miracles: yet is it given us for a better use, that we may believe with the
heart unto righteousness, that our tongues may be framed unto true
confession: that we may pass from death to life: that we which are poor and
empty, may be made rich: that we may withstand Satan and the world stoutly.
Therefore the grace of the Spirit shall always be annexed unto Baptism,
unless the let be in our selves.

39 For the promise apperteineth unto you. It was requisite that this should
be expressly added, that the Jews might certainly think and persuade
themselves, that the grace of Christ did belong as well to them as to the
Apostles. And Peter proves it thus, because the promise of God was made unto
them. For we must always look unto this: because we cannot otherwise know the
will of God, save only by his word. But it is not sufficient to have the
general word, unless we know that the same is appointed for us. Therefore
Peter says, that those benefits which they see in him and his fellows in
office, were in times past promised to the Jews: because this is required
necessarily for the certainty of faith, that every one be fully persuaded of
this, that he is comprehended in the number of those unto whom God speaks.
Finally, this is the rule of a true faith, when I am thus persuaded, that
salvation is mine, because that promise appertains unto me, which offers
the same. And hereby we have also a greater confirmation, when as the promise
is extended unto those, who were before a far off. For God had made the
covenant with the Jews. If the force and fruit thereof come also unto the
Gentiles, there is no cause why the Jews should doubt of themselves, but that
they shall find the promise of God firm and stable. Exodus 4.22. Gene. 17.7.
And we must note these three degrees, that the promise was first made to the
Jews, and then to their children, and last of all, that it is also to be
imparted to the Gentiles. We know the reason why the Jews are preferred
before other people, for they are as it were the first begotten in Gods
family, yea they were then separated from other people by a singular
privilege. Therefore Peter observes a good order, when he gives the Jews
the pre-eminence. Whereas he adioyneth their children unto them, it depends
upon the words of the promise: I will be thy God, and the God of thy seed
after thee. Where God does reckon the children with the fathers in the grace
of adoption. This place therefore does abundantly refute the manifest error
of the Anabaptists, which will not have infants which are the children of the
faithful, to be baptized, as if they were not members of the Church. They
epsy a starting hole in the allegorical sense, and they expound it thus,
that by children are meant those which are spirituallie begotten. But this
gross impudency does nothing help them. It is plain and evident that Peter
spoke thus, because God did addopt one nation peculiarly. And Circumcision did
declare that the right of adoption was common even unto infantes. Therefore
even as God made his covenant with Isaach, being as yet unborn, because he
was the seed of Abraham: so Peter teaches that all the children of the Jews
are contained in the same covenant, because this promise is always in force, I
will be the God of your seed.

And to those which are a far of. The Gentiles are named in the last place,
which were before strangers. For those which refer it unto those Jews,
which were exiled a far off and driven into far countries, they are greatly
disceiued. For he speaks not in this place of the distance of place: but he
notes a difference between the Jews and the Gentiles, that they were first
joined to God by reason of the covenant, and so consequently became of his
family or household: but the Gentiles were banished from his kingdom. Paul
uses the same speech in the second Chapter to the Ephesians, Ephesians. 2.11.
that the Gentiles which were strangers from the promises, are now drawn
near through Jesus Christ, unto God. Because that Christ (the wall of
separation being taken away) has reconciled both the Jews and Gentiles unto
the Father, and coming he has preached peace unto those which were nigh at
hand, and which were a far off. Now we understand Peter his meaning. For
to the end he may amplify the grace of Christ, he does so offer the same
unto the Jews, that he says the Gentiles are also partakers thereof. And
therefore he uses this word Call, as if he should say: Like as GOD has
gathered you together into one peculiar people heretofore by his voice, so the
same voice shall sound every where, that those which are a far off, may
come and join themselves unto you, when as they shall be called by a new
proclamation.

40 And with many other words did he testify and exhort, saying: Be ye saved
from this froward generation.

41 Those therefore which willingly embraced his word, were baptized: and
there were added that day, about three thousand souls.

42 And they continued in the Apostles doctrine, and in fellowship, and
breaking of bread, and prayers.

40 And with many. Although in these things which we have had hitherto, Luke
did not recite the words of saint Peter, but did only briefly touch the
chief points: notwithstanding he tells us again in this place, that Peter
did not use doctrine only, but did add the pricks of exhortations. And he
expresses plainly that he stood much hereupon. Whereas he says, that he
did exhort and beseech, he notes therein his earnestness. For it was not so
easy a matter for them by and by to take their leave of those errors
wherewith they were of late infected, and to shake off the government of the
Priests whereunto they were accustomed. Therefore it stood him upon to pull
them violently out of this mire. The sum was this, that they should beware
of that froward generation. For they could not be Christ's unless they would
depart from his professed enemies. The Priests and Scribes were then in great
authority, and for as much as they did cover themselves under the visure of
the Church, they did deceive the simple. This did hinder and keep back a
great many from coming to Christ. Also some might waver, and other some might
fall away from the right faith. Therefore Peter plainly declares that they
are a froward generation, howsoever they make boast of the title of the Church.
For which cause he commands his hearers to separate themselves from them,
least they entangle themselves in their wicked and pestiferous fellowship.
Whereas he says Be ye saved, he signifies unto them that they shall surely
perish, if they couple themselves with such a plague. And surely experience
does teach us how miserably those men are tossed to and fro, who cannot
discern the voice of their pastor from the voice of other men: and again
what an hinderance softness and sluggisheesse is to a great many, whilst
they desire to stand in a doubt. Therefore he commands them to depart from
the wicked, if they will be saved. And this point of doctrine is not to be
neglected. For it were not sufficient to have Christ set before us, unless we
were also taught to fly those things which do lead us away from him. And it is
the duty of a good shepherd to defend his sheep from the wolves. So at this
day to the end we may keep the people in the sincere doctrine of the Gospel,
we are ever now and then enforced to show and testify, how much papistrie
differs from Christianity, and what a hurtful plague it is to be yoked
with the unfaithful enemies of Christ. Neither ought Peter to be accused of
railing, because he calls the reverend fathers, who had the government of the
Church in their hands at that day, a froward generation. For those dangers
which may draw the soul unto destruction, are to be showed by their names.
For men will not beware of poison, unless they know that it is poison.

41 They therefore which willingly. Luke shows more plainly how fruitful
this one sermon which Peter made was: to wit, that it gained unto Christ about
three thousand men. And therewithal he declares the nature and force of
faith, when he says, that with a prompt and ready mind they embraced his
word. Therefore faith must begin with this readiness, and willing desire to
obey. But because many do show themselves at the first very willing, who
afterward have in themselves no constancy or continuance: least we should
think that it was some sudden pange which by and by fell away, Luke does also
afterward commend their constancy, who (as he said) did willingly embrace this
word of the Apostles, showing that they were joined unto the disciples, or that
they were engrafted into the same body, and that they continued in their
doctrine. Therefore we must neither be slow to obey, ne yet swift to leap
back: but we must stick fast and stand stoutly to that doctrine which we did
forthwith without any tariance embrace. Furthermore this example ought to make
us not a little ashamed. For whereas there was a great multitude converted unto
Christ with one sermon, an hundred sermons can scarce move a few of us: and
whereas Luke says that they continued, there is scarce one amongst ten that
does show even a mean desire to profit and go forward, yea rather the more
part does soon loath our doctrine. Woe be therefore to the sluggishnesse and
lightness of the world.

In their doctrine. Luke does not only commend in them the constancy of faith
or of godliness: but he says also that they did constantly give themselves
to those exercises, which serve to the confirmation of faith: to wit, that they
studied continually to profit, by hearing the Apostles: that they gave
themselves much to prayer: that they did use fellowship and breaking of bread
very much: as touching prayer and doctrine, the sense is plain. Communication
or fellowship, and breaking of bread may be taken diversely. Some think that
breaking of bread does signify the Lords supper: othersome do think that it
signifies alms: othersome that the faithful did banquet together among
themselves. Some do think that coinonia does signify the celebrating of the
holy supper: but I do rather agree to those others, who think that the same
is meant by the breaking of bread. For Coinonia unless it have somewhat added
unto it, is never found in this sense. Therefore I do rather refer it unto
mutual society and fellowship, unto alms, and unto other duties of brotherly
fellowship. And my reason why I would rather have breaking of bread to be
understood of the Lords supper in this place, is this, because Luke does reckon
up those things wherein the public estate of the Church is contained. Yea, he
expresses in this place four marks whereby the true and natural face of the
Church may be judged. Do we then seek the true Church of Christ? The image
thereof is lively depainted and set forth unto us in this place. And he
begins with doctrine which is as it were the soul of the Church. Neither
does he name all manner of doctrine, but the doctrine of the Apostles, that
is, that which the son of God had delivered by their hands. Therefore
wheresoever the pure voice of the Gospel does sound, where men continue in the
profession thereof, where they exercise themselves in hearing the same
ordinarily, that they may profit: without all doubt there is the Church.
Hereby we may easily gather how frivolous the boasting of the Papists is,
whiles that they carelessly thunder out with full mouth the name of the Church:
whereas notwithstanding they have most filthily corrupted the doctrine of the
Apostles. For if it be duly examined, we shall find no sound part at all: and
in most points they do as much dissent from the same, and have as little
agreement therewith, as light with darkness. The rule of worshipping God,
which ought to be fet out of the pure word of God alone, is only made and
patcht together amongst the papists, of the superstitious inventions of men.
They have translated unto the merits of works, the hope of salvation which
ought to have rested in Christ alone. The invocation of God is altogether
polluted with innumerable profane dotinges of men. Finally, whatsoever is
heard amongst them, it is either a deforming of the Apostles doctrine, or else
a clear overthrowing and destroying of the same. Therefore we may as easily
refute the foolish arrogancy of the papists, as they can cloak their dealings
with the title of the Church. For this shall be the state: whether they have
retained the purity of doctrine, from which they are as far as Hell is from
Heaven. But they are wise enough in that point, because they will have no
controversy moved about doctrine. But we as I have said, may freely contemn
that vain visure: forasmuch as the Spirit of God does pronounce, that the
Church is principally to be esteemed and discerned by this mark, if the
simplicity or purity of the doctrine delivered by the Apostles do flourish
and be of force in the same.

In fellowship. This member and the last do flow from the first, as fruits
or effects. For doctrine is the bond of brotherly fellowship amongst us, and
does also set open unto us the gate, unto God, that we may call upon him. And
the supper is added unto doctrine in steed of a confirmation. Wherefore Luke
does not in vain reckon up these four things, when as he will describe
unto us the well ordered state of the Church. And we must endeavor to keep
and observe this order, if we will be truly judged to be the Church, before
God and the Angels, and not only to make boast of the name thereof amongst
men. It is certain that he speaks of public prayer. And for this cause it
is not sufficient for men to make their prays at home by themselves, unless
they meet altogether to pray: wherein consists also the profession of faith.

43 And there came fear upon every soul, and many wonders and signs were
wrought by the Apostles.

44 And all those which believed, were joined together, and had all things
common.

45 And they sold their possessions and substance, and did part them to all
men, as every man had need.

43 And there came. He signifies unto us that the show and sight of the
church was such, that it made others afraid, which did not consent unto
doctrine. And that was done for the preserving and furthering of the Church.
When there arises any sect, all men set themselves stoutly against the same:
and as novelty is odious, the Jews would never have suffered the Church of
Christ to stand one minuite of an hour, unless the Lord had restreined them
with fear as with a bridle. Furthermore Luke notes the manner of fear, that
it was no such fear as brings men unto the obedience of Christ, but such as
causes men to stand in a doubt, and so consequently does as it were so bind
them hand and foot, that they dare not hinder the Lords work. Like as there
be some at this day, who will willingly be ignorant of the Gospel: or at least
are so holden with the cares of this world, that they cannot thoroughly join
themselves unto Christ: and yet they are not so hard hearted, but that they
confess that the truth is on our side: and therefore the rest is as it were
in the midde way, neither do they favor the cruelty of the wicked, because
they are afraid to strive against God. And whereas he says, Every soul, he
speaks thus by Synecdoche. For it is certain that many did contemn the
hand of God: and that othersome were stricken with no great fear, but that
they did furiously rage together against the Church. But Luke his meaning was
this, that there appeared such power of God in the Church, that the people for
the most part had not one word to say.

And many woonders. This member serves also to the showing of the cause. For
the miracles served to make them afraid together with other works of God:
although this was not the only reason, but one of many, why they were afraid
to set themselves against God, who was on that side, as they did gather by the
miracles: whence we gather that they are not only profitable for this, to
bring men to God, but also to make the wicked somewhat more gentle, and that
they may tame their furiousness. Pharao was a man of desperate stubbernes,
Exo. 8.8. etc 19.
and yet we see how miracles do sometime pearce his obstinate heart. He
forgets them by and by, but when the hand of God is heavy upon him, he is
compelled through fear to yield. To be brief, Luke teaches that the Jews
were by this means kept back, that the Church which might easily have been
destroyed, might have got up her head. Which thing we have oftentimes tried
even in our time. And he does not only declare that they were bridled with
fear, least they should be so bold as to attempt so much as they lusted to
do hurt to the Church, but that they were also humbled with reverence to the
glory of the Gospel.

44 And all. Whereas I have translated it joined together, it is word for
word in saint Luke, Into the same, or into one, which may be expounded of the
place: as if he should have said that they were wont to dwell together in one
place. Notwithstanding I had rather understand it of their consent and
agreement: as he will say in the fourth Chapter, That they had one heart.
Acts. 4.32.
And so he goes forward orderly, when as he begins with their mind. He
adds afterward their bountifulness, as a fruit proceeding thence. Therefore
he gives us to understand, that they were rightly joined together with
brotherly love amongst themselves, and that they did in deed declare the
same, because the rich men did sell their goods that they might help the poor.
And this is a singular example of love, and therefore does Luke record the
same, to the end we may know that we must relieve the poverty of our
brethren with our plenty.

But this place has need of a sound exposition, because of fantastical
spirits, which do feign a communalty or participation together of gods,
whereby all policy or civil government is taken away: as in this age the
Anabaptists have raged, because they thought there was no Church unless all
men's goods were put and gathered together, as it were in one heap, that they
might all, one with another take thereof. Wherefore we must in this point
beware of two extremes. For many under color of policy, do keep close and
conceal whatsoever they have, they defraude the poor, and they think that
they are twice righteous, so they take away no other men's goods. Othersome are
carried into the contrary error, because they would have all things confused.
But what does Luke? Surely he notes another order, when he says, that there
was choice made in the distribution. If any man object, that no man had any
thing which was his own, seeing all things were common, we may easily
answer. For this community or participation together must be restreined unto
the circumstance which insueth immediately: to wit, that the poor might be
relieved as every man had need. We know the old proverb, All things are
common amongst friends. when as the scholars of Pythagoras said thus, they did
not deny but that every man might govern his own house privately, neither did
they intend to make their own wives common. So that this having of things
common, whereof Luke speaks, and which he commends, does not take away
household government: which thing shall better appear by the fourth chap.
where as he names two alone which sold their possessions, of so many
thousands. Whence we gather that which I said even now, that they brought
forth and made common their goods in no other respect, save only that they
might relieve the present necessity. And the impudency of the Monks was
ridiculous, who did profess that they did observe the Apostles rule, because
they call nothing their own: and yet nevertheless they neither sell any
thing, neither yet do they pass for any man's poverty: but they stuff their
idle bellies with the blood of the poor, neither do they regard any other
thing in their having of things common, save only that they may be well filled
and daintilie, although all the whole world be hungry. Wherein then are they
like to the first disciples, with whom they will be thought to be able to
compare?

46 And continuing daily with one accord in the Temple, and breaking bread
from house to house, they did eat their meat with gladness, and singlenes of
heart,

47 Praising God, and having favor with all the people. And the Lord added
daily unto the congregation, those which should be saved.

46 Continuing in the Temple. We must note that they did frequent the Temple
for this cause, because there was more opportunity and occasion offered there
to further the Gospel. Neither were they drawn with the holiness of the
place, seeing they knew that the shadows of the law were ceased: neither
meant they to draw others by their example to have the Temple in any such
reverence: but because there was there great concourse of people, who having
laid aside their private cares, wherewith they had been drawn away else
where, did seek the Lord: they were continually in the Temple, that they
might gain such unto Christ. There might be another reason which might induce
them hereunto, that they might have a mutual conference and imparting of
doctrine amongst themselves: which they could not have done so conveniently in
a private house, especially seeing they were so many.

Breaking bread from house to house. Luke signifies unto us that they did not
only show some token of true godliness, publicly, but that the course and tenor
of their private life was al one in that respect. For whereas some do think
that in this place, by breaking of bread is meant the holy supper, it seems
to me that Luke meant no such thing. He signifies therefore unto us that they
used to eat together, and that thriftily. For those which make sumptuous
banquets, do not eat their meat together so familiarly. Again Luke adds, In
singlenes of heart. Which is also a token of temperance. In sum, his meaning
is to declare that their manner of living, was brotherly and sober. Some do
join simplicity and gladness with the praise of God: and both texts may well
be allowed. But because there can be no singleness of heart in praising God,
unless the same be also in all parts of the life, therefore it is certain
that there is mention made thereof in this sense, that the faithful did
always use the same in all places. And we must also note the circumstance of
time, that being environed and beset with many dangers, they were merry and
joyful. The knowledge of Gods love toward us, and the hope of his protection
do bring us this goodness with them, that we praise God with quiet minds,
whatsoever the world does threaten. And as Luke spoke a little before of the
public estate of the Church, so he declares now what form and manner of
life the faithful did use: that we may learn by their example a thriftie
fellowship in our manner of living, and in all our whole life to embrace
singleness, to enjoy the spiritual joy, and to exercise our selves in the
praises of God. Furthermore, the singleness of heart reaches far: but if
you join it in this place with breaking of bread, it shall signify as much
as sincere love, where one man deals plainly with an other, neither does
any man craftily hunt after his own profit. Yet had I rather set the same
against that carfulness, wherewith worldly men do too too much torment
themselves. For when as we do not cast our care upon the Lord, this reward
hangs over our heads, that we tremble and quake even when we take our rest.

47 Having favor. This is the fruit of an innocent life, to find favor even
amongst strangers. And yet we need not to doubt of this, but that they were
hated of many. But although he speak generally of the people, yet he
means that part alone which was sound, neither yet infected with any poison
of hatred. He signifies briefly that the faithful did so behave themselves,
that the people did full well like of them for their innocence of life.

The Lord added daily. He shows in these words, that their diligence was not
without profit. They studied so much as in them lay, to gather into the Lords
sheepefold those which wandered and went astray. He says that their labor
bestowed herein, was not lost: because the Lord did increase his Church
daily. And surely whereas the Church is rather diminished than increased, that
is to be imputed to our slothfulness or rather frowardnes. And although they
did all of them stoutly labor to increase the kingdom of Christ, yet Luke
ascribes this honor to God alone, that he brought strangers into the Church.
And surely this is his own proper work. For the ministers do no good by
planting or watering, i. Corinth. 3
unless he make their labor effectual by the power of his Spirit.
Furthermore we must note that he says, that Those were gathered unto the
Church, which should be saved. For he teaches that this is the means to
attain to salvation, if we be incorporate into the Church. For like as there
is no remission of sins, so neither is there any hope of salvation.
Furthermore, this is an excellent comfort for all the godly, that they were
received into the Church, that they might be saved: as the Gospel is called
the power of God, Romans 1.16.
unto salvation to all that believe. Now for as much as God does gather only
a part, or a certain number, this grace is restreyned unto Election: that it
may be the first cause of our salvation.

CHAP. III.
1 or almost at that time.
NOw Peter and John went up together into the temple, about the ninth hour of
prayer.

2 Furthermore, a certain man, which was lame from his mothers womb was
carried: whom they laid daily at the gate of the Temple, which is called
Beautiful, that he might ask alms of those which entered into the Temple.

3 When he saw Peter and John draw near to the Temple, he asked an alms.

4 And Peter beholding him earnestly with John, said, Look on us.

5 And he gave heed unto them, thinking that he should receive somewhat of
them.

6 And Peter said, Silver and gold have I none: but such as I have, give I
thee: In the name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth, a rise and walk.

7 And when he had taken him by the right hand, he lift him up, and immediately
his feet and ankle bones received strength:

8 And leaping up he stood, and walked, and entered with them into the Temple,
walking and leaping and praising God.

9 And all the people saw him walking, and praising God.

10 And they knew him, that it was he which was wont to sit for the alms at
the Bewtiful gate of the Temple. And they were filled with wondering, and were
astonished at that thing which was come unto him.

11 Moreover, when the lame man which was healed, held Peter and John, all the
people ran amazed unto them, into the Porch which is called Solomon's.

1 We saw before that many signs were showed by the hands of the Apostles:
now Luke recites one of many for examples sake, after his common custom:
namely, that a lame man, which was lame of his feet from his mothers womb,
was perfectly restored to his limbs. And he does diligently gather all the
circumstances which serve to set forth the miracle. If it had been that his
legs had been out of joint, or if it had been some disease coming by some
casualtie, it might have been the more easily cured. But the default of nature
could not have been so easily redressed. When as he says that he was
carried, we gather thereby that it was no light halting, but that this man did
lie as if his legs had been dead. Forasmuch as he was wont daily to ask
alms, hereby all the people might the better know him. In that being healed,
he walks in the Temple at the time of prayer, this served to spread abroad
the fame of the miracle. Furthermore this does not a little set forth the same,
that being lift up and set upon his feet, he leapeth up therewithal, and
walks joyfully.

Went up together. Because these words epi to auto, does no more signify place
than time, this latter sense seems better to agree with the text of Peter,
yet because it is of no great importance, I leave it indifferent. That is
called the ninth hour of prayer, when as the day began to draw toward night.
For seeing the day from the rising of the sun unto the going down thereof,
had twelve hours, as I have said else where, all that time was divided into
four parts. So that by the ninth, is meant the last portion of the day: as
the first hour did continue unto the third, the third unto the sixth, the sixth
unto the ninth. Hence may we gather by a probable conjecture, that that hour
was appointed for the evening sacrifice. Furthermore if any man ask, whether
the Apostles went up into the Temple that they might pray according to the rite
of the law: I do not think that that is a thing so likely to be true, as that
they might have better opportunity to spread abroad the Gospel. And if any man
will abuse this place, as if it were lawful for us to use and take up
superstitious worshippings, whilst that we are conversant amongst the
ignorant and weak, his reason shall be frivolous. The Lord appointed that
the Jews should offer sacrifice, morning and evening. By this exercise were
they taught, Exodus ^9.41 Number. 28.2.
to begin and end the day with calling upon the name of God, and with
worshipping him. Therefore Peter and John might freely come into the Temple,
which was consecrated to God: neither did they pollute themselves, seeing they
called upon the God of Israel, that they might thereby declare their
Godliness. First in that the Lord would have the old people to observe the
appointed hours: we gather thereby that the Church cannot be without
certain Discipline. And even at this day were it profitable for us to have
such meetings daily, unless our too too much sluggishnesse did let us. And
whereas the Apostles go up at that hour, hereby we gather that we must
foreslowe no opportunity that is offered us for the furtherance of the Gospel.

3 He asks an alms. We see how God restored this lame man to his limbs
contrary to his expectation. Because he thought that his disease was
incurable, he was only careful for maintenance. That is given him which he
durst never have asked. In like sort God does oftentimes prevent us, neither
does he stay until he be provoked. And hence can we not gather any occasion of
slothfulness, as if the Lord did therefore meet us of his own accord,
that being idle and slothful we may suffer the Lord to do good unto us. For
we are commanded to pray, and therefore let us not foreslowe our duty. But
first of all under the person of the lame man, we have set before us an
example of a man that is not yet illuminated by faith, that he may know how
to pray aright. Such does God prevent as it is needful, even of his own
accord. Therefore when as he restores our souls not only to health, but
also to life, he himself is to himself the cause hereof. For this is the
beginning of our calling, that he may make those things to be which are not:
Romans 4.17.
that he may show himself unto those who seek not after him. Furthermore
howsoever we be already taught by faith to pray unto God, yet because we
do not always feel our miseries, it comes not into our mind to seek for
remedy: therefore the Lord brings the same freely and unlooked for.
Finally howsoever we be bent to pray, yet does he exceed our hope and
petitions with his goodness.

4 Look upon us. Peter does not thus speak, before he be certain of the
purpose and intent of God. And surely in these words he commands him to hope
for some singular and unwonted benefit: yet here may a question be moved,
Whether they had power to work miracles so often as they would. I answer that
they were ministers of Gods power in such sort, that they did attempt nothing
of their own will or proper motion, but the Lord wrought by them, when he
knew that it was expedient it should be so. Hereby it came to pass that
they healed one and not all. Therefore as in other things they had the Spirit
of God to be their guide and directer, so also in this point. Therefore before
such time as Peter commands the lame man to arise, he did cast and fasten
his eyes upon him. This steadfast looking upon him, was not without some
peculiar motion of the Spirit. Hereby it comes to pass, that he speaks so
surely and safely without al fear of the miracle. Furthermore he meant by
this word to provoke the lame man to receive the grace of God: yet does he
look for nothing but for an alms.

6 Silver and gold. Peter does truly excuse himself, that he does want
that help which the lame man did require. And therefore does he declare that
if he were able to relieve his poverty he would willingly do it: like as
every man ought to consider with himself what the Lord has given him, that
he may therewith help his neighbors. For what store so ever God gives to
every man, he will have the same to be an instrument and help to exercise
love. Therefore he says that he gives that which he has. This was at the
first a trick of mockage, in that Peter begins to speak of his poverty,
after that he had brought the lame man into a rare hope, as if he meant to
mock a gaping crow: but he comfort him immediately, to the end the miracle
might be had in greater estimation by the comparison. That is horrible
wickedness, in that the Pope, when as he is created, does most unshamefastly
abuse this place, making thereof a comicall or rather a scoffing play. There
be two Celles or places made of stone, in the one whereof when he sits,
and the people ask an alms, using these words of Peter, he casts abroad
crosses in the air with his fingers. When he is brought into the next Cell or
place, he has bags full of money. Then his Angels cry unto him, He has
dispersed, he has given to the poor. Psalm. 112.9.
I have made mention hereof, to the end all men may see that Satan does
questionless reign there, where they do so manifestly mock the sacred word
of God. And to the end I may return unto the former sentence, it is evident
enough, that Peter was instructed by a certain and sure revelation, when as
he says that he has the gift of healing.

In the name of Jesus. He says that this is the work and benefit of Christ,
that he restores to the creeple the use of his feet, for Name is taken for
power and empire or government. Neither must we dream that there is any
magical force in the sounding or pronouncing of the word, as the Jews do
dote about the word Jehovah. To be short Peter meant to declare that he was
nothing but a minister, and that Christ was the author of the miracle. For this
ought to have been, and was his care, that Christ might be made known unto
the world, and that his name might be sanctified. But why does he give
Christ this Epithete or title of Nazareth? I leave to other men their own
judgment: but I think thus: For as much as Christ was thus called in contempt,
Peter meant of set purpose to express that that Jesus of Nazareth whom they
had crucified, and whose name was despised and without glory amongst the
Jews, and was to the most of them detestable, was nevertheless the Messiah
promised of God, and that all power was given unto him of the father: as Paul
says, 1. Cor. 2.2.
that he preaches Christ and him crucified.

Arise and walk. This might seem to be a very ridiculous thing. For the
Creeple might have readily objected, Why have thou not first given me legs
and feet? For this is a plain mock, when as thou biddest a man without
feet, to go. But he believed Peter his words: and he which was at the first
so slow, does now with a ready and joyful mind embrace Gods benefit.
Whereby appears both the force of the word, and also the fruit of faith.
The force of the word is double, both in that the Creeple is so touched, that
he does forthwith obey without any delay: and in that it gives strength to
his dead members, and does after a sort renew the man. And faith also has her
reward, in that the creeple obeys him which commanded him to rise not in
vain. Therefore we see how God works by his word, to wit, when he gives
success to the preaching thereof, that it may pearce into the minds of men:
secondly when he gives those things with his hand, which are promised there:
moreover he suffers not faith to be void, but she does in deed truly
enjoy all those good things, which she looks for, and which are offered
unto her in the same word. And we must remember that which I have already
said, that we have in this history a type or figure of our spiritual
restoring: namely, that as the word laid hold on by faith, did restore the
Creeple to his limbs, so the Lord pearceth into our souls by the word, that
he may restore the same. And first of all he speaks by man's mouth, and
pricketh us forward unto the obedience of faith: that done he moves our hearts
inwardly by his spirit, that the word may take lively root in us: finally
he reaches out his hand, and by all means he finisheth his work in us. We
gather out of Matthew that miracles must be thus handled.

9 And all the people saw. He begins now to declare the fruit of the
miracle, to wit, that the creeple began to show his thankfulness, by praising
God, and that all the people were brought into great woondering. And here is a
double fruit. For he which was healed, does acknowledge and set forth the
benefit of God, on the other side the people is moved, and the same is spread
abroad, many come to see it. And where as Luke says, that they were filled
with woondring, it does only declare a preparation, which a more full
proceeding and going forward did at length follow. For it was necessary that
they should go forward, because this their woondring had ferued to no end of
it self, but did rather make them astonished and amazed, than bring them from
their own proceedings unto God.

Therefore it was as it were the foundation of the building which was to come,
in that the people was touched with amazednes. For if we pass over the works
of God contemptiblie or carelessly, we shall never be able to profit by them.
Furthermore this place does teach us, what miracles do work of themselves in
men: to wit, that they breed a confused amazedness. For although the Lord
does call us streightway unto himself by showing plainly his goodness and
power there, yet such is the weakness of our nature that we stumble or faint
in the midway, until such time as we be helped by doctrine. Let us therefore
learn reverently to consider the works of God, that the woondring at them,
may make an entrance for doctrine. For when doctrine is cold and unprofitable
with us, God does justly punish our unthankfulness by this means, because
we have despised the glory of his works. Again because we are not so quick
of sight, that we can see so much in the works of God alone, as is
sufficient, let us learn to join therewithal the help of doctrine. To be
brief, the one ought not to be separated from the other. Which thing
experience does sufficiently teach us. For hereby it came to pass that the
world did so wickedlie abuse miracles. The Papists do object unto us
miracles again and again. Let us suppose that they be true, whereof they
make such boast, yet do they greatly err in this, that they wrest them to a
wrong end: to wit, that they may darken the name of God, and infect the pure
truth of the Gospel with their inventions. For, whence come so many
superstitious worshipings of saints, save only from the abuse of miracles?
For when any miracle is wrought, men must needs be moved. And because they
are deaf when they should hear the word, and do not mark what God does
mean, Satan does craftily take an occasion of superstition by our
amasednesse. As for example: I will acknowledge the power of God in a miracle.
If it were wrought by Peter, Satan will by and by put this in my head, and
will say thus: Do thou not see that this is a man of God? therefore thou
do owe unto him divine honor. The same thing had befallen the Jews when
they were amassed, unless Peter his sermon had called them back into the right
way. But in popery where none did call them back or reprove them, the
preposterous woondering of men did easily get the upper hand. Wherefore we
must so much the more seek for medicine out of the word, that doctrine may
direct us unto the right end, being lifted up with the miracles.

11 In the porch. It is like that there was a porch builded in that place,
where Solomon's porch was sometimes, and that it took the name thereupon. For
the old Temple was pulled down, but Zerubabell and Esdras in the reedifying
and new building of the same Temple had imitated the same so nigh as they
could possibly devise. Afterward Herod renewed the same, and made it far
more gorgeous, but that vain cost which he had bestowed, had not yet blotted
out the remembrance of Solomon in the hearts of the people. And Luke names
the same as a most famous place, whereunto the people ran together by heaps
to celebrate their feasts unto God at the times appointed.

12 And when Peter saw that, he made answer unto the people, Men of Israel,
why marvel ye at this, or why look ye so steadfastly upon us, as if by our
own power or godliness, we have made this man walk?

13 The God of Abraham, Isaach and Jacob, the God of our Fathers has glorified
his son Jesus, whom ye have delivered, and whom ye have denied before the
face of Pilate, when he had judged him to be loosed.

14 But ye have denied the holy, and just, and have desired to have a
murderer given you.

15 But ye have murdered the Prince of life: whom God has raised up from the
dead: whereof we are witnesses: and in the faith of his name, his name has
strengthened this man whom ye have seen and known.

16 And the faith which is by him, has given him this pe^fect soundness, in
presence of you all.

12 Men of Israel. He begins his sermon with a reproving of the people. And
yet does he not simply reprove them because they wonder: for that was
altogether profitable and worthy praise: but because they do wickedly ascribe
unto men that praise which is due to the work of God. As if he should say,
Ye do amiss, in that you stay in us, and stand gasing upon us, whereas you
ought rather to look upon God and Christ. Therefore this is to be amassed
euillie, when as our minds do stay in men. And we must note that he
condemns the respect of men. As if, says he, we by our own power and
virtue had done this. Therefore there is an error and corruption in this, if
we attribute that unto the godliness and power of men, which is proper to God
and Christ. And as concerning power, no man will deny that it comes of God:
yet when they have confessed this in one word, they do not cease to take from
God his right, to the end they may adorn the creatures with that which they
take from him. As we see the Papists place the power of God, in the Saints:
yea they include his power in a stone or stock of wood, so soon as the image
is consecrated to Barbara or Chrysogonus. But notwithstanding let us suppose
that they do not offend in that former member. Yet do they foolishly think
that they have done their duty toward God, when as they leave him the power:
and assign the miracles unto the godliness of Saints. For why do they run
unto them, when they will obtain either rain or fair weather, or be
delivered from diseases, unless they do imagine that they have by their
godliness deserved, that God should grant them this right and privilege?
This is therefore but a childish starting hole, when they confess that God is
the author of the power: but they thank the godliness of Saints for those
benefits which they have received. Howsoever they color the matter, we must
always know this, that Peter does generally condemn those which do so
look unto men in miracles, that they think that their holiness is the cause
thereof. This is the first part of the sermon, wherein he reprooueth
superstition. And we must note this manner and order of teaching. For because
men are inclined to nothing more, than to fall from God unto the Creatures, it
is very expedient to prevent this vice in time. And if the people were
forbidden to look unto the Apostles, much more does the Spirit draw us away
from calling upon every petie Saint.

13. 14. The God of Abraham. He adds a remedy now, in calling them back
unto Christ. And the sum is this, that this is Gods purpose in those miracles
which he works by the Apostles, to set forth the glory of his Christ.
Whereupon it follows that all those do deal disorderly, who set up Peter
or any other whatsoever he be, for so much as all men must decrease, and
Christ alone must be excellent. Here appears a manifest difference between
Christ and the Apostles. John. 3.30.
First of all he is the author, they are only the ministers. Secondly, this
is the lawful end, that he alone may have the glory: and as for them, there
is no respect to be had of them as concerning glory. For certainly, they
which do glorify any in miracles besides Christ, they set themselves flatly
against the counsel of God.

He makes mention of the God of Abraham, Isaach, and Jacob, to the end he may
declare unto the people, that he means nothing less, than to lead them away
from the old and ancient worship of the true God, which they had received of
the Fathers. Furthermore, God has given himself this title, that he might
disseuer and distinguish himself by some mark from Idols. For we do not
comprehend God in his essence which cannot be seen, and which is infinite.
Therefore he uses such means as agree best with us, to bring us to the
knowledge of him. The Turks do boast that they do worship God, which is the
Creator of heaven and earth: but before they come at heaven, they vanish away.
Therefore to the end God might keep his people from vain and erroneous
inventions, he kept them in his covenant. Therefore when he calls himself the
God of Abraham, Deuteronomy. 30.12
he did briefly teach that which Moses declares more at large: Say not, Who
shall ascend into heaven? who shall go down into the depth? Or who shall
sail over the Seas? The word is nigh, etc. Furthermore, as amongst the Jews
the name of the holy Fathers was in high estimation: so Peter does closely tell
them, that they were no better than other men, without the only begotten son
of God. And at this day God will be known by a more evident mark yet, when
as he calls himself the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ. Let us now return
unto Peter. He says that he brings in no new religion, that he may draw away
the people from the law and the Prophets. For if he should attempt this, God
had forbidden them to hear him. Deuteronomy. 13.3. 1. Cor. 3.11.
Deuteronomy. 13. Like as Paul teaches, that we must retain one foundation in the
spiritual building: because so soon as we depart even but a little from
Christ, there can nothing ensue but ruin. And hereby also we may easily
discern in what sense he calls God the god of the Fathers. For neither does
he take this for a general maxim: that what manner worship soever the fathers
had, we must continue the same: as the Papists do foolishly vaunt, that they
do follow the manner of worshipping, which was used amongst the fathers. For
Peter does expressly reckon up Abraham, Isaach, and Jacob, from whom true
religion did proceed, and by whom it was divinely delivered, whereby he does
signify unto us, that we must not follow all fathers: whereof many did grow
out of kind, and became altogether unlike to the first fathers, that this
honor is due to the children of God alone, and that others are to be refused.
Eze. 20.18.
Which thing the Prophets do also beat in every where: Walk not in the ways
of your fathers, etc.

Whom ye have delivered. He mingleth with doctrine a most sharp chiding,
according as the matter did require. For it was impossible to bring them truly
unto God, unless they were first brought to the knowledge of their sins.
Neither does he only lightly touch them, but he does very gravely show them
the horriblenesse of that offense, which they had committed. To this end
tends that comparison, that they delivered him to be put to death, whom
Pilate would have loosed. And again, that pardoning a murderer, they put the
prince of life to death: that they did reject the just and holy. Men must be
so stricken, that being brought to know their giltines, they may earnestly
fly unto the remedy of pardon. Such vehemency and earnestness did Peter
also use in his first sermon. He says afterward that God raised him up.
Whereby they ought to know, that in putting Christ to death, they did strive
against God. Although Peter had respect unto an higher thing: to wit, that
their cruelty did no whit impair the glory of Christ because God had
nevertheless restored him to life. When as he says, that he and his fellows
in office were witnesses of the resurrection, his meaning is, that they saw it
with their eyes. Luke 24.48.
Therefore this is referred not only unto the Apostolical function: but
because they saw Christ with their eyes after that he was risen from the
dead. Although I do also grant that this second thing is comprehended under
these words: Because it is likely that Peter does make mention of that
function which was committed unto him, to the end he may purchase the greater
authority.

16 And in the faith of his name. When as he says, In the faith of his name,
and His name, and again, The faith which is by him: this repetition is a token
of a fervent affection. For because he was wholly given to set forth the
glory of Christ, he beats in the same thing oftentimes. Moreover we see
that when Paul is occupied about the showing and setting forth of the grace
of Christ: he thinks that he has never spoken enough touching the same. And
surely, such is the wicked nature of men, that Christ cannot be so highly
extolled, and so preached, that his honor can remain sound unto him. Let us
therefore remember, that Peter did use such variety and plenty of words, to
the end he might stay us in Christ. As touching the phrase, when as he says,
his name, in the faith of his name has strengthened, he shows both the
cause and the manner. The power of Christ had healed the Creeple, but by faith.
When as he says, the faith which is by him, by this word he signifies unto
us, that our faith cannot arise up unto God, unless it be grounded in Christ,
and so consequently that this our faith does look unto Christ and stay it
self upon him, and so he shows that there can be no right faith in God,
when we pass over this mean.

Furthermore, as he said before, that he and the other Apostles were witnesses
of Christ's life: so he does now declare that this life was manifestly proved
unto the Jews by a sign or effect: because they see the creeple healed, in
whom they had an excellent and evident token of the divine power of Christ.
And when as in this last member he makes faith the cause of this soundness,
he lays unthankfulness to their charge by the way, unless they give faith
her due praise. And although faith may be referred as well unto the man that
was healed, as unto the Apostles, yet we need not to stand much about this
matter, because the power of the Gospel is set forth by Synecdoche.

17 And now brethren, I know that through ignorance you did it: as did also
your rulers.

18 And God has fulfilled all things which he had spoken by the mouth of his
prophets, that Christ should suffer.

19 Repent therefore, and be converted, that your sins may be forgiven:

20 When the times of refreshing shall come from the presence of the Lord, and
he shall send him that was Or set before your eyes, and represented.
preached before, Jesus Christ.

21 Whom heaven must contain until the time that all things be restored,
which he has spoken by the mouth of all his holy prophets, since the
beginning of the world.

17 Because it was to be doubted least being cast down with despair, they
should refuse his doctrine, he does a little lift them up. We must so temper
our sermons that they may profit the hearers. For unless there be some hope of
pardon left, the terror and fear of punishment does harden men's hearts with
stubbornness. For that of David is true, Psalm. 130.4.
That we fear the Lord when we perceive that he is unto us favorable and
easy to be pacified. Thus does Peter lessen the sin of his nation, because
of their ignorance. For it had been impossible for them to have suffered and
endured this conscience, if they had denied the son of God, and delivered
him to be slain, wittinglie, and willingly. And yet will he not flatter them,
when as he says, That they did it through ignorance: but he does only somewhat
mitigate his speech, least they should be overwhelmed and swallowed up of
despair. Again we must not so take the words as if the people did sin
simply of ignorance: for under this there did lie hid hypocrisy: but as
wickedness or ignorance does abound, the action is named of the one or the
other. This is therefore Peter his meaning, that they did it rather through
error and a blind zeal, than through any determined wickedness. But a question
may be moved here, If any man have offended wittinglie and willingly whether
he shall surely fall into despair or no? I answer, that he does not make
mention in this place of all manner of sin, but only of the denying of Christ,
and of the extinguishing of the grace of God, so much as in them did lie. If
any man be desirous to know more concerning this, 1. Tim. 1.13
he may read the first chapter of the first epistle to Timothy.

As did also your rulers. First this seems to be an improper comparison. For
the Scribes and the priests were carried headlong with a wonderful madness, and
they were full of wicked unfaithfulness: but the perverse study and zeal of
the law did prick forward the people. Again the people were incensed against
Christ, in as much as their rulers did provoke them thereunto. I answer, that
they were not all of one mind: for without dout many of the^ were like unto
Paul, unto who^ that does truly appertain, which he writes elsewhere of the
princes and rulers of this world, if they had known the wisdom of God, they
would never have crucified the Lord of glory. Therefore he speaks not
generally of all the rulers: but if any of them be curable, them does he inuit
to repentance.

18 And God. Hereby it appears more plainly to what end he made mention of
ignorance. For when he tells the^ that God has acco^pli^^ed those things
which he had foretold, he does so touch their offense in the death of Christ,
that it turns to their salvation. Ignorance, says he, has made you
guilty: yet God has brought that to pass which he had determined, that Christ
should redeem you by his death. This is a most notable consideration, when as
we ponder and consider with our selves, that through the wonderful counsel of
God, our evils are turned to another end to us. Yet this does no whit excuse
us. For so much as in us lies, we cast away our selves by sinning: but that
conversion, whereof I have spoken, is a notable work of gods mercy, whereof we
must speak, and which we must extol with humility. The Jews did what they
could to extinguishe all hope of life in the person of Christ. And yet
nevertheless that death gave life as well to them, as to all the whole world.
We must also remember that which we saw elsewhere, least there should any false
and absurd opinion creep in, that Christ was laid open to the lust of the
wicked, that God is made the chief author, by whose will his only son did
suffer.

19 Repent. We must note that when he exhorts unto repentance he does also
declare that there is remission of sins prepared for them before the face of
God. For as I said of late, no man can be stirred up to repentance, unless he
have salvation set before him, But he which does despair of pardon, being as
it were given over unto destruction already does not fear to run headlong
against God obstinately. Hereby it comes to pass that the Papists cannot
deliver the doctrine of repentance. They babble indeed very much concerning the
same: but because they overthrow the hope of grace, it cannot be that they
should persuade their disciples unto the study of repentance. Moreover I
confess that they babble a little touching forgiveness of sins: but because
they leave men's souls in dout and in fearfulness, and furthermore do cast
them as it were into a Labyrinth, or place out of which they know not how to
come, this part of the doctrine being corrupt, they confound the other also.

20 That when. If we follow Erasmus and the old interpreter, this sentence
shall be imperfect, which may be made perfect, thus. When the time of refreshing
shall come, you may also enjoy this refreshing. When Christ shall come to judge
the world, you may find him a redeemer and not a judge. But because Beza does
fitly translate it, After that they shall come: it is better to retain that
which is not so rackt: so you resolve it thus: that sins are forgiven against
the day of the last judgment: because unless we be cited to appear before
Gods judgment seat, we are not greatly careful to pacify God. First of all
we must note, that he sets before them the day of judgment, to the end the
former exhortation may take the greater effect. For there is nothing which does
more prick us, than when we are taught that we must once give an account. For
so long as our senses are holden and kept in this world, they are drowned as it
were in a certain drowsines, that I may so call it. Wherefore the message of the
last judgment must sound as a trumpet to cite us to appear before the
judgment seat of God. For then at last being truly awaked we begin to think
of a new life. In like sort when Paul preached at Athens: God says that he
does now will all men to repent: because he has appointed a day wherein he will
judge the world. The sum is this, that Christ who is now unto us a master,
when as he teaches us by the Gospel, is appointed of the Father to be a
judge, and shall come in his due time: and that therefore we must obey his
doctrine betimes, that we may gather the fruit of our faith then. But some man
may object, that Peter speaks otherwise of the last day. For this does not
serve to make them afraid, when he says, the time of refreshing. I answer,
that there is a double prick, wherewith the faithful are pricked forward when
as they are told of the last judgment. For the profit of faith does not
appear in this world, yea rather it seems to go well with the despisers of
God: but the life of the godly is full of myseries. Therefore our hearts
should oftentimes faint and quail, unless we should remember, that the day of
rest shall come, which shall quench all the heat of our trouble, and make an
end of our miseries. The other prick whereof I spoke, is this, when as the
fearful judgment of God causes us to shake off delicacie and drowsinesse.
So Peter mixeth in this place threatenings with promises, partly to the end he
may allure the Jews unto Christ, and partly that he may prick them forward
with fear. Furthermore this is a thing much used in the scripture, as it
speaks either unto the reprobate, or unto the elect, sometimes to make the
day of the Lord doleful and fearful, sometime to make the same pleasant and
to be wished for Peter therefore does very well, who whilst that he puts
the Jews in good hope of pardon, does make the day of Christ pleasant to
them, to the end they may desire the same.

And shall send him. He says expressly, that Christ shall be judge, to the end
they may know that the contempt of the Gospel shall not be unpunished. For how
should not Christ punish the same? In the mean while this does greatly comfort
the faithful, when as they know that it shall be in his hand to give
salvation, who does now promise and offer the same. He adds moreover that he
shall come, who is now preached unto them. Whereby he takes away all excuse of
ignorance. As if he should say, Christ is preached unto you now, before he
come to judge the world: to the end that those who will embrace him, may
receive the fruit of their faith at that day: and to the end that others who
shall refuse him, may be punished for their unbelief. Although the Grecians do
read this two ways. For some books have procecerugmenon that is preached
before: and other some, procecheirismenon that is showed or set before their
eyes. But both have one sense: to wit, that Christ is not offered unto them in
vain now by the doctrine of the Gospel: because he shall be sent the second
time by his father, to be a judge armed and prepared to render vengeance,
unless they embrace him now for their Redeemer.

21 Whom the heaven must contain. Because men's senses are always bent and
inclined toward the gross and earthly beholding of God and Christ, the Jews
might think with themselves, that Christ was preached in deed to be raised up
from the dead, yet could they not tell where he was, for no man did show them
where he was. Therefore Peter preuenteth them, when he says, that he is in
heaven. Whereupon it follows, that they must lift up their minds on high, to
the end they may seek Christ with the eyes of faith, although he be far
from them, although he dwell without the world in the heavenly glory. But this
is a doubtful speech: because we may as well understand it, that Christ is
contained or comprehended in the heavens, as that he does comprehend the
heavens. Let us not therefore urge the word, being of a doubtful
signification: but let us content our selves with that which is certain, that
we must seek for Christ no where else save only in heaven, whiles that we hope
for the last restoring of all things: because he shall be far from us, until
our minds ascend high above the world.

Until the time of restoring. As touching the force and cause, Christ has
already restored al things by his death: but the effect does not yet fully
appear: because that restoring is yet in the course, and so consequently our
redemption, for as much as we do yet groan under the burden of servitude. For
as the kingdom of Christ is only begun, and the perfection thereof is deferred
until the last day, so those things which are annexed thereunto, do now
appear only in part. Therefore if at this day we see many things confused
in the world, let this hope set us upon foot and refreshe us, that Christ
shall once come, that he may restore all things. In the mean season, if we
see the relics of sin hang on us, if we be inuironned on every side with
diverse miseries, if the world be full of wasting and scattering abroad, let us
bewail these miseries, yet so that we be vpholde^ with the hope of restoring.
And this is the reason why Christ does not appear by and by, because the
warfare of the church is not yet full, whose time seeing it is appointed by
God, it is not for us to prevent the same.

Which he spoke. I do not expound this of the times alone: but I refer it unto
the whole period: so that the sense is this, that whatsoever he had spoken
before of the kingdom of Christ, is witnessed by all the prophets. Certes the
Gospel does win no small credit hereby, that so soon as God began to show
himself to the world, he did always set Christ before them: after that he
began to speak unto the Fathers, he did always lay this foundation of
doctrine. By the same argument Paul commends the Gospel both in the
beginning of his Epistle to the Romans, and also in the end, to wit, that it
is no new thing, but promised eue^ from the beginning. Romans 1.1. and 16.25.
This is true antiquity, which is able to purchase credit to doctrine: when
as God himself is the author, the holy Prophets the witnesses: and the
continual course of times confirms the testimony. This confirmation was
especially necessary for the Jews, who being brought up in the doctrine of
the law, ought to admit nothing but that which agrees therewith. Therefore
Peter does command them only to call to mind those things which the
prophets have testified of Christ.

22 Moses truly said unto the fathers: The Lord your God shall raise up a
prophet unto you of your brethren: him shall ye hear according to al things
which he shall speak unto you.

23 And it shall come to pass that every soul which shall not hear that
prophet, shall be destroyed of the people.

24 And all the prophets from Samuel, and thencefoorth as many as have spoken,
have likewise foretold these days.

22 By this argument he proves, that he goes not about to cause them to
revolt from Moses, because it is a part of the law to take heed to and obey
this chief teacher. Here might a dout arise, why Peter thought it more
convenient to cite this testimony of Moses than others, seeing there were many
other in readiness far more plain: but he did this for this cause, because he
entreats in this place of the authority of doctrine. And this was the best
way to bring the Jews to be Christ his disciples. For he should have preached
in vain of all other things, unless they had been persuaded, that his
doctrine was reverently to be received. This is therefore the thing which Peter
aims at, to bring them to hear Christ willingly, as the master who^ God
has appointed to teach them. But here arises a question which has in it
great difficulty: too wit, in that Peter applies that unto the person of
Christ, which Moses spoke generally of the prophets. For although he make
mention of a prophet in the singular number, yet the text does plainley
declare, that he speaks not of one alone: but that this word is put
indefinitely. For after that Moses had forbidden the people to give them selves
unto the superstitions of the Gentiles, by turning aside unto enchaunters and
soothsayers, he shows them therwithall a remedy, whereby they may avoid all
vanity: to wit, if they depend wholly upon the word of God alone. By this
means he promises that God will be careful at all times to send them
prophets, that they may teach the^ aright. As if he should say, God will never
suffer you to be destitute of prophets, of whom you may learn whatsoever shall be
profitable for you to know. And Moses says expressly, of thy brethren, to the
end the Jews may know that the oracles of God are to be sought and fet no
where else, seeing that God had appointed unto them teachers of the kindred of
Abraham. He adds further, like unto me: that they may know that they were
not to hear God only at one time, or by the mouth of one man: but as God
proceeds to teach us by diverse ministers, throughout the continual course
of times, so must we hold on in the obedience of the word. Now the Jews were
wont to reverence Moses: therefore he will have them to give like honor to the
prophets. I know that many would feign restrain it unto Christ. They catch at
this word, Deuteronomy. 18.15
whereas Moses does testify that the prophet shall be like unto him: whereas
notwithstanding it is written that there arose none like unto Moses. I confess
that there is in both places the same note of likeness, yet in a diverse sense.
For in the second place the likeness or equality is expressed, as it does
plainly appear. They catch also at another thing, that the prophet shall far
excel Moses, of who^ he bears witness as a crier or harrold. But this is never
a whit stronger: because Moses goes about to bring to pass, that the word of
God may be believed by whomsoever it be brought.

Therefore there is no cause why we should set our selves to be laughed to scorn
by the Jews, by wresting the words of Moses violently, as if he spoke of Christ
alone in this place. Yet must we see, whether Peter does cite the testimony
fitly, whose authority ought to serve for a sound reason. I say that in Peter
his speech there is nothing which is not most convenient. For he saw that which
all men ought to grant, that this testimony does so appertain unto the other
Prophets, that yet notwithstanding it does chiefly commend Christ, not only
because that he is the prince and chief of all the Prophets, but because all
other former prophesies were directed toward him, and because God did at length
speak absolutely by his mouth. For God spoke in diverse manners, and at sundry
times in times past, unto our fathers by the Prophets, he added the conclusion
at length, in the last days, in his only begotten son. Therefore it came to
pass, that they wanted prophets for a certain years before his coming: Heb.
1.1.2. Malac. 4.4. Mat. 11.13. John. 4.25.
which thing is plainly gathered out of the words of Malachie: who after that
he has commanded the people to be mindful of the law, he passes over by and
by unto John Baptist and unto Christ: as if he should say, that the prophesies
are now ended until the last revelation come: according to that, The law and
the prophets prophesied until John: after that the kingdom of God is preached.
And that was so common amongst the people, that the woman of Samaria could say
according to the common fame and opinion, We know that the Messiah shall come,
who will teach us all things. Therefore we know that after the return of the
people, all the prophets ceased, to the end they might be made more attentive
to hear Christ, by that silence or intermission of revelations. Therefore
Peter did not wrest this place, or abuse the same through ignorance, but he
took that doctrine which all men had received for a principle: that god had
promised to teach his people at the first by his prophets as by means, but at
length principally by Christ, at whose hands they were to hope for the perfect
manifestation and laying open of al things. And to this purpose serves that
excellent testimony, or commendation wherewith his father sets him forth,
Hear him.

Mat. 17.5.
23 Every soul. Here, by a most grievous punishment against the rebellious,
the authority of all the prophets, but most of al of Christ is established. And
that for good causes: For seeing there is nothing that God does account more
precious than his word, it cannot be that he should suffer the same to be
freely conte^ned. Therefore if any man despised the law of Moses, he was
adjudged to die the death. And hereunto Moses had respect when he said, He
shall be put away from among the people. For God had adopted the stock and kindred
of Abraham unto himself, upon this condition, that this might be sufficient
for them unto the chiefest felicity to be reckoned in that number, as it is
said in the Psalm, Blessed is the people whose god is the Lord. And in another
place, Blessed is the nation whom the Lord has chosen to be his inheritance.
Wherefore it is not to be doubted, but that he pronounces that he shall be
blotted out of the book of life, whosoever shall refuse to hear Christ. For
he is not worthy to be accounted one of the church, whosoever he be that
refuses to have him to be his master, by who^ alone God does teach us, and by
whom he will have us to hear himself: and he cutteth himself away from the
body, whosoever he be, that refuses to be under the head.

24 And all. When as he says that all the prophets do with one consent send
their scholars unto Christ: that appears more plainly hereby which I said,
that the commendation of the Gospel is contained under that testimony of Moses,
and so consequently that the conclusion of prophecies is principally noted.
Again this makes much for the certainty of the Gospel, that all the prophets
for a long time do yet notwithstanding so temper their form of teaching with
one consent, that they do testify all together, that men ought to hope for a
certain better, and more perfect thing. Therefore whosoever will believe Moses
and the prophets, he must needs submit himself unto the doctrine of Christ,
Ioh. 5.47.
without which, all that is lame and imperfect which they taught.

25 You are the children of the Prophets, and of the covenant which God made
with your fathers, saying unto Abraham, And in thy seed shall all families of
the earth be blessed.

26 God raised up unto you first his son Jesus, and he sent him blessing
you, whiles that he does turn away every one from his sins.

25 You are the children. He signifies that the grace of the covenant was
appointed principally for them, which covenant God made with their fathers.
And so as he pricked them forward to obey the Gospel by terrifiyng them with
the terror of punishment, so be allureth them now again to receive the grace
which is offered them in Christ. So that we see how that God omitteth nothing
whereby he may bring us unto him self. And it is the duty of a wise minister,
so to prick forward the sluggish and slow bellies, that he do lead those
gently, which are apt to be taught: we must also note diligently this course
of teaching, where Peter shows that the Gospel is assigned and appointed
unto the Jews. For it is not sufficient to have the mercy of God preached
unto us generally, unless we also know that the same is offered unto us by the
certain ordinance of God. For this cause is it that Paul stands so much
upon the auouching of the calling of the Gentiles, because if any man should
think, that the Gospel came unto him by chance, Romans 15.8. Ephesians. 3.3. and 4.
when as it was scattered here and there, faith should quail: yea there
should be only a doubtful opinion in steed of faith. Therefore to the end we
may steadfastly believe the promise of salvation, this application (that I may
so term it) is necessary: that God does not cast forth uncertain voices,
that they may hang in the air, but that he does direct the same unto us by his
certain and determinate counsel. Peter tells the Jews, that Christ is
promised unto them after this sort, to the end they may more willingly embrace
him. And how proves he this? because they are the children of the prophets and
of the covenant. He calls them the children of the Prophets, which were of
the same nation, and therefore were heirs of the covenant, Genesis 17.7.
which did belong unto all the whole body of the people. For he argues thus:
God made his covenant with our fathers: Therefore we which are their
posterity, are comprehended in the covenant. Whereby the doubting subtlety
of the Anabaptists is refuted, who do expound the children of Abraham only
allegorically: as if God had had no respect to his stock, when he said, I will
be the god of thy seed. Certainly Peter does not speak in this place of the
shadows of the law: but he affirms that this is of force under the kingdom
of Christ, that God does adopt the children together with the fathers: Romans 9.7.
and so consequently the grace of salvation may be extended unto those which
are as yet unborn. I grant in deed that many which are the children of the
faithful, according to the flesh, are counted bastardes, and not legitimate,
because they thrust themselves out of the holy progeny through their unbelief.
But this does no whit hinder the Lord from calling and admitting the seed of
the godly into fellowship of grace. And so although the common election be not
effectual in all, yet may it set open a gate for the special elect. Romans 11.23.
As Paul entreats in the 11. to the Romans, whence we must fet an answer
for this question.

And in thy seed. He proves that the covenant was made with the Fathers,
because God said unto Abraham, In thy seed shall all nations be blessed. Genesis
22.18.
But if we admit Paul his interpretation, this testimony shall make nothing for
the present cause. Paul teaches that Christ is this seed. If the blessing be
promised to all mankind by Christ, Gal. 3.16.
what is this to the especial or particular privilege of one nation? Secondly
Peter himself seems shortly after to subscribe to this exposition of Paul,
when as he says that Christ was sent, that in him the Jews may be blessed.
For this could not be, unless Christ were that blessed seed. I answer, When
Paul refers it unto Christ, he stands not upon the word seed, but he
has respect to an higher thing: to wit, that it cannot be one seed, unless it
be united and knit together in Christ, as in the head. For Ismael and Isaac
although both of the^ be the sons of Abraham, yet do they not make one seed:
because they be divided into two people. Therefore though many be estranged from
the family of Abraham, which came of him according to the flesh, yet Moses
notes one certain body, when he promises the blessing unto the seed of
Abraham. And whence comes the unity, save only from the head which is in
Christ? In this sense does Paul understand this word seed, of Christ, although
it be a nowne collectiue, because if you depart from him, the posterity of
Abraham shall be as torn members, neither shall there be any thing else in
them, save only mere wastnes and scattering abroad. Peter agrees with that
doctrine, because he does so extend the blessing unto all the people, that he
does nevertheless seek the fountain in Christ. Secondly forasmuch as the Jews
do what they can to wring from us this testimony, the godly Readers must arm
themselves against their cauils: and so much the rather because christian
writers have been too slack in this point: as I have said in the epist. to the
Galathians. First as touching the word seed, there is no cause why they should
prattle that Paul does not rightly restrain it unto Christ. For he does not
this simply, but in that respect whereof I have spoken. In which point I
confess both our latin and Greek interpreters have erred. Now we must see
what this manner of speech does import. The Gentiles shall be blessed in the
seed of Abraham. Our men think that there is some cause noted, to wit, that
through that seed the Gentiles shall be blessed. The Jews toss this to and fro,
because this phrase signifies every where in the scriptures an example or
similitude: as on the otherside to be cursed in Sodom, in Israel, or in an
other people, is to take them for a notable example of a curse. I answer that
it is a doubtful speech, and taken diversely according to the circumstance of
the places which the Jews do craftily dissemble. For they gather many places,
out of which they prove that there is a comparison made: as if it should be
said, The gentiles shall desire to be blessed like to the seed of Abraham. But
when as the scripture says elsewhere, They shall bless themselves in the
living God: as Iere. 4. Esaias 65. Iere. 4.2. Esaias. 65.16. Deuteronomy. 10.8.
And again, do bless in the name of the Lord, Deuteronomy 10. and in other such
like places: who does not see that there is a cause expressed? Therefore I say
that this form of speech ought to be understood according to the
circu^sta^ces of the places. And now forasmuch as I have declared that the
seed of Abraham can be found no where else save only in Christ, it remains
that we consider of what sort the office of Christ is. So shall it appear
undoubtedly, that he is not made a bare example or pattern, but that the
blessing is truly promised in him: because without him we be all accursed. Yet
there remains one dout. For certes both these are spoken in one sense: They
shall be blessed in thee, and, In thy seed. But Abraham was nothing else but a
type or myrror of the blessing. I answer that in the person of Abraham that
body is also noted out, which depends upon one head and is knit together in
the same.

All the families. The Jews do grossly expound this, that all nations shall
desire to be blessed, as the seed of Abraham. But we say otherwise, That they
shall be ingraffed into the society. For the name of Abraham tended to this end,
because it should come to pass that god should gather al people unto him. Also
when the prophets will declare the force hereof, they foretell every where that
the inheritance of salvation shall be common to the Gentiles. And hereby it
appears, that the covenant of God, which was then proper to the Jews alone,
is not only common to all men but is made with us expressly. Otherwise we could
not conceive that hope of salvation which is firm enogh out of the Gospel.
Therefore let us not suffer this promise to be wrong from us, which is as it
were a solemn declaration, whereby the Lord makes us his heirs together with
the fathers. Whereunto Peter also had respect, when as he says shortly after,
That Christ was first sent unto the Jews. For he does signify that the
Gentiles also have their order, though it be secundarie.

26 He has raised up his son. He gathers out of the words of Moses that
Christ is now revealed. But the words do seem to import no such thing: yet
does he reason fitly thus, because the blessing could no otherwise be, unless
the beginning thereof did flow from the Messiah. For we must always remember
this, that all mankind is accursed, and therefore there is a singular remedy
promised us, which is performed by Christ alone. Wherefore he is the only
fountain and beginning of the blessing. And if sobeit Christ came to this end
that he may bless the Jews first, and secondly us, he has undoubtedly done
that which was his duty to do, and we shall feel the force and effect of
this duty in our selves, unless our unbelief do hinder us. This was a part
of the Priest his office under the law, to bless the people and least this
should be only a vain ceremony, Number. 6.27. Heb. 7.1.6.
there was a promise added: as it is Numb. 6. And that which was shadowed in
the old priesthood, was truly performed in Christ. Concerning which matter
we have spoken more at large in the seventh chapter to the Hebrews. I like not
Erasmus his translation. For he says, When he had raised him up, as if he
spoke of a thing which was done long ago. But Peter means rather, that
Christ was raised up, when he was declared to be the author of the blessing:
which thing since it was done of late and suddenly, it ought to move their
minds the more. For the scripture uses to speak thus, as in the last place of
Moses, whereunto Peter alludeth. To raise up a prophet, is to furnish him with
necessary gifts to fulfill his function, and as it were to prefer him to the
degree of prophetical honor. And Christ was raised up then, when he fulfilled
the function enjoined him by his father, but the same thing is done daily when
he is offered by the Gospel that he may excel amongst us. We have said that
in the Aduerbe of order, first, is noted the right of the first begotten,
because it was expedient that Christ should begin with the Jews, that he
might afterward pass over unto the Gentiles.

Whiles that he turns. He does again commend the doctrine of repentance, to
the end we may learn to include under the blessing of of Christ newnes of
life, as when Esaias promises that a redeemer should come to Sion, he adds a
restraint, Those which in Jacob shall be turned from their iniquities. For
Christ does not do away the sins of the faithful, to the end they may grant
liberty to themselves to sin under this color: but he makes the^ therewith
all new men. Although we must diligently distinguish these two benifittes
which are linked together, that this ground work may continue, that we are
reconciled to God by free pardon. I know that other men turn it otherwise:
but this is the true meaning of Luke. For he speaks thus word for word: in
turning every one from his wickedness.

CHAP. IIII.
1 ANd as they spoke unto the people, the priests, and the governor of the
temple, and the Sadduces came upon them,

2 Taking it grievously that they taught the people, and preached in Jesus
name, the resurrection from the dead.

3 And they laid hands on them, and they put them in prison until the morrow.
For it was now euentide.

4 And many of those which had heard the word believed: and the number of me^
there was about five thousand.

1 In this narration we must consider three things chiefly. That so soon as
the truth of the Gospel does once appear, Satan sets himself against the
same on the other side so much as he is able, and atte^pteth all things that
he may smoulder the same in the very first beginnings. Secondly that God does
furnish his children with invincible force and strength, that they may stand
steadfast and immovable against all assaults of Satan: and not yield unto the
violence of the wicked. And last of all we must note the event and end, that
howsoever the adversaries seem to bear the chiefest swindge, and they
themselves do omit nothing which may serve to blot out the name of Christ: and
on the other side howsoever the ministers of sound doctrine be as sheep in the
mouths of wolves: yet does god spread abroad the kingdom of his son, he
fostereth the light of the gospel which is lighted, and he is the protector of
his children. Therefore so often as the doctrine of the Gospel arises, and
diverse motions do rise on the other side, and the course thereof is let
diverse ways, there is no cause why godly minds should faint or quail as at
some unwonted thing: but they ought rather to remember that these are the
ordinary endeavors of Satan, so that we must think upon this well, before it come
to pass, that it cannot otherwise be, but that Satan will spue out all his
might and main, so often as Christ does come abroad with his doctrine. And
therewithal let us consider that the constancy of the apostles is set forth
unto us for an example, least being overcome either with any perils, or
threatenings, or terrors, we leap back from that profession of faith which the
Lord requires at our hands. And moreover, let us comfort our selves with this,
that we need not to doubt but that the Lord will give prosperous success when
we have done our duty faithfully.

1 And as they spoke. Hereby it appears how watchful the wicked be: because
they are always ready at an inch to stop the mouth of the servants of Christ.
And undoubtedly they came together as it were to quench some great fire. Which
thing Luke signifies, when as he says that the ruler or captain of the
temple came also, and he adds moreover that they took it grievously that
the apostles did teach. Therefore they came not upon the^ by chance, but of set
purpose: that according to their authority they might restrain the apostles
and put them to silence. And yet they have some show of law and equity. For if
any man did rashly intrude himself, it was the office of the high priest to
repress him: and also in like sort to keep the people in the obedience of the
law and the prophets, and to prevent all new doctrines. Therefore when they
hear unknown men, and such as had no publik authority, preaching unto the
people in the temple, they seem according as their office did require, and
they were commanded by God to adresse themselves to remedy this. And surely at
the first blush it seems that there was nothing in this action worthy of
reprehension: but the end does at length declare that their counsel was
wicked, and their affection ungodly. Again it was an hard matter for the
Apostles to escape infamy and reproach, because they being private and despised
persons, did take upon the^ public authority. To wit, because when things are
out of order, many things must be assaied contrary to the common custom: and
especially when we are to avouch and defend religion and the worship of God.
and the ringleaders themselves do stop always, and do abuse that office
against God, which was committed unto them by god. The faithful cha^pions of
Christ must swallow up and pass through this ignominy in popery. For a
thousand summers will go over their heads, before any reformation or amendment
will wex ripe amongst them for the better. Therefore Luke stands upon this
point, when as he says that they were grieved, because the resurrection was
preached in the name of Christ. For hereupon it follows that they did hate the
doctrine before they knew the same. He expresses the Saduces by name, as those
which were more courageous in this cause. For they were almost a part of the
Priests: but because the question is about the resurrection, they set them
selves against the apostles more tha^ the rest. Furthermore this was most
monstrous confusion amongst the Jews, in that this sect which was so profane,
was of such authority. For what godliness could remain, when as the
immortality of the soul was counted as a fable and that freely? But me^ must
needs run headlo^g after this sort, when they have once suffered pure doctrine to
fall to the ground amongst the^. Wherefore we must so much the more diligently
beware of every wicked turning a side, least such a step down follow
immediately. Some men think that the ruler of the temple was chosen from among
the priests: but I do rather think that he was some chief captain of the
Roman army. For it was a place which was fortified both naturally and
artificially. Again, Herod had builded a tower there, which was called Antonia.
So that it is to be thought that he had placed there a band of soldiers, and
that the Roman Captain had the government of the Temple: least it should be
a place of refuge for the Jews, if they had stirred up any tumult, which we
may likewise gather out of Josephus. And this agrees very well that the enemies
of Christ did crave the help of the secular power, under color of appeasing
some tumult. In the mean season they seek favor at the hands of the
Romans, as if they were careful to maintain the right of their empire.

4 And many of them which heard. The Apostles are put in prison, but the force
of their preaching is spread far and wide, and the course thereof is at
liberty. Of which thing Paul boasts very much, that the word of God is not
bound with him. And here we see that Satan and the wicked have liberty
granted them to rage against the children of God: yet ca^ they not (maugre
their heads) prevail, but that god does further and promote the kingdom of
his son, Christ does gather together his sheep, and that a few men unarmed,
furnished with no garrisons, do show forth more power in their voice alone,
than all the whole world by raging against the^. This is in deed no common work
of God, that one sermon brought forth such plentiful fruit: but this is the
more to be wondered at, that the faithful are not terrified with the present
danger, and discouraged from taking up the cross of Christ together with the
faith. For this was a hard beginning for nouices. Christ did more euide^tlie
declare by this efficacy and force of doctrine, that he was alive, than if he
should have offered his body to be handeled with hand, and to be seen with the
eyes. And whereas it is said that the number of those which believed, did grow
to be about five thousand, I do not understand it of those which were newly
added, but of the whole church.

5 And it came to pass that the next day their rulers, and elders, and Scribes
were gathered together at Jerusalem.

6 And Annas the highest priest, and Caiphas, and John, and Alexander, and so
many as were of the kindred of the priests.

7 And when they had set them before them, they asked them: In what power, or
in what name have ye done that?

8 Then Peter, being filled with the holy Ghost, said unto them, Ye rulers of
the people, and elders of Israel,

9 If we be judged this day for healing the man which was lame, by what mean^
he is made whole:

10 Be it known unto you all: and to all the people of Israel, that in the
name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth, whom ye have crucified, whom God has raised
up from the dead, this man stands before you whole.

11 This is the stone which was refused of you the builders, it is placed in
the head of the corner.

12 Neither is there salvation in any other. Neither is there any other name
given under heaven unto men, wherein we must be saved.

5 It is a thing worthy to be noted in this place, that the wicked do omit no
subtlety that they may blot out the Gospel and the name of Christ, and yet do
they not obtain that which they hoped for: because god does make their counsels
frustrate. For they make an assembly wherein they do all things so
tyrannously, that yet notwithstanding lust bears a show of right, and
liberty is driven far away, and at length, the truth may seem to be
condemned by good right. But the Lord brings upon them a sudden fear, so
that they dare not do that which they can, and which they do most of all
desire: whatsoever the Apostles shall bring in defense of their cause, that
shall remain buried and shut up with the walls, where there is none which
does bear them any favor. And therefore there is no place left for the truth.
Yet we see how the Lord brings their counsel to naught, whiles that being
kept back with fear of the people, they stay themselves and bridle their
fury, to the end they may avoid envy. But I marvel much why Luke does m^ke
Annas the highest priest in this place, seeing that it appears by Josephus,
that this honor was not taken from Caiphas, until Vitellius had entered
Jerusalem to bear rule, after that Pilate was commanded to depart unto Rome.
All men grant that the Lord was crucified in the eighteenth year of Tiberius
And that empire did continue four years longer. And it must needs be, that
there were 3. years complete after the death of Christ, before Pilate was put
from the office of the proconsull. For when Tiberius was dead, he came to Rome:
So that Caiphas was hie priest yet 3. years after the death of Christ.
Wherefore it is to be thought that that whereof Luke speaks in this place, did
not happen immediately after the resurrection of Christ. Although the dout cannot
thus be answered. For Josephus reports that Ionathas was chosen into the
place of Caiphas: but because this Ionathas was the son of Annas, it is a
thing not unlike to be true, that the son was called by the name of the
father: as Caiphas also had two names: for they did also call him Joseph.

7 In what power. They do yet seem to have some zeal of God. For they feign
that they are careful that the honor due unto God, may not be given to any
other. Name is taken in this place for authoririe. In sum, they deal as if
they were most earnest defenders and maintainers of Gods glory. In the mean
season their importunatenes is wonderful, in that they go about to drive the
apostles to make denial, by asking many questions concerning a manifest
matter, and to wring out by fear some ^^her thing than they had confessed. But
God does bring their crafty wiliness to naught, and makes them hear that
which they would not.

8 Peter being filled with the holy Ghost. It is not without great cause that
Luke adds this, to the end we may know that Peter spoke not with such a
majesty of himself. And surely seeing he had denied his master Christ, being
afraid at the voice of a sielie woman, he should have utterly fainted in such
an assembly, Mat. 26.70.
when he did only behold their pomp, unless he had been vpholden by the power of
the Spirit. He had great need of wisdom and strength. He excels in both
these so much, that his answer is in deed divine. He is another manner of man
here than he was before. Furthermore this profits us two manner of ways. For
this title or commendation is of no small force to set forth the doctrine
which shall follow immediately, when it is said that it came from the holy
God. And we are taught to crave at the hands of the Lord the Spirit of wisdom
and strength, when we make profession of our faith, to direct our hearts and
minds. The fulness of the spirit is taken for a large and no common mesure.

9 If we be judged. Undoubtedly Peter lays tyranny to the charge of the
Priests and the Scribes, because they examine them unjustly concerning a
benefit which deserves praise, as if he and his fellow had committed some
heinous offense. If says he, we be accused for this cause, because we have
made a sick man whole, Peter has in this place more respect unto the wicked
affection of the mind, than unto the very order of the question. For if under
color of a miracle, the Apostles would have drawn away the people from the
true and sincere worship of God, they should have been worthily called to
answer for themselves: because religion does far excel all the good things
of this present life. But seeing they (having no cause at al) did wickedly make
an offense of that which they ought to have honored: Peter being supported with
this confidence does at the first gird them wittily with a taunting preface,
because they sit as judges to condemn good deeds. Yet he touches this point
but lightly, that he may pass over unto the matter.

10 Be it known unto you. Peter might (as I have already said) have turned
aside unto many starting holes, if he would not have entered the cause: but
because the miracle was wrought, to this end, that the name of Christ might be
glorified, he descends by and by unto this. For he knew that he was the
minister of such excellent power of GOD that he might have a seal to confirm
his doctrine. In the mean while the wicked, will they nill they, are enforced
to hear that which they would have had buried full deep. When they have done
what they can, this is all, they cause Peter to avouch and object to their
faces, that wherewith they were so grieved, when it was spoken to others. And
first he makes Christ the author of the miracle. Secondly because it seemed
to be an absurd and incredible thing, that a dead man should be endewed with
divine power, he testifies that Christ is alive, because God has raised him
up from the dead, howsoever they had crucified him. So that the miracle gives
him occasion to preach the resurrection of Christ. And by this testimony Peter
meant to prove, that he was the true Messiah. He says that they had crucified
him, not only to the end he may vpbraide this unto them, that they may
acknowledge their fault: but also that they may understand, that they have in
vain striuen against God: and so consequently cease to rage so vnluckely and
with such deadly success.

11 This is the stone. He confirms by testimony of Scripture that it is no
new thing, that the ringleaders of the Church, which have glorious titles given
them, and have the chief room in the Temple of God, have notwithstanding
wickedlie rejected Christ. Therefore he cites a place out of the hundredth and
eighteenth Psalm: Psa. 118.22.
where David complains that he is rejected of the Captain of the people, and
yet notwithstanding he boasts that he was chosen of God, to have the chief
room. Moreover he compares the Church or the state of the kingdom by an
usual metaphor to a building. He calls those which have the government, the
masters of the work, and he makes himself the principal stone, whereon
the whole building is stayed and grounded. Fot that is meant by the head of the
corner. Therefore this is David's comfort, that howsoever the Captains have
rejected him, so that they would not grant him even the basest place, yet did
not their wicked and ungodly endeavors hinder him from being extolled by God,
unto the highest degree of honor. But that was shadowed in David, which God
would have perfectly expressed in the Messiah. Therefore Peter deals very
aptly, when as he cites this testimony, as being spoken before of Christ as
they knew full well that it did agree properly to him. Now we know to what end
Peter did cite the Psalm: to wit, least the Elders and Priests being
unadvisedly puffed up with their honor, should take to themselves authority
and liberty to allow or disalow whatsoever they would. For it is evident that
the stone refused by the chief builders, is placed by Gods own hand in the
chief place, that it may support the whole house. Furthermore this happens not
once only, but it must be fulfilled daily: at least it must seem no new
thing, if the chief builders do even now also reject Christ. Whereby the vain
boasting of the Pope is plainly refuted, who makes his boast of the bare
title, that he may usurp whatsoever is Christ's. Admit we grant to the Pope
and his horned beasts that which they desire, to wit, that they are appointed
to be ordinary pastors of the Church, they can go no farther at length, than
to be called chief builders with Annas and Caiphas. And it is evident what
account ought to be made of this title, which they think is sufficient to mix
heaven and earth together. Now let us gather out of this place some things which
are worth the noting. For as much as they are called master builders who have
government of the Church, the name itself puts them in mind of their duty.
Therefore let them give themselves wholly to the building of the temple of God.
And because al men do not their duty faithfully as they ought, let them see
what is the best manner of building aright, to wit, let them retain Christ for
the foundation: that done, let them not mix straw and stubble in this
building, but let them make the whole building of pure doctrine: 1. Cor. 3.12.
as Paul teaches in 1. Cor. 3. Whereas God is said to have extolled Christ,
who was rejected of the builders, this ought to comfort us, when as we see even
the Pastors of the church, or at least those which are in great honor, wickedly
rebel against Christ, that they may banish him. For we may safely set light by
those visures, which they object against us: so that we need not fear to give
Christ that honor, which god does give to him. But if he wink for a time, yet
does he laugh at the boldness of his enemies from on high, whiles they rage and
fret upon earth. Furthermore though their conspiracies be strong and guarded
with all aides, yet must we always assure our selves of this, that Christ his
honor shall remain safe and sound. And let the fruit of this confidence ensue
also, that we be valiant and without fear in maintaining the kingdom of
Christ, whereof God will be an invincible defender, as he himself affirms.
We have already spoken of Peter his constancy, in that, one simple man,
having such envious judges, and yet having but one partner in the present
danger, shows no token at all of fear, but does freely confess in that
raging and furious company, that thing which he knew would be received with
most contrary minds. And whereas he sharply vpbraideth unto the^ that
wickedness which they had committed, we must fet from hence a rule of speech,
when we have to deal with the open enemies of the truth. For we must beware of
two faults on this behalf, that we seem not to flatter by keeping silence or
winking: for that were treacherous silence, whereby the truth should be
betrayed. Again, that we be not puffed up with wa^tonnes, or immoderate heat,
as men's minds do oftentimes break out more then they ought, in contention.
Therefore let us use gravity in this point, yet such as is moderate: let us
chide freely, yet without al heat of railing. We see that Peter did observe
this order. For at the first he gives an honorable title: when he is once
come to the matter he inueigheth sharply against them: neither could such
ungodliness as theirs was, be concealed. Those which shall follow this example,
shall not only have Peter to be their guide, but also the spirit of God.

Or more particular.
12 Neither is there salvation in any other. He passes from the species unto
the Or general.
Genus: and he goes from the corporal benefit, unto perfect health. And
assuredly Christ had showed this one token of his grace, to the end he might be
known to be the only author of life. We must consider this in all the
benefits of God, to wit, that he is the fountain of salvation. And he meant
to prick and sting the Priests with this sentence, when as he says that there
is salvation in none other save only in Christ, whom they went about to put
quit out of remembrance. As if he should say, that they are twice damned, who
did not only refuse the salvation offered them by God, but endeavor to bring
the same to naught, and did take from all the people the fruit and use thereof.
And although he seems to speak unto deaf men, yet does he preach of the
grace of Christ, if peradventure some can abide to hear: if not, that they may
at least be deprived of all excuse by this testimony.

Neither is there any other name. He expounds the sentence next going before.
Salvation (says he) is in Christ alone: because God has decreed that it
should be so. For by Name he means the cause or mean. as if he should have
said, For as much as salvation is in Gods power only, he will not have the same
to be common to us by any other means, then if we ask it of Christ alone.
Whereas he says under heaven, they do commonly refer it unto creatures: as if
he should say, that the force and power to save, is given to Christ alone.
Notwithstanding I do rather think that this was added, because men cannot
ascend into heaven, that they may come unto God. Therefore seeing we are so
far from the kingdom of God, it is needful that God do not only inuit us
unto himself, but that reaching out his hand, he offer salvation unto us, that
we may enjoy the same. Peter teaches in this place, that he has done that in
Christ, because he came down into the earth for this cause, Ephe. 4.10.
that he might bring salvation with him. Neither is that contrary to this
doctrine that Christ is ascended above all heavens. For he took upon him our
flesh once for this cause, that he might be a continual pledge of our
adoption. He has reconciled the father to us for ever by the sacrifice of his
death: by his resurrection he has purchased for us eternal life. And he is
present with us now also, that he may make us partakers of the fruit of
eternal redemption: but the revealing of salvation is handled in this place,
and we know that the same was so revealed in Christ, that we need not any
longer to say, Who shall ascend into heaven? Romans 10. And if so be this
doctrine were deeply imprinted in the minds of all men, Romans 10.6.
then should so many controversies concerning the causes of salvation, be
soon at an end, wherewith the Church is so much troubled. The Papists
confess with us, that salvation is in God alone, but by and by they forge to
themselves infinite ways to attain unto the same. But Peter calls us back
unto Christ alone. They dare not altogether deny that we have salvation given
us by Christ: but whiles they feign so many helps, they leave him scarce the
hundredth part of salvation. But they were to seek for salvation at the hands
of Christ, wholly: for when Peter excludes plainly all other means, he
places perfect salvation in Christ alone, and not some part thereof only.
So that they are far from understanding this doctrine.

13 And when they saw the boldness of Peter and John, and considered that they
were men unlearned and ignorant, they wondered, and they knew them that they
had been with Jesus.

14 And when they saw the man that had been healed standing with them, they
could not say against it.

15 But when they had commanded them to depart out of the council, they
consulted among themselves,

16 Saying, What shall we do to these men? For a manifest sign is done by them,
and it is openly known to all the inhabitants of Jerusalem, neither can we
deny it.

17 But least it be noised any farther among the people, in threatening let us
threaten them, that they speak not hence forth to any man in this name.

18 And then when they had called them, they charged them that they should not
speak at all, or teach in the name of Jesus.

13 Here may we see an evil conscience: for being destitute of right and
reason, they break out into open tyranny, the hatred whereof they had assaied to
escape. Therefore he does first declare that they were convict, that it may
appear that they did war against God wittingly and willingly like Giants. For
they see a manifest work of his in the man which was healed, and yet do they
wickedly set themselves against him. In as much as they know that Peter and
John were men unlearned and ignorant, they acknowledge that there was somewhat
more than belongs to man, in their boldness: therefore they are enforced to
wonder whether they will or no. Yet they break out into such impudency, that
they fear not to seek some tyrannous means to oppress the truth. When as
they confess that it is a manifest sign, they condemn themselves therein of
an evil conscience. When they say that it is known to al men, they declare
that passing over God, they have respect unto men only. For they bewray their
want of shame thereby, that they would not have doubted to turn their back, if
there had been any color of denial. And when they ask what they shall do,
they make their obstinate wickedness known unto al men. For they would have
submitted them selves unto God, unless devilish fury had carried them away
to some other purpose. This is the Spirit of giddines and madness, wherewith
God does make his enemies drunk. So when they hope shortly after that they
can by threatenings bring it about, that the fame shall go no farther, what can
be more foolish? For after they have put two simple men to silence, shall the
arm of God be broken?

17 In threatening let us threaten. Here may we see what a deadly evil power,
void of the fear of God is. For when that religion and reverence which ought,
does not reign, the more holy the place is which a man does possess, the more
boldly does he rage. For which cause we always take good heed that the wicked
be not preferred unto the government of the Church. And those which are called
to this function, must behave themselves reverently and modestly, least they
seem to be armed to do hurt. But and if it so happen they abuse their honor,
the Spirit declares there as in a glass, what small account we ought to
make of their decrees and commandments. The authority of the Pastors has
certain bounds appointed, which they may not pass. And if they dare be so
bold, we may lawfully refuse to obey them, for if we should, it were in us
great wickedness: as it follows now.

19 And Peter and John answered them, and said, Whether it be right in the
sight of God, to hearken unto you rather than to God, judge ye.

20 For we cannot but speak those things which we have seen and heard.

21 And when they had threatened them, they let them go finding nothing for
which they might punish them, because of the people: for all men did glorify
God, because of that which was done.

22 For the man was more then forty years old, on whom the sign of healing
was showed.

23 Furthermore when they were let go, they came to their fellows, and told
them whatsoever things the Priests and Elders had said.

19 Whether it be right. Let us remember to whom they make this answer. For
this council did undoubtedly represent the Church: yet because they do abuse
their authority, the Apostles say flatly that they are not to be obeyed. And
(as men use to do in an evident matter) they refer over the judgment unto
their adversaries, for a reproach unto them. Furthermore it is worth the noting,
that they set the authority of God against their decrees. Which thing should
be done out of season, unless they were the enemies of God, who
notwithstanding were otherwise the ordinary Pastors of the Church. Moreover
the Apostles express a farther thing also, to wit, that the obedience which
men use toward evil and unfaithful Pastors, howsoever they hold the lawful
government of the Church, is contrary to God. This question does the Pope
answer pleasauntly, because he says that all those things are divine
oracles whatsoever it has pleased him to blunder out unadvisedly. By this
means the danger of contrariety is taken away. But the Bishops can challenge
no more at this day, than God had given then to the order of the Priests.
Therefore this is a toy too childish, That they can command nothing but that
which is agreeable to the commandment of God. Yea rather the thing it self
declares evidently, that there shall be no conflictt then, if they suffer
their vain and unbridled lust to raunge freely, having vanquished and
renounced the doctrine of Christ. Therefore by what title soever men be called,
yet must we hear them only upon this condition, if they lead us not away
from obeying God. So that we must examine all their traditions, by the rule of
the word of God. We must obey princes and others which are in authority: yet
so, that they rob not God (who is the chief king, Father, and Lord) of his
right, and authority. If we must observe such modesty in politic
gouernemente, it ought to be of far more force in the spiritual government
of the Church. And least according to their wonted pride, they think that
their authority is abated, when God is extolled above them, Peter draws them
away from such pleasant flattering of themselves, telling them that this matter
must be determined before the judgment seat of God, for he says plainly,
Before God: because howsoever men be blinded, yet will God never suffer any man
to be preferred before him. And sur^ly the Spirit did put this answer in the
mouth of the Apostles, not only to the end he might repress the furiousnes of
the enemies, but that he might also teach us what we ought to do, so often as
men become so proud, that having shaken off the yoke of God, they will lay
their own yoke, upon us. Therefore let us then remember this holy authority
of God, which is able to drive away the vain smoke of all man's excellency.

20 For we cannot. Many things which are found out by hearing and seeing, may
yea ought to be concealed, when as the question is concerning the redeeming of
peace. For this is a point of discourtesie and of wicked stubbernes to move
and raise a tumult about unnecessary matters: but the Apostles do not speak
generally, when as they say they cannot but speak. For the Gospel of Christ is
now in hand, wherein consists both the glory of God, and the salvation of
men. It is an unmeet thing and sacrilegious wickedness, that the same should
be suppressed by prohibitions and menacings of men: for God commands that his
Gospel be preached: especially sythence they did know that they were chosen to
be witnesses and preachers of Christ: and that God had opened their mouth.
Therefore whosoever puts them to silence, he indeuoreth so much as he is
able to abolish the grace of God, and for do the salvation of men. And if so be
it a prohibition so wicked do stop our mouths, woe be to our sluggishnes.
Now let all men see what confession God requires at their hands: least when
they keep silence because of men, they hear a fearful voice proceed out of
the mouth of Christ, whereby their unfaithfulness shall be condemned. And as for
those which are called unto the office of teaching, let the^ be terrified with
no threatenings of men, with no color of authority, but let them execute that
office which they know is enjoined them by God. 1. Cor. 9.
Woe be unto me, says Paul, if I preach not the Gospel: because the function
is committed unto me. Neither ought we only to set this commandment of god
against the tyrannous commandments of men: but also against all lets which
Satan does oftentimes thrust in, to break off and hinder the course of the
Gospel. For we have need of a strong buckler to bear off such sore assaults,
which all the ministers of Christ do feel but howsoever we speed this is a
brazen wall, that the preaching of the Gospel does please God: and therefore
that it can for no cause be suppressed.

21 And when they had threatened them. And here is the end of sedition, that the
wicked cease not to breath out their fury, yet are they bridled by the secret
power of God, so that they cannot tell how to do any hurt. How is it that
being content with threatenings, they do not also rage against their bodies,
save only because the power of God does bind them as a chain? Not that the
fear of God does prevail with them for it is the regard of the people alone
which hinders them: but the Lord does bind them with his bonds though they be
ignorant thereof. Luke comme^deth unto us the providence of God in preserving
his children: and though it be hidden from the wicked, yet we may behold the
same with the eyes of faith. Furthermore the wonderful Counsel of God does
show it self here, in that the glory of Christ is furthered by those which
are his most deadly enemies. For whereas the Priests do assemble themselves
together, it is not done without great rumor. All men wait for some rare and
singular event: the Apostles depart being let loose and acquitted. Therefore
the adversaries are not only vanquished: but they confirm the Gospel against
their will. Notwithstanding it is expedient for us to mark again, that the
faithful do so get the victory, that they are always humbled under the
cross. For they are threatened again and straightly charged that they teach not
henceforth in the name of Christ. Therefore they do not so get the upper
hand, that they do not triumph, save only under the reproach of the cross.
Whereas Luke says that they did all glorify God, he notes the fruit of the
miracle now the second time: although it may be that they were not all brought
unto the perfect end. For that man which is touched with the feeling of the
power of God, and does not come unto Christ, neither has his faith confirmed
by the miracle, he staieth as it were in the midway. Yet this was some thing,
though not al, that the power of God was acknowledged in the healing of the
man, so that the adversaries being ashamed, did cease off from their fury, or
at least give back a little.

23 Furthermore when they were let go. It shall appear by and by to what end
they declared to the other disciples, what things had befallen them: to wit,
that they might be the more emboldned and encouraged by the grace of God
hereafter: secondly that they might arm themselves with prayer against the
furious threatenings of their enemies. And thus must the children of God do,
one must prick forward another, and they must join hand in hand that they may
vanquish the common adversary fighting under Christ's banner. They consider with
themselves what dangers hang over their heads, to the end they may be the more
ready to enter the same: although they see their enemies prease sore upon
them: yet least it should grieve them to have a new cumbat ever now and then:
they assure themselves that they shall be invincible through the same power of
God whereby they gat the victory before. And it is to be thought (although Luke
make no mention thereof) that the Apostles being contented with their former
answer, did not contend with those furies: and yet we must persuade our
selves that they were not so forgetful of their former constancy, that they
did submit themselves unto their ungodly decree like slaves.

24 And when they had heard it, they lift up their voice unto God with one
accord, and said, Lord, thou art God which have made heaven and earth, the sea
and all things which are therein.

25 Which by the mouth of thy servant David have said, Why have the heathen
raged together, and why have the people imagined vain things?

26 The Kings of the earth have stood up, and the Rulers have met together:
against the Lord, and against his Christ.

27 For of a truth Herod, and Pontius Pilate, with the Gentiles and the people
of Israel, have come together in this city against thy holy son Jesus,

28 That they might do whatsoever thine hand, and thy counsel had decreed
before to be done.

29 And now O Lord, look upon the threatenings of these men, and grant unto
thy servants that they may speak thy word with boldness.

30 Reaching out thine hand to this end, that healing, and signs, and wonders
may be done by the name of thy holy son Jesus.

31 And when they had prayed, the place moved wherein they were assembled. And
they were all filled with the holy Ghost, and did speak the word of God with
boldness.

We are taught by this example, what is our duty to do, when our
adversaries do imperiously threaten us. For we must not carelessly laugh in
time of danger, but the fear of danger ought to drive us to crave help at
the hands of God: and this is a remedy to comfort and set us up on foot,
least being terrified with threatenings, we cease off from doing our duty.
Here is a double fruit of this history: that the disciples of Christ do not
jest when they hear that their enemies do threaten them so sore, and prease
so sore upon them, as careless and sluggish men use to do, but being touched
with fear, they fly to seek help at the hands of God: And again they are
not terrified, neither yet do they conceive any immoderate fear: but crave of
God invincible constancy with right godly petitions.

24 Thou art God which have created. Although this title and commendation of
Gods power be general, yet it ought to be referred unto the present matter.
For they do in such sort acknowledge the power of God in the creation of the
whole world, that they apply the same therewith all unto the present use. In
like sort the Prophets do oftentimes commend the same, to the end they may
redress that fear which troubles us when we behold the power of our enemies.
Secondly they add thereunto the promise: and they make these two the
foundations of their boldness, wherewith they are emboldned to pray. And
surely our prayers are such as they ought to be, and acceptable to God, only
then, when as staying our selves upon his promises and power, we pray with
certain hope to obtain that for which we pray. For we cannot otherwise have
any true confidence, unless God do will us to come unto him, and promise that
he is ready to help us: and secondly unless we acknowledge that he is able
enough to help us. Wherefore let the faithful exercise themselves in this
double meditation, so often as they address themselves unto prayer.
Furthermore we gather hereby after what sort we ought to consider the creation
of the world: to wit, that we may know that all things are subject to God,
and ruled by his will: and when that the world has done what it can, there
shall no other thing come to pass but that which God has decreed: yea that
the wantonness of the wicked is monstrous, as if the clay should resist the
potter. For this is the meaning of the faithful generally, that whatsoever
dangers hang over their heads, yet can God prevent the same infinite ways, for
as much as all things are in his hand: and that he is able to make all the
parts of heaven and earth (which he has created) to obey him.

25 Who by the mouth of David. They discende now unto the second member, that
they ask nothing but that which God has promised to perform. So that his
will and power are joined together, to the end they may fully assure
themselves that they shall obtain their requests. And because the kingdom of
Christ is now in hand, they make rehearsal of the promise of God, wherein he
promises to defend and maintain the same: so that when the whole world has
done what it can to overthrow it, yet all shall be in vain. And herein
appears their Godliness, and sincere zeal, in that they are not so much
careful for their own safety, as for the increasing and advancement of the
kingdom of Christ.

Why have the Gentiles raged? We must needs confess that David speaks of
himself: who after he was chosen King by the Lord, and anointed by Samuel the
Prophet, did enjoy the kingdom very hardly, because his enemies withstoode
him on every side. We know how the rulers and people conspired together
with Saul and his family: after that, the Philistines and other strange
enemies, despising him when he came newly to the crown, made war against
him, striving who should begin first. Wherefore it is not without cause that
he complains that the Kings rage and take counsel together, and that the
people do go about diverse things. Nevertheless because he knew that God was
the supporter of his kingdom, he derideth their foolish enterprises, and
affirms that they are vain. But because his kingdom was established, that
it might be a figure or image of the kingdom of Christ; David does not stay
still in the shadow it self, but he apprehends the body: yea the holy
Ghost, as the Apostles do truly repete the same, does sharply reprove the
foolish and ridiculous madness of the world, in that they dare invade the
kingdom of Christ which God had established, as well in the person of David as
of Christ himself. And this is a singular comfort, in that we hear that God
is on our side, so long as we go on warfare under the kingdom of Christ.
Hereby we may persuade our selves, that howsoever al men both high and low,
do wickedly conspire together against this kingdom, yet shall they not
prevail. For what is all the whole world compared with God? But we must first
of all know and assure our selves of this, that God will continually maintain
the kingdom of his son, whereof he himself is the author, so that we may
set his decree (which shall not be broken) against the rashness of men: that
trusting to the help of his hand, we may not doubt to despise all the
preparation and furniture of men though they be terrible. And he does
diligently express how great the bands of the adversaries are: he says that
they attempt all things, he does also reckon up their counsels, least any of
these do terrify us. Furthermore when as the Psalm teaches, that the
kingdom of Christ shall endure, maugre the heads of the adversaries, it does
also show that there shall be many adversaries, which shall endeavor to
overthrow the same. On the one side he brings in the Kings raging, on the
other, the people all out of quiet. Whereby he signifies that all estates
shall be offended at it. And no marvel, because nothing is more contrary to
the flesh, than the Spiritual sword of the Gospel, wherewith Christ kills
us, Romans 15.16.
that he may make us obey him. Therefore we must know this for a suertie, that
the kingdom of Christ shall never be quiet in the world least when we are to
fight, we be afraid as at some strange thing.

26 Against the Lord and his Christ. The Spirit teaches by this word that al
those do make war against God, which refuse to submit themselves to Christ.
They do full little think this oftentimes. Notwithstanding it is so, that
because God will reign in the parson of his son alone, we refuse to obey
him, so often as we rebel against Christ. As the Lord himself says in John,
He which honoreth not the son, honoreth not the father. Wherefore let the
hypocrites profess a thousand times, that they mean nothing less, than to
make war against God, yet shall they find this true, that God is their open
enemy, unless they embrace Christ with his gospel. The use of this doctrine
is double: For it armeth us against all the terrors of the flesh, because we
must not fear, lest they get the victory of God, which withstand the Gospel.
Again we must beware, lest through the contempt of godly doctrine, we
advance our selves against God to our own destruction.

27 Have met together in this city. They declare that this prophecy was
proved to be true by the event, to the end they may believe the same more
assuredly. For the sense is, Lord thou have spoken it, and we have in truth
tried the same to be true. And they call to mind that which was done four
years before or there about. In like sort it is expedient for us to apply the
events of things which are foretold, to the confirmation of our faith. But
because it might seem that the matter fell out far otherwise then, than the
Psalm pronounces, for as much as they raged not in vain, neither were the
assaults of the enemies frustrate, when they had put Christ to death: and
their violence went further afterward after a fearful manner: the faithful
remove this offense: and say that the enemies could do no more, than God had
appointed. Therefore howsoever the wicked did suppose that Christ was quite
taken away by death, and did now vainlie triumph, yet the faithful confess
that their rage was all but vain. But here may a question be moved, why he
calls them the Gentiles and people of Israel, seeing there was but one body.
I think that the diversity of countries is noted in this place, out of which
the Jews came together to the feast: as if they should have said, that the
Jews which were borne in diverse places, having made as it were a concourse,
did assault the kingdom of Christ, yet was their fury frustrate and of none
effect.

Thy holy son Jesus. The Grecians use the very same word which I
translated even now, Servant, when mention was made of David: for they call
pa^da sometimes a servant, sometimes a Son. And David i^ so called, because he
was the minister of God, as well in ruling the people, as in the office of a
Prophet. But this word Son agrees better with the person of Christ, unless
some man had leifer take it thus, that Luke meant to allude unto that
likelihood which David had with Christ, when he sets down a word of a
double signification. It is expressly said that God has anointed his son,
that that may truly agree to him which is in the Psalm: for in anointing
him, God made him a King. And yet we must note therewithal what manner
anointing this was: for we know that he was not anointed with visible oil,
but with the holy Ghost.

28 That they might do. I have already declared to what end this is spoken:
that the kingdom of Christ was so far from being ouerrunne by that
conspiracy, that in truth it did then flourish. Notwithstanding herein is
contained a singular doctrine, that God does so govern and guide all things by
his secret counsel, that he does bring to pass those things which he has
determined, even by the wicked. Not that they are ready willingly to do him
such service, but because he turns their counsels and attempts backward: so
that on the one side appears great equity and most great righteousness: on
the other appears naught but wickedness and iniquity. Which matter we have
handled more at large in the second Chapter. Let us learn here by the way,
that we must so consider the providence of God, that we know that it is the
chief and only guider of all things, which are done in the world: that the
devil and all the wicked are kept back with Gods bridle, least they should
do us any harm: that when they rage fastest, yet are they not at liberty to
do what they list, but have the bridle given them, yet so far forth as is
expedient to exercise us. Those men which do acknowledge the foreknowledge of
God alone, and yet confess not that all things are done as it pleseth him, are
easily convict by these words, That God has appointed before that thing to be
done which was done. Yea Luke being not contented with the word counsel,
adds also hand, improperly, yet to the end he might the more plainly declare
that the events of things are not only governed by the counsel of God, but
that they are also ordered by his power and hand.

29 And now O Lord. They do very well extend that unto themselves, which they
cited concerning Christ: because he will not be separated from the Gospel:
yea what trouble so ever befalls his members, he applies that to his own
person. And they crave at Gods hands that he will beat down the cruelty of
the adversaries: yet not so much for their own sake, that they may live
quietly and without vexation, as that they may have liberty to preach the
Gospel in all places. Neither was it for them to desire a life which they
might, spend idly, having forsaken their calling. For they add, Grant unto
thy servants O Lord, that they may speak boldly. And by the way we must
note this speech, that the Lord would behold their threatenings. For seeing
it belongs properly to him, to resist the proud and to throw down their
lofty looks: the more proudly they brag and boast, the more do they
undoubtedly provoke God to be displeased with them, and it is not to be doubted
but that God being offended with such indignity and cruelty, Esai. 37.14. and
17.
will redress the same. So Ezechias to the end he may obtain help in
extremity, declares before the Lord the arrogancy of Senacherib and his
cruel threatenings. Wherefore let the cruelty and reproaches of our enemies
rather stir up in us a desire to pray, than any whit discourage us from going
forward in the course of our office.

30 Grant unto thy servants. Seeing that one miracle had stinged the enemy so
sore, how is it that these holy men do desire to have new miracles done daily?
Therefore we gather that hence, which I have already touched, that they make
so great account of the glory of God, that in comparison of this, they set
light by all other things. They have respect unto this one thing only, that
the power of God may be declared by miracles, which the godly ought always to
desire, although the adversaries burst, and all the whole Hell do rage. The
same must we also think of boldness to speak. They knew that the wicked
could abide nothing worse, than the free course of the Gospel: but because
they know that that is the doctrine of life, which God will have published
whatsoever befall: they do undoubtedly prefer the preaching thereof before
all other things, because it is acceptable to God. And we are taught that we
do then rightly acknowledge the benefits of God as we ought, if by this
occasion we be pricked forward to pray, that he will confirm that which he
has begun. The Apostles had showed a token of heroical fortitude: now
again they pray that they may be furnished with boldness. So Paul desires
the faithful, to pray unto the Lord that his mouth may be opened, whereas
notwithstanding his voice did sound every where. Therefore the more we
perceive our selves to be helped by the Lord, let us learn to crave at the
hands of God that we may go forward hereafter: Ephesians. 6.19.
and especially seeing the free confession of the Gospel is a singular gift of
God, we must continually beseech him to keep us in the same.

31 And when they had prayed. Luke declares now that God did not only hear
this prayer, but did also testify the same by a visible sign from heaven. For
the shaking of the place should of it self have done them small good: but it
tends to another end, that the faithful may know that God is present with
them. Finally it is nothing else but a token of the presence of God. But the
fruit follows, for they are all filled with the holy ghost, and endowed with
greater boldness. We ought rather to stand upon this second member. For
whereas God did declare his power then by shaking the place, it was a rare and
extraordinary thing: and whereas it appeared by the effect, that the Apostles
did obtain that which they desired, this is a perpetual profit of prayer,
which is also set before us for an example.

32 And the multitude which believed had one heart and one soul: and no man
did say that any of those things which he possessed was his own: but they had
al things common.

33 And the Apostles did bear witness of the resurrection of Jesus Christ
with great power, and great grace was upon them all.

34 For there was none among them that lacked. For so many as possessed lands
or houses, selling them, they brought the price of those things which were
sold.

35 And they laid it at the feet of the Apostles. And it was distributed to
every man according as he had need.

36 And Ioses which was surnamed of the Apostles Barnabas (which is the son
of comfort) a Leuite, of the country of Cyprus,

37 Whereas he had land, he sold it, and brought the money, and laid it at
the Apostles feet.

32 And the multitude. In this place there are three things commended: that
the faithful were all of one mind: that there was a mutual partaking of
goods amongst them: that the Apostles behaved themselves stoutly in auouching
the resurrection of Christ. He says that the multitude had one heart: because
this is far more excellent than if a few men should have a mutual consent.
And heretofore he has declared that the Church did grow to be about five
thousand. And now he says that there was wonderful concord in so great a
multitude, which is a very hard matter.

And surely where faith bears the chief sway, it does so knitte the hearts
of men together, that all of them do both will and nill one thing. For discord
springs hence, because we are not all governed with the same Spirit of
Christ. It is well known that by these two words heart and soul, he means
the will. And because the wicked do oftentimes conspire together to do evil:
this concord was laudable and holy therefore, because it was amongst the
faithful.

And no man did say. This is the second member: that they coupled this love
with external benefits. But we shall see anon, after what sort they had their
goods common. This is now worth the noting in the text of Luke, that the
inward unity of minds goes before as the root, and then the fruit
follows after. And surely even we ought to observe the same order, we must
one love another, and then this love of ours must show it self by external
effects. And in vain do we boast of a right affection, unless there appear
some testimony thereof in external offices. Moreover Luke declares there
with all, that they were not of one mind for any respect of their own
commodity, for as much as the rich men, when they did liberally bestow their
goods, sought nothing less then their own gain.

33 And with gre^^ power. This third member appertains to doctrine. For Luke
does signify that the zeal which the Apostles had to preach the Gospel, was
so far from being diminished, that they were rather endewed with new power.
Whereas he does only name the resurrection of Christ, it is Synecdoche: for
this part is put for the whole Gospel. But Luke makes mention of the
resurrection alone, because it is as it were the furnishing or fulfilling of
the Gospel: and secondly because they had endured a sore cumbat for the same,
and the Sadduces were sore grieved at it, who did then bear the chief swindge.

And great grace was. He signifies that this served not a little to the
spreading abroad of doctrine, in that by healping the poor so bountifully,
they found favor at the hands of strangers. For he says that they were
beloved, because they were beneficial. Therefore there is a showing of a
reason in these words, No man amongst them did lack. Although we need not
doubt of this, but that their honesty, and temperaunce, and modesty, and
patience, and other virtues did provoke many to bear them good will. He
declares afterward, after what sort they had their goods common, which he
had touched before: to wit, that the rich men soulde their lands and houses,
that they might relieve the poverty of the poor.

34 For so many as were. Although this be an universal speech, yet is it all
one as if it were indefinite. And assuredly it is to be thought, that there
were many which did not diminish their possessions, and that may be gathered
out of the text. For when he speaks of Ioses anon, undoubtedly he meant to
note a notable example passing all others. Therefore he says, that all did
that which many did every where. Neither does this disagree with the common
use of the Scripture. Again he means not that the faithful sold all that
they had, but only so much as need required. For this is spoken for
amplifications sake, that the rich men did not only relieve the poverty of
their brethren of the yerelie revenue of their lands, but they were so
liberal, that they spared not their lands. And this might be, though they did
not rob themselves of all, but only a little diminish their revenues. Which
we may gather again out of the words of Luke: For he says that this was
the end, that no man might lack. He shows further that they used great
wisdom: because it was distributed as every man had need. Therefore the goods
were not equally divided, but there was a discrete distribution made, lest any
should be out of measure oppressed with poverty. And peradventure Ioses has
this commendation given him by name, because he sold his only possession. For
by this means he passed all the rest. Hereby it appears what that means,
that no man counted any thing his own, but they had all things common. For no
man had his own privately to himself, that he alone might enjoy the same,
neglecting others: but as need required, they were ready to bestow upon al
men. And now we must needs have more then iron bowels: seeing that we are no
more moved with the reading of this history. The faithful did at that day
give abundantly even of that which was their own: but we are not only
content at this day wickedly to ^^ppresse that which we have in our hands, but
do also rob others. They did simply and faithfully bring forth their own:
we invent a thousand subtle shifts to draw all things unto us by hook or by
crook. They laid it down at the Apostles feet: we fear not with
sacrilegious boldness to convert that to our own use, which was offered to
God. They sold in times past their possessions: there reigns at this day an
insatiable desire to buy. Love made that common to the poor and needy, which
was proper to every man: such is the unnaturalness of some men now, that they
cannot abide that the poor should dwell upon the earth, that they should have
the use of water, air, and heaven. Wherefore these things are written for our
shame and reproach. Although even the poor themselves are too blame for some
part of this evil. For seeing goods cannot be common after this sort, save
only where there is a godly agreement, and where there reigns one heart and
one soul: many men are either so proud, or unthankful, or slothful, or
greedy, or such hypocrites, that they do not only so much as in them lies,
quite put out the desire to do well: but also hinder ability. Galath. 6.9.
And yet must we remember that admonition of Paul, that w^ be not weary of
well doing. And whereas under color of this, the Anabaptists and fantastical
men have made much ado, as if there ought to be no civil property of goods
amongst Christians, I have already refuted this folly of theirs in the second
Chapter. For neither does Luke in this place prescribe a law to all men,
which they must of necessity follow, whiles that he reckons up what they
did, in whom a certain singular efficacy and power of the holy Spirit of God
did show it self: neither does he speak generally of all men, that it can
be gathered that they were not counted Christians which did not sell all that
they had.

CHAP. V.
1 ANd a certain man, called Ananias, with Sapphira his wife sold a
possession.

2 And he kept back part of the price, his wife knowing thereof: and bringing
part, he laid it at the Apostles feet.

3 And Peter said, Ananias, why has Satan filled thine heart, that thou
should lie to the holy Ghost, and keep back part of the price of the
ground?

4 Did it not remaining remain to thee? and being sold, was it not in thy
power? how is that thou have put this thing in thy heart? thou have not lied to
men, but to God.

5 And when Ananias heard these words, falling, he yielded up the ghost, and
there came great fear upon all those which had heard these things.

6 Furthermore the young men which were present, gathered him up, and carrying
him out, they buried him.

1 Those things which Luke has reported hitherto, did show that that
company which was gathered together under the name of Christ was rather a
company of Angels than of men. Moreover that was incredible virtue, that the
rich men did dispoile themselves of their own accord, not only of their
money, but also of their land, that they might relieve the poor. But now he
shows that Satan had ine^nted a shift to get into that holy company: and
that under color of such excellent virtue. For he has wonderful wiles of
hypocrisy to insinuate himself. This way does Satan assault the Church, when
as he cannot prevail by open war. But we must specially in this place have
respect unto the drift of the holy Ghost. For in this history he meant to
declare, first how acceptable singleness of heart is to God, and what an
abomination hypocrisy is in his sight: secondly how greatly he allows
the holy and pure policy and government of his Church. For this is the
principal point, the punishment wherewith God punished Ananias and his wife.
As the greatness thereof did at that time terrify them all, so it is unto us
a testimony, that God cannot abide this unfaithfulness, when as bearing a
show of holiness where there is none, we do mock him contemptibly. For if
having weighed all the circumstances, we be desirous to know the sum: Luke
condemns no other fault in Ananias, than this, that he meant to deceive God
and the Church with a feigned offering. Yet there were more evils packed under
this dissimulation: the contempt of God, whom he fears not, though he knew
his wickedness: sacrilegious defrauding, because he keeps back part of
that which he professed to be holy to God: perverse vanity and ambition,
because he vaunteth himself in the presence of men without having any respect
unto Gods judgment: want of faith, because he would never have gone this way
to work, unless he had mistrusted God: the corrupting of a godly and holy
order: furthermore the hypocrisy it self was a great offense of it self. The
fact of Ananias did bear a goodly show, although he had given only the half
of his land. Neither is this a small virtue, for a rich man to bestow the
half of his goods upon the poor: Prou. 15.8.
but the sacrifices of the ungodly are an abomination to God: neither can any
thing please him, where the singleness of heart is wanting. Luke. 21.2.
For this cause is it that Christ makes more account of the two mites offered
by the widdowe, than of the great sums of others, who of their great heaps
give some part. This is the cause why God does show an example of such sharp
punishment in Ananias. Now let us note every point by it self. He laid it
at the feet of the Apostles. Lo what ambition does. Ananias is ashamed, not
to be accounted one of the best. therefore although he be greedy of money,
yet to the end he may purchase a name amongst men, he depriueth himself of
some part of his riches. In the mean while he does not consider that he
lies and disceiueth in the sight of God, and that God will punish this lie. So
it is, that he honoreth the Apostles feet, more than Gods eyes. Wherefore we
must take good heed, that when we do well, we do not seek to be praised
of the by standers: and it is not without cause that Christ says, that it is
profitable for us, when we give our alms, to have the left hand ignorant of
that which the right hand does.

3 And Peter said. How did Peter know Ananias his fraud and purloigning?
undoubtedly by the revelation of the Spirit. Therefore Luke signifies unto
us, that the Apostles did after a sort represent gods person, and supply his
room. If the Spirit of God by the mouth of a mortal man, do so sore urge an
hypocrite, being otherwise painted with the beautiful color of virtues, how
shall the reprobate abide the voice of god himself, with the sound of the
trumpet, when they shall appear before his judgment seat? Furthermore Peter
points out the cruelnes and horriblenes of the offense, by his question, when
he says, that Satan had filled the heart of Ananias. For there is no man whose
heart is not pricked with the pricks of Satan: and all men are also many ways
tempted, yea these temptations pearce into their minds: but where Satan
possesses the heart, he reigns in the whole man, having as it were expelled
God. This is a sign of a reprobate, to be so addicted and given over to Satan,
that the Spirit of God has no place. That which follows afterward concerning
lying, may have a double sense: either that he did falsely bear a show of the
Spirit, or that he lied against the Spirit. And in deed it is word for word
Mentiri Spiritum: but forasmuch as the Greek word Pseudesthai is joined with a
double accusative case, and that does better agree with the text, I am rather
of this mind, that Ananias is reprehended, because he did lie falsely to the
holy Ghost. Which he confirms shortly after, when he vpbraideth this unto
him, that he has lied unto God and not unto men. Wherefore we must take great
heed, that hypocrisy reign not in us: which has this wickedness proper to it,
to go about to disceiue God, and as it were, cornicum oculos configere, to go
about to make blind those which are most wise: which cannot be without a
disloyal and unseemly mock. Wherefore it is not without cause that Peter
says, that where this comes to pass, the heart is possessed of Satan. For
who durst (unless he were void of reason) so blaspheme God? Therefore Peter
asks him as of some wonder: because such blindness is horrible.

4 Did it not remaining. This amplifieth the offense, because he sinned being
enforced by no necessity. For seeing it is no just or lawful excuse to have
been provoked by some other means, how much worse is it to run headlong unto
wickedness willingly, and as it were of set purpose to pull down Gods
vengeance? We gather out of this, that no man was enforced to sell his goods or
lands. For Peter says that Ananias had free liberty to keep both his land
and his money: because in the second member the field which was sold, is taken
for the price it self. Therefore he should nevertheless have been counted
faithful, though he had kept that which was his own. Whereby it appears
that they are me^ destitute of their right wits, who say that it is not lawful
for the faithful to have any thing of their own.

Thou have not lied to men but to God. Although the words be diversely
construed, yet do I not doubt but that this confirms the former sentence.
For hypocrites do so inwrappe themselves in so many shifts, that they think
they have nothing to do with God. And Peter speaks thus expressly, because
Ananias had deceived the church. Mat. 18.20.
But he ought to have considered, that, Where two or three be gathered
together in the name of Christ, he is present there as the chief governor: yea
he ought to have behaved himself no other wise in that assembly, than if he
should have seen God with his eyes. For seeing that God will reign in the
Church, if we give him any reverence, we must reverence that rule and
government religiously, which he exercises by his word. The Apostles were
in deed men, but not private men: 1. Cor. 3.16. and 17. and 6.19
because God had put them in his steed. Furthermore we must note, that he
says that he lies to God, who does lie to the holy Ghost. For the divinity
of the holy ghost is manifestly proved by this form of speech. In like sort
Paul says: Ye are the Temples of God, because his Spirit dwells in you. 1.
Cor. the third Chapt.

2. Cor. 2.16.
5 When Ananias heard these things. The death of Ananias does in deed declare
and prove the force of the word, which Paul does highly extol: to wit, that it
is the savor of death unto death to those which perish. 2. Cor. 2. He speaks
in deed of the spiritual death of the soul, but there was a visible sign in
the body of Ananias, of that punishment which cannot be seen with the eyes
of men. He was not slain with sword, by force, nor hand, but was stricken
dead with the only hearing of the voice. When we hear this, let the
threatenings of the Gospel terrify us, and humble us in time, least we also
feel the like effect. For that which is spoken of Christ, Esaie. 11.4.
He shall slay the wicked with the breath of his mouth: does not only
appertain to the head of the wicked, but also to every member. For those
which refuse the salvation offered in his word, it must needs be deadly to
them, which was naturally wholesome. But and if any man do think it an absurd
thing, that the Apostle did punish Ananias bodily: First I answer that this
was an extraordinary thing: secondly that this was one of the gifts of the
Spirit: as it appears by the 12. 1. Cor. 12.10
Chapter of the first to the Corinthians. After which sort we shall afterward
see Elimas the sorcerer stricken with blindness by Paul. Therefore Peter did
nothing which was impertinent to his function, Acts. 13.8.
when he did in time shoot that dart which the holy Ghost had given him. And
whereas some think that this was too cruel a punishment, this comes to
pass, because weighing Ananias his sin in their own and not in Gods
balance, they count that but a light offense which was a most great and
grievous crime, being full of such hainos offenses, as I have already
declared. Othersome do think that this was nothing so, because they see many
hypocrites escape scotfree daily, which do no less mock God than did Ananias:
yea, because they themselves being most gross contemners of God, are yet
notwithstanding unpunished for their wickedness. But as God has powered out
visible graces upon his Church in the beginning, to the end we may know that
he will be present with us by the secret power of his spirit: yea he showed
that openly by external signs, which we feel inwardly by the experiment of
faith: so he declared by the visible punishment of two, how horrible a
judgment remains for all hypocrites, which shall mock God and his Church.

And there came great fear. This was the Lords purpose, by punishing one, to
make the rest afraid, that they might reverently beware of all hypocrisy. And
that which Luke says, that they feared, does appertain unto us also. For
God meant to give all ages a lesson at that time: that they may learn to deal
syncerely and uprightly with him. In the mean season, the punishment of this
wicked person ought to have encouraged the godly hereafter to consecrate
their goods more freely to God and the poor: because they might gather how
precious alms was in the sight of God, seeing the profaning thereof was so
punished.

7 And there was passed about the space of three hours, when his wife came in
ignorant of that which was done.

8 And Peter said unto her, Tell me, sold ye the field for so much? she
answered, Surely for so much.

9 And Peter said unto her, What is this that ye are agreed together to tempt
the Spirit of the Lord? Behold the feet of those which have buried thy husband
are at the door which shall carry thee out.

10 And immediately she fell down at his feet, and gave up the ghost.
Furthermore when the young men came in, they found her dead, and when they had
carried her out, they buried her beside her husband.

11 And there came great fear upon all the Church, and upon all which heard
these things.

7 That punishment wherewith the Lord punished Sapphira, contains no new
thing: save only that the example was the more confirmed thereby. And it came
to pass by the certain providence of God that the Church should see apart
the obstinate wickedness and treacherous mind of them both. Seeing their faults
were alike they might hau^ ben known together: but this was more fit and
profitable for the church, that they might severally bewray their own
wickedness. Neither was Sapphira provoked by the sight of her husband to
dissemble (as it falls out oftentimes) that the fault could be ascribed to
shamefastnes: but of her own accord, and being pricked forward by no other
means, she seems to be no better than her husband. Moreover their
wickedness in lying was like, for as much as she may see by Peter his
interrogation that that their guile was found out.

8 Tell me. We see that God does not by and by punish her, but first he tries
the matter thoroughly: least he should send vengeance upon any save the
obstinate, and those which will not be pardoned. For although Sapphira did know
that the matter was hidden, she ought to have been stricken with this question
of Peter, no otherwise than if she had been cited to appear before the
judgment seat of God. She has a time granted her to repent: yea this is as it
were a pleasant inuiting unto repentance. But she in holding on so carelessly,
does declare that she was incurable: because she is touched with no fear
of God. And hereby are we taught to labor diligently to bring sinners into
the way. For the spirit of God keeps this moderation: but when as
stubbernnesse and the stubberne contempt of God is added unto the offense, it
is now high time to punish. Therefore those men are too arrogant who are
displeased with the immoderate rigor of God. It is rather our duty to
consider how we shall in time to come stand before the judgment seat of God.
Although this is too much to despise his holy power and majesty, if we will
have him mocked freely without any punishment. Moreover, so many circumstances
which before I have gathered, do sufficiently prove that Ananias and Sapphira
were not worthy of one death only. For first of all hypocrisy is of it self
very abominable to God: secondly whereas they are determined to lie unto God,
this arises of great contempt in that they do not reverence and fear Christ
being the chief governor of those amongst whom they were, it is ungodliness
joined with impudency: because, so they can escape shame and reproach amongst
men, before whom they were determined to vaunt and brag, they pass not to
deny their manifest wickedness unto God. Whereas they do stubbernly deny
their offense, this does as it were, make up the heap and measure. And whereas
innumerable hypocrites do no less mock God and the church daily, who
notwithstanding are not punished with death, I have already showed why this
ought to seem to be no inconvenient thing. For as much as God is the only
judge of the world, it belongs to him to punish every man at his pleasure,
when and how it seems good to him. Wherefore we may not prescribe unto him a
certain mean and manner of punishment. But the greatness of the spiritual
judgment which is as yet hid, has been set before us, in the bodily
punishment of two, as in a mirror. For if we consider what it is to be cast
into eternal fire, we shall not judge that this is the greatest evil and
punishment of all, to fall down dead before men. Look the tenth chapter of the
first to the Corinthians. 1. Cor. 10.5.


9 To tempt the spirit. He utters the same thing in other words which he had
said before: to wit, that they did mock god irreverently and contemptiblie. But
he said that they tempted the Spirit, because they had cunningly packt their
fraud, as if the Spirit of God were not the knower of the hearts. For it was a
point of too great carelesnes, seeing the one made the other privy to their
wickedness, to make their match between themselves, having as it were excluded
God. For the scripture says that God is tempted, either when his power is
taken from him, or the knowledge of all things is denied him. Furthermore, he
means that Spirit which governed the Church by the Apostles. For when Christ
says, When the Spirit comes, he shall judge the world, he notes no other
kind of authority than that which he exercises by the ministry of the church.

11 And there came fear. He says again, that the punishment of one, was a
lesson for all. But he plainly expresses in this place a double fear. He
says that the church feared, because the faithful do never so perfectly fear
God, but that they profit yet more, being admonished by his judgments.
Therefore by all those punishments which we read have been laid upon men in
times past, and do daily see to be laid upon them, does God call us back from
the enticements and liberty of sinning. For our flesh must be brideled ever
now and then after this sort: because one bridle will scarce serve the turn.
There was another manner fear in the strangers, yet no such fear as brought
them unto the sincere worship of God, yet notwithstanding it was such as caused
them to give the glory to God.

12 And by the hands of the Apostles were done many signs and woonders
amongst the people. And they were all with one accord in the porch of Solomon.

13 And of the other durst no man ioyn himself to them: but the people
magnified them.

14 And the multitude of those that believed in the Lord both of men and
women, grew more and more.

15 So that they brought forth the sick into the streets, and laid them in
beds and couches, that at the least way the shadow of Peter as he came, might
shadow some of them.

16 And a multitude of the next cities came together to Jerusalem, bringing
their sick and those which were vexed with unclean spirits, which were all
healed.

12 He returns to miracles of another sort, which are more proper to the
gospel: to wit, whereby Christ does not only declare his power, but also his
goodness: to the end he may allure men unto himself with the sweetness of
his grace. For he came to save the world, and not to condemn it. Therefore
whereas the sick are healed, and other are delivered from devils, these
benefits done to the body, do represent the spiritual grace of Christ: and
therefore they agree with his natural office, that I may so speak. That
fearful sign which was showed in Ananias and Saphira, came to pass
exraordinarilie. Luke says that the church was increased by miracles, because
they serve for faith (as we have said) to prepare some, to confirm other
some. Whereby that is proved again, which I have said else where, that miracles
must never be separated from the word. Luke shows the multitude of miracles
by this, in that the sick were brought forth every where, that they might
be healed. For God meant thus to set forth the Gospel of his son,
especially at the beginning: that he might for a certainty testify to the
Jews, that that restoring of all things was present, which was so often
promised, and in which all their hope was reposed, as they themselves did
pretend, and make semblance. It is welknowne that Couches were certain little
beds in which the men of old were wont to rest at noone. Because they might
the more easily carry them out, they laid the sick in them.

And they were all with one accord. He signifies unto us that they were wont
to meet together at certain hours, not only for doctrine and prayers sake,
but that they might win other unto the Lord, as occasion was given. For
every man lived at home at his own house, but they had their meetings there,
as assuredly no body of the Church can otherwise continue. For if every man
will be his own teacher, and pray apart by himself, and if there be no meetings
and assemblies, how excellently so ever the Church be ordered and appointed,
yet must it needs decay and come to naught. He says that they were all of one
mind, to the end we may know that they did all keep that order willingly, that
no man was so disordered, as to keep himself at home, neglecting the public
assembly. Wherein they showed a token not only of modesty, but also of
constancy For they could not do this without danger, seeing the place was so
famous. For which cause the agreement of them all to put them selves in hazard,
was so much the more worthy of commendation.

13 And of other durst no man. This was the second fruit of the miracles, in
that those which believed not, being convict with the excellent power of God,
dare not despise the Apostles, but are rather enforced to reverence the church.
Yet that might seem an absurd thing, that being terrified with miracles, they
fly from God and his people. I answer, that they were let through their
own fault from coming. And it is not to be doubted, but that God does call us
unto himself by miracles. Therefore whosoever they be that go not so far,
as willingly to embrace the grace of God which shines in them, they are let
and hindered by their own perverse and evil conscience. Yet this is some
fruit, in that God wringeth some fear out of them: although Luke does ascribe
this not only to the miracle, but rather comprehends all together which
might seru^ to the increasing of the dignity of the Church. For all things
were so ordered, that there shined there a certain divine majesty: for they
did no less differ from the other, than Angels from men. For there is a
certain secret majesty in holy discipline, and in sincere godliness, which
does even fast bind the wicked whither they will or not. But we know not at
this day of what sort the same is, yea rather we cause our selves to be
despised together with the Gospel, through our profane liberty of evil living.
Furthermore the punishment of Ananias and his wife, did not a little terrify
the wicked, and keep them from breaking in unadvisedly into the company of
those men, where God had showed himself so sharp a judge. Yet we must note,
that he speaks of men which were indifferent, in this place, and of those
which were not of the worst sort. For there were at that time many at Jerusalem,
whom neither the reverence of signs, neither yet of the angelical holiness of
the godly could move. Therefore Luke means moderate men, in whom there was
some feed of the fear of God: like as we see at this day certain, who^ the
vanity of the world keeps back from submitting their necks unto the yoke of
Christ: yet because they smell out some divine thing in our doctrine, they dare
not despise the same: yet we may see also in what deadly grins Satan
insnareth all those which have not the spirit of Christ, that they do not only
fear to provide for themselves, but purposely avoid those remedies which are
offered them unto salvation. They both see and allow those things which are
both holy and profitable, and yet notwithstanding they are either carried
headlong unto things which are worse, or else they wex drowsy in their
filthiness.

15 The shadow of Peter as he came. The Papists abuse this text, not only to
the end they may commend feigned miracles which they say are done at the graves
of martyrs: but also that they may boast of their relics. Why (say they)
shall not the grave or garment, or the touching of the bones of Peter have
power to heal, as well as his shadow had this power? I answer, we must not
by and by think that that is right, which Luke says was done by ignorant
men, and those which knew not the pure faith. Yet we have a more certain
answer in readiness than this. For the apostles were endued with such power
for this cause, because they were ministers of the gospel. Therefore they used
this gift in as much as it served to further the credit of the gospel: yea God
did no less show forth his power in their shadow than in their mouth. Those
miracles whereof the Papists babble, are so unlike to these, that they are
rather altogether contrary. For this is the end of their miracles, to lead
away the world from Christ unto Saints.

17 And the highest priest rose and all that were with him, that is to say, the
sect of the Sadduces, and were filled with Or, Indignation.
zeal.

18 And they laid hands upon the Apostles, and put them in the common prison.

19 But the Angel of the Lord opened the door of the prison in the night
season, and bringing them out, said:

20 Go, and standing speak in the temple unto the people, all the words of
this life.

21 When they heard this early in the morning, they entered into the temple, and
taught. But when the highest priest came, and those that were with him, they
called a council, and all the whole Senate of the children of Israel and sent
into the common prison, to fetch them.

22 But when the Ministers came, they found them not. Therefore they returned
and told, saying:

23 The prison truly found we shut with all diligence, and the keepers standing
at the door, but when the prison was opened, we found none within.

24 When the chief priest and the captain of the temple and the priests heard
these sayings, they doubted of these things, what this would be.

25 Furthermore a certain man coming told them, saying: Behold, the men
whom ye had put in prison, stand in the temple teaching the people.

26 Then the captain going with the ministers, brought them without violence.
For they feared the people, least they should be stoned.

17 Luke has hitherto declared that the church was wonderfully increased, that
it was furnished with diverse gifts, that it excelled in miracles: finally that
the kingdom of Christ did flourish there by all means: now he begins to show
that the fury of the wicked was kindled with these things, so that they raged
sorer afresh. Whence we may gather with what blind fury and rage Satan drives
the^ forward, when as they are so little terrified with such evident power of
God, that they run headlong more boldlye, and with greater force, and bend
all their force as it were to overthrow the very heaven. As this so great
blindness is a horrible punishment of almighty GOD so ought it to teach al
men to submit themselves betimes to god, least that they themselves being taken
with the Spirit of giddiness (whiles they run against the hand of God) be
broken in pieces with the same. Nevertheless let us know that God will so
increase his Church with spiritual good things, that yet notwithstanding he
suffers the same to be vexed of the wicked. Therefore we must always be ready
for the cumbate. For our estate at this day is not unlike to theirs. Especially
the knowledge of the gifts of God, whereby he testifies that he is present
with us, ought to encourage us, least the fury and boldness of the wicked do
terrify and dismay us. For this is no small comfort, when we know that God is
present with us.

Which were with him. He means those which were most familiar; and the
nighest lincked in friendship with the chief Priest, whose counsel he was
wont to use: and whom he had, being as it were gathered and culled out of the
whole order, not for judgment, or discretion, but for the love of his faction:
as they did then contend among themselves shamelesly, like mortal enemies.
Furthermore Luke says again, that the Sadduces did bear the greatest swinge
at that day: to the end we may know that the government was then confused
with horrible wastnesse: when as such a sect could bear rule. But God suffered
the Synagogue to be drowned in such extreme reproach, after that he had
separated his Church from it, to the end they might have the less excuse, who
dispising the gospel, did continue in such a sink of filthiness. In the mean
season what did enforce and drive forward those swine, who were touched with no
care of the life to come, save only mere ambition, and desire to keep that
lordship and pre-eminence, which they had gotten?

They were filled with zeal. I had leiffer keep the greek word still
(especially seeing it is common enough otherwise) then to translate it Emulation
or indignation. For he speaks generally of the perverse and violent force,
wherewith hypocrites are carried and inflamed to maintain their superstitions.
Whereby it appears, what account God makes of zeal, and what praise it
deserves, when as it is not governed by reason and wisdom: that is, when it
is not lead and guided by the Spirit of God. We see at this day those men
moved and stirred with devilish fury, who will be counted the most devout of
al men: who rage horribly to shed innocent blood. Nevertheless let us note,
that he speaks not in this place of an unadvised or blind zeal, which was
in many of the Jews, as Paul affirms, but we understand rather a whot and
unbridled violence. For although the wicked be accused of their own
consciences, because they wittingly resist godliness: yet do they disceiue
themselves with a false show of zeal, because it is lawful to prevent new
things. So at this day almost in all popery, they boast only of zeal,
whereas notwithstanding they are zealous for their belly. But admit we grant
that that is true which they pretend, how can this excuse the heat of their
cruelty, whereunto they are enforced by their blindness? as if this were a
chief virtue, to grant liberty to their wrath, to be avenged of that which
displeases them. But this was former in order: to make a difference between
good and evil, least any thing be dissolved unadvisedly.

19 The angel of the Lord. The Lord brought the Apostles out of prison, not
because he would rid them quite out of the hands of their enemies: for he
suffered them afterward to be brought back again, and to be beaten with
rods. But he meant to declare by this miracle that they were in his hand and
tuition, to the end he might maintain the credit of the gospel: partly, that
the church might have another confirmation thereby: partly that the wicked
might be left without excuse. Wherefore we must not hope always, nay we must
not always desire that God will deliver us from death: but we must be content
with this one thing, that our life is defended by his hand so far as is
expedient. In that he uses the ministry of an angel, in this he does
according to his common custom. For he testifies every where in the
scriptures, that the angels are ministers of his goodness toward us. Neither is
that a vain speculation. For this is a profitable help for our infirmity,
that we know that not only god does care for us, but also that the heavenly
spirits do watch for our saftie. Again, this was no small pledge of Gods love
toward us, that the creatures of al other most noble are appointed to have
regard of our saftie. The angel opens the prison in the night: because he
would not work the miracle, when the wicked might see him: although he would
have the same being wrought, known by the event it self.

20 Speak in the Temple. This is the end of their deliverance, that they
employ themselves stoutly in preaching the Gospel, and provoke their enemies
courageously, until they die valiantly. For they were put to death at length
when the hand of God ceased, after that they had finished their course. But now
the Lord opens the prison for them, that they may be at liberty to fulfill
their function. That is worth the marking, because we see many men, who after
they have escaped out of persecution, do afterward keep silence, as if they
had done their duty toward God, and were no more to be troubled: othersome
also do escape away by denying Christ. But the Lord does deliver his children,
not to the end they may cease off from the course which they have begun, but
rather that they may be the more zealous afterward, the apostles might have
objected, It is better to keep silence for a time, for as much as we cannot
speak one word without danger. We are now apprehended for one only sermon, how
much more shall the fury of our enemies be inflamed hereafter, if they shall
see us make no end of speaking? But because they knew that they were to live
and to die to the Lord, they do not refuse to do that which the Lord
commanded. So we must always mark what fu^ction the Lord inioyneth us. There
will many things meet us oftentimes, which may discourage us, unless being
content with the commandment of God alone, we do our duty, committing the
success to him.

The words of this life. A singular commendation of the Gospel, Romans 1.17.
that it is a lively doctrine, bringing salvation unto men. For the
righteousness of God is revealed unto us in it, and in it Christ offers
himself unto us with the sacrifice of his death, with the Spirit of
regeneration, with the earnest of our adoption. And this is spoken expressly to
the Apostles, to the end they may the more courageously enter all manner
cumbates for the Gospel, forasmuch as they hear that they are ministers of
eternal salvation. The demonstratiue is added for the more certainty: as if
the angel did point out life with his finger: as assuredly we need not to seek
the same far, when we have the word in our mouth, and in our heart, unless
peradventure some man had rather take it by hypallage, the words of this life,
for these words: which I do not reject: yet that former sense me thinks is
better. For it was a new revelation of Christ, wherein they had life present.

21 And when the chief priest came. The chief Priest calls all the council
together now, least if giving the honor to his own sect, he omit others, and
be not able to bear the burden. Therefore he is enforced by fear to call the
multitude together, notwithstanding they observe diligently and straightly the
form of law. The elders are called, who did govern, that nothing may be done,
but according to the sentence and authority of the council. Who would not have
hoped for a moderate end, seeing they began thus. And surely they pretend what
color they can, least they seem to oppress the truth violently and
tyrannously. But when they hear that the Apostles teach in the temple,
howesoeuer they know that they came not out by deceit of man, but
myraculouslye, yet they hold on still in their purpose, where appears
together with the ungodliness of behavior, and contempt of God, horrible fury
and want of reason. Therefore the beautiful colors of right and equity do
never so cover hypocrites, but that they do at length bewray their wickedness.
They must needs certainly gather by all circumstaunces that it is the work of
God, that the prison was opened, yet they do not dout openly to rage against
god. These things are also meet for our time. We know how proudly the Papists
boast of that maxim of theirs: That lawful councels must be obeyed, because
they represent the church. Moreover they call those lawful councels, and they
will have them so accounted, wherein nothing is wanting touching the external
form. And such a council was this whereof Luke speaks in this place: and
yet notwithstanding we know that it was gathered, to put out the name of
Christ. For although the priests did then creep in unto honor, by subtlety
or by inordinate suit to win the favor of men, or by other wicked policies,
or whether they burst in unto the same by bribery, or murder, yet the dignity
of the priesthood did continue as yet, until Christ was revealed. There was
in the assembly of the elders a representing of the Church: but whereas the
truth of God is not sought, all outward appearance is nothing else but a mere
visure. Therefore it is in vain for the Papists to cover their abominations
with the shadow of this buckler. Because it is not sufficient for those to be
gathered together who are rulers of the Church, unless they do this in the
name of Christ. Otherwise for as much as it is an usual policy of Satan, to
transfourme himself into an angel of light, we will grant him as fit a
covert under the title of the Church, as he can wish.

He brought them without violence. 2. Cor. 11.14.
We have spoken somewhat before of the captain of the Temple. For I do not
think that it was lawful for the Jews to set and appoint whom they would to
rule the temple, but that the President of the Province did appoint one to have
the government of the temple. And he says that they were brought without
violence, that is, that they were not drawn violently: least any tumult
should arise. So that whereas they neither fear nor reverence God, they are
afraid of men. The Apostles also do show their modesty in that, that whereas
they are guarded with a great number of men, yet do they suffer themselves to
be led away by the officers, least they should be authors of any tumult.

27 And when they had brought them, they set them before the council: and the
chief priest asked them,

28 Saying, Did not we in commanding, command you, that you should not teach
in this name^. And behold ye have filled Jerusalem with your doctrine, and
you will bring the blood of this man upon us.

28 The chief Priest lays two crimes to the charge of the Apostles. For he
accuses them of contumacie or stubbornness, because they obeyed not the
decree of the Council. In the second member he bewrays an evil conscience,
or at least he shows that he handeled rather a private business then any
public cause. For he complains that the Apostles will cause the Priests and
the Scribes to be hated for the death of Christ. Behold therefore, what that
is which netteleth them, because they fear the revenge and punishment of
wicked murder. He pretends at the first doctrine: but we may gather out of
the end, that he was not so careful for doctrine. In the mean season he
accuses the Apostles of sedition: for he takes that for a thing which all men
for the most part did grant: that Christ was put to death justly.
Notwithstanding this is the pincipall point of the accusation, that they did
not obey the commandment of the Priests. It was an heinous offense not to
obey the chief Priest: how much more heinous was it then to despise the whole
order? But the chief Priest does not consider what is his duty toward God
and the Church: he abuses his authority tyrannously, as if the same were not
under any laws. As the Pope deals with us at this day. For seeing that he
takes to himself an unbridled authority and government, he fears not to
condemn us for Schismatikes, so soon as he sees us refuse his decrees. For
he catches at these sentences. He which despises you, despises me: Luke.
10.16
and thereupon he concludes that we will rebel against God. But if he will be
heard as the ambassador of Christ, he must speak out of the mouth of Christ.

Now forasmuch as he does manifestly play the minister of Satan: he boroweth
authority without shame and color, of the name of Christ: Yea the very form
of speech which the chief Priest uses, does prove, how carelessly spiritual
tyrants, who vsurp such authority and Lordship as is not subject to the word
of God, dare grant liberty to themselves to attempt whatsoever pleases them.
With a commandment (says he) have we commanded. Whence comes such strait
rigor, save only because they think that all that must be received without
exception which they shall command?

29 And Peter and the Apostles answering, said, We ought rather to obey God
than men.

30 The God of our fathers has raised up Jesus, whom ye slew, hanging him upon
a tree.

31 Him God has lifted up with his right hand, to be a prince and a savior,
to give repentance to Israel, and remission of sins.

32 And we are his witnesses of these Or things
words: and the holy Ghost also, whom God has given to them that obey him.

33 And when they heard these things, they were cut in sunder, and would slay
them.

29 This is the sum of their answer, It is lawful for them, nay they ought to
prefer God before men. God commands us to bear witness of Christ: therefore
it is in vain for you to command us to keep silence. But I have declared
before in the third chap. when this sentence takes place, that we ought rather
to obey God than men: God does set men over us in such sort with power, that he
keeps still his own authority fafe and sound. Therefore we must obey rulers so
far, that the commandment of God be not broken. Whereas power and authority is
lawfully used, then it is out of season to make comparison between god and man.
If a faithful pastor do command or forbid out of the word of god, it shall be in
vain for me^ which are stubborn to object, that we ought to obey god. For god
will be heard by man. Yea man is nothing else but an instrument of God. If a
magistrate do his duty as he ought, a man shall in vain say that he is contrary
to god, seeing that he dissenteth in nothing: yea rather the contrary rule is
then in force. We must obey gods ministers and officers if we will obey him.
But so soon as rulers do lead us away from the obedience of God, because they
strive against God with sacrilegious boldness, their pride must be abated,
that God may be above all in authority. Then all smokes of honor vanish away.
For God does not vouchsafe to bestow honorable titles upon men, to the end
they may darken his glory. Therefore if a father being not content with his own
estate, do ass^y to take from God the chief honor of a father, he is
nothing else but a man. If a King, or Ruler, or Magistrate, do become so
lofty, that he dimisheth the honor and authority of God, he is but a man. We must thus think also of Pastors. For he which goes beyond his
bounds in his office (because he sets bimself against God) must be
dispoyled of his honor, least under a color or visure he deceive. The office
of a Pastor is very excellent, the authority of the Church is great, yet so
that no parre of Gods power and, Christ's mastershippe be diminished. Whence
we may easily gather that the pride of the Pope is ridiculous, who, when as
he treads underfoot the whole kingdom of Christ, and does set himself openly
against God, will yet nevertheless lie hid under the name of Christ.

30 The God of our fathers. They discende unto the matter whereof they are to
speak, that they may declare that they made small account of the commandment
of the priests, not without cause ne yet unadvisedly. For (as I have already
said) the comparison between God and man takes no place save only when there
is some contrariety. Therefore they prove by this, that they are enforced by
the fear of god to refuse the commandment of the priests: because God
commands that which they forbid. Therefore first of all they say that God had
raised up Christ, after the common custom of the scriptures. For this speech
is common, that God raised up prophets or judges, or rather ministers, whom
he determined to use unto some great work: which imports as much as that
all excellency of nature is weak, unless God do furnish those with singular
gifts, whom he prefers unto any excellent office. Peradventure also they
allude unto that famous place of Moses, Deuteronomy. 18.15 before. 3.22
which Peter cited in his first sermon. They cite the God of the fathers by
name as the author, that they may declare that they bring in no new form of
religion, neither yet will they enforce upon the people any new God. For they
were to make answer to that false slander, that they went about to lead away
the people from the law and the prophets. Not that they allow all that worship
which was used by the fathers, as profane men are content with this only
argument, that the fathers taught thus, that they do all things according to
the custom and decree of their ancestors: but the Apostles speak in this
place of these fathers with whom God has made his covenant, who followed right
and pure doctrine, who embraced the promise of salvation with true faith,
finally, who had their beginning of the heavenly Father, and who through the
only begotten son of God were the children of God together with their
posterity.

Whom ye. In this member the apostles declare unto them plainly thar they were
the enemies of god, who would have the chief honor given the^ as unto the
governors and prelates of the church. Whereupon it follows that they are
unworthy even of the smallest authority. Although there is also a prevention,
being a token of boldness, when as he speaks of that thing boldly and
freely, which they did account a shameful thing to wit, least any part of
Christ's glory should seem to be diminished because he suffered a slanderous
death upon the cross: as if it had been said, You have slain him: neither
was your cruelty satisfied with a plain and common death: for he was hanged
upon a tree. But neither could death extinguish his power, neither could that
shame and reproach which he suffered amongst you, take away his honor.
Therefore the calling of God continues firm and stable. Therefore as the
Apostles hit the priests in the teeth with that wickedness and heinous offense
which they had committed: so they prevent by a granting to express the manner
of the reproachful death which Christ suffered, least the authors of the
wickedness triumph, as having gotten the victory.

31 Him has God lifted up. Therefore the Apostles do signify that whatsoever
the wicked do go about, it did not hinder and keep back Christ from
fulfilling his function which was enioined him by his father. The right hand of
God is taken for his power. Neither is the same Metaphor used in this place,
which we had before chap. 2. and which is common elsewhere, when Christ is said
to be lift up unto the right hand of the father: but the meaning of this place
is, that Christ which was slain by the hand of me^, was lift up on high by the
power of God, that he might bear rule over angels and men. And this seems
secretly to be set against all the enterprises of Satan and the world: as if
he should say that they shall have no good success, because they shall never
climb so high, as to hinder the hand of God, whereby he has both wrought
mightily already in his only begotten Son, neither will he ever cease to
work. Yet the end is added also, that he may be a captain and Savior. For so
often as god did put his people in hope of salvation, he was wont to promise a
prince or a king, by whose hand he would restore all things. The Apostles do
testify that this principality was granted to Christ. Notwithstanding they
do more plainly express his office by the other adiunct. The su^me is this,
that Christ is placed in the highest degree of honor, that he may govern the
people of god: and not that only, but that he may show him self to be a saving
captain, or the author of salvation.

To give repentance. They show in this place how Christ reigns to save the
people: to wit, when he brings his own to repentance, and does reconcile them
unto God through the remission of sins. Furthermore we know that the sum of
the gospel is contained in these two things. Wherefore the Apostles do not
only stand upon the defense of their cause, but they preach the office of
Christ plentifully, that they may win even some of the mortal enemies of
Christ, if it may be. Furthermore, we have declared before, what the word
repentance does signify: to wit, that it is an inward turning of man unto god,
which shows it self afterward by external works. For Christ gives us the
Spirit of regeneration for this cause, that he may renew us inwardly: to the
end that a new life may afterward follow the newness of the mind and heart.
And if it belong to Christ to give repentance, then it follows that it is
not a thing which is in man's power. And surely seeing that it is a certain
wonderful reformation or fashioning again, which makes us new creatures,
repayreth in us the image of God, brings us out of the bondage of sin, unto
the obedience of righteousness: it is a thing as impossible for men to convert
themselves, as to create themselves. Repentance is I grant a voluntary
conversion, but whence have we this will, save only because God changes our
heart, Ezec. 11.19
that it may he made fleshie of a stony heart: flexible of hard and
stubborn: and finally, right of wicked? And this comes to pass when Christ
regenerateth us by his Spirit. Neither is this given in a moment, but it must
be increased daily during our whole life: until we be fully joined to God:
which shall be then, when we have put off our flesh. This is in deed the
beginning of repe^ta^ce when a man who before was turned away from God,
renounceth the world, and himself, and does purpose to lead a new life. But
because when we have entered the way, we are far from the mark, we must
needs go forward continually. We have both, through the benefit of Christ.
For as he begins repentance in us, so does he also give us perseverance.
This is an inestimable grace: but it should do us but a little good, unless
it were coupled with forgiveness of sins. For Christ does both find us the
enemies of God at the first, and also there are always vices remaining in us,
which cause disagreement between him and us: so that he may justly be offended
with us, rather than merciful unto us. And therein does our righteousness
consist, if God do not impute our sins unto us. Therefore this latter grace
must never be separated from the former. Yea rather the Gospel shall be lame
and corrupt, unless it consist upon these two members, that is, unless men
be taught, that they are reconciled to God by Christ, by the free imputation
of righteousness, and that they are fashioned again unto newness of life by
the Spirit of regeneration. So that we understand briefly how we must
obtain salvation in Christ.

32 And we are his witnesses. After that they have declared that their doctrine
came from god, they descend now unto the other part: that they speak as they
were commanded by god, least they seem to attempt any thing unadvisedly. For
this also was a necessary defense: as it is for all the ministers of the
Gospel: to wit, that they make this openly known to all men, that they teach
nothing but that which they have received of God. Secondly, that they are
called hereunto, so that they cannot avoid the necessity of teaching unless
they will resist God. Luke puts words in this place in steed of things,
according to the Hebrewe phrase. Although if any man had rather understand it
of the speech it self, I do not deny but that it may be so. The sum is,
seeing they are brought forth by God to be witnesses, they may not give back,
but they must publish that which he has commanded.

And also the spirit. They confirm their calling by the effect. For this was as
a seal to approve their doctrine, seeing that God gave the holy Spirit to
those which believed. For as much as it appeared manifestly by this that he
allowed the faith of the Gospel, and it was acceptable to him. In that they
say, to those which obey him, I refer it unto Christ: as if they should have
said, Those which believe in Christ, are plentifully rewarded for their
obedience. Therefore god will have Christ obeyed wherefore eue^ our ministry
does please him in that thing. Yet here may a question be moved, seeing that we
have faith by the revelation of the spirit how is it said in this place that
the same is given after faith? I answer, that the gift of tongues, of
prophecy, of interpretation, of healing, and such like, are spoken of in this
place, wherewith god did beautify his Church. As Paul says, where he asks the
Galathia^s, Whether they received the Spirit by the law or by the hearing of
faith. Therefore the illumination of the spirit goth before faith, because it is
the cause thereof: Gal. 3.2. Mat. 13.12.
but there follow other graces afterward, that we may go forward: according to
that, To him that has, shall be given. And if we will be enriched ever now and
then with new gifts of the Spirit, let us hold out unto God the lap of
faith. But the reward wherewith our want of faith is rewarded at this day, is
far unlike, for the most part being destitute of the Spirit of God: does
neither see nor understand any thing.

33 They were cut insunder. The Priests ought to have been thoroughly moved
though they had had hearts of iron: but they burst. Whence we gather, that no
reasons can prevail with the reprobate, to bring the^ unto the obedience of
Christ. For unless God speak within, the outward doctrine shall be able to
do nothing else but to beat the ears. The Apostles were able so to overcome
their enemies, that they should not have had one word to say: but their
fury was so untamed and unbridled, that they do rather go mad. Yet we
must therewithal note the force of the word: because although the reprobate
are not thereby changed, that they may become better, yet it pearceth into
their hearts, so that it urges their consciences. For thence springs their
fury, because they saw themselves urged by their judge. They would gladly
mock all the Gospel: as they attempt whatsoever they can, that they may
count it as nothing: but there is in the same a certain hidden majesty, which
drives away mightily all their delicacie. And chiefly when they are cited by
the sound of the trumpet to appear before the judgment seat of GOD, then
appears their madness and rage.

34 And a certain Pharisee, named Gamaliel, a doctor of the law, precious to
all the people, rising in the council, commanded the Apostles to be carried
out a little space.

35 Then he said unto them, Men of Israel, take heed to your selves, what ye
intend to do touching these men.

36 For before these days there arose one Theudas, saying that he was some
great man, to whom consented a number of men about four hundredth: who
perished, and they were all scattered abroad which had obeyed him, and were
brought to naught.

37 After him arose one Judas of Galile, in the days of the tribute, and led
away much people after him, and he likewise perished, and al which had obeyed
him, were scattered abroad.

38 Now therefore I say unto you, Abstain from these men, and let them alone.
For if this counsel or this work be of men, it shall come to naught.

39 But if it be of god, you cannot destroy it: least at any time ye be found
to fight with God.

34 Luke shows now after what manner God brought to naught that fury of the
wicked. They were purposed to put the Apostles to death: Gamaliel stands up
amidst the^, to break off that mad consultation. Furthermore, he notes the
circumstaunces, to the end we may know how it could be, that one man could
prevail so much against so many. He says he was a Pharisee, which sect was
in great estimation as we know. He says that he was in price or honored
amongst the people: And they feared the people. Hereby it comes to pass
that they are the more afraid to do any thing contrary to his mind. So God
does oftentimes set sudden terrors against his enemies (when they look not
for them) to stay their violence. Furthermore Gamaliel commands the
Apostles to go aside, least they should be the more imboldned by his words.
For we must not think that he spoke thus, because he did allow the doctrine of
the Gospel, or that he meant to defend the same: but because he saw all the
rest enflamed with fury, he being a man moderate and courteous, does with
sober speech temper that excess. But if we consider all things well, this
judgment and opinion is unmeet for a wise man. I know that many count it as
an Oracle: but it appears sufficiently hereby that they judge amiss,
because by this means men should abstain from al punishments, neither were any
wicked fact any longer to be corrected. Yea all helps of life were to be
refused, which we cannot prolong one moment. Both things are true, that no
endeavors of men can destroy that which is of God: and that that which is of
men, is not so strong that it can stand. But he gathers amiss hence, that
men must sit still and say nothing in the mean season. We must rather mark
what God commands us to do: and he will have us to restrain wickedness. To
this end has he appointed Magistrates, and armed them with the sword. To this
end has he set Elders over his Church, to bring the froward in order, and that
they may not suffer sin licentiously to rage without punishment. Therefore it
is gathered amiss, that we must refrain from punishing because God is
sufficient of himself, to take away evils. Although his whole counsel is
such. Gamaliel wills the Scribes and Elders, to take heed that they make not
open war against God. And he speaks as it were touching a doubtful matter.
Whereby it appears that he has no certainty from the foundation: when as he
doubts in the quality of the cause, neither dare set down whether it be
good or evil, but does only command to defer it for a time, until the
cause appear more plainly. In sum, Gamaliel fetteth an evil consequent
from true grounds: because he applies that amiss unto the external office
and manner of doing, which ought to serve for faith only. On the other side,
let this be our Logike, That which is of God, must needs stand though all
the whole world say nay: therefore faith must stand without all fear against
all the assaults of Satan and men, seeing faith is underpropped and supported
with the eternal truth of God: although heaven fall, our salvation is safe,
which has God to be the author and keeper thereof: because God does defend
the kingdom of Christ, it can never be overthrown with any violence: because
the doctrine of the Gospel is grounded in God, howsoever men resist or shake
the same, yet shall it nevertheless continue firm. Again, although the
wicked attempt whatsoever they can, and seek al means to destroy the church,
although they furiously strive against Christ and his Church so much as they
are able, yet they shall not prevail, because it is the property of God to
bring the counsels of men to naught: and by this means does he punish their
rashness. We see that both members are well applied to faith. But in the mean
season there is no cause why the servants of Christ should be less diligent
in maintaining the truth: why they should suffer the Church to decay through
their fault: why they should carelessly wink at their wickedness who endeavor
to turn all things topsie turuie.

36 There arose one Theudas. If we credit Josephus, Gamaliel alters in this
place the true course of the history. For he reports that Judas Gaulanites,
who was borne in Gamala, at such time as Quirinius, or Cyrenius was Proconsull,
did raise a tumult with his adherentes, because they would not have their
goods taxed: and that Theudas at such time as Cuspius Fadus was Procuratour,
did boast that he was a Prophet of God. And Fadus was sent into Judea by
Claudius Caesar. The former history is recorded in the eighteenth book of
Antiquities: and the other in the twentieth. But I think that when Luke says,
After him was there one Judas: he meant not to note the course of time as if he
were the latter: but forasmuch as Gamaliel brought in two like examples, he
might put the one in place of the other, without having respect of time.
Therefore the word post, is as much as Moreover, or besides. Furthermore even
these examples wherewith Gamaliel confirms his opinion, do not sufficiently
agree with the present cause. For, because they did not by and by resist Judas,
that sedition which he had raised, was the occasion of many murders, and at
length he was vanquished with hand and weapon. Theudas also had done far more
hurt, unless he had been put to flight in time by Cuspius Fadus. But Gamaliel
has respect unto this alone, that men have unlucky success when as they
auance themselves unadvisedly: and that comes to pass by the just judgment
of God. But because the Priests refuse to harken when God gives them good
counsel, they are worthy to be made amassed by man with friuilous reasons,
wavering hither and thither through foolish perplexity. Furthermore if we
cast the time, we shall find that it was twelve years at least after the
death of Christ, before the Apostles were beaten. For unto the five years,
which remained of the government of Tyberius, we must add three and one
half, which Caligula reigned. Fadus was not sent by Claudius into Judea,
before the second or third year of his reign. Gamaliel rehearses not the
act within a day or two after. Therefore that space of time is complete whereof
I spoke. Wherefore the constancy of the Apostles was the more excellent, who
though they be so evil rewarded for those long pains which they had
endured, yet are they not discouraged, neither do they cease to hold on as
they had begun.

That he was some great man. Some books have, Saying that he was some body:
yet both carry one sense. For he boasted that he was such a Prophet, that he
could dry up Jordan, that those which were with him might go over dry
foot. Nevertheless we see how far Gamaliel is from true knowledge, who
compares the holy Ministers of Christ unto seducers and robbers: although he
mitigateth his words afterward, and inclining toward the better part, leaves
it indifferent, whether they have taken this matter in hand having God for
their author or not. Yet he speaks doubtfullie, because he provides only
for quietness, all inquiry being set a part. This is only to be allowed
in his speech, that he fears the wicked from wicked boldness, because there
is nothing more to be feared than to strive against God.

40 And they obeyed him:

And when they had called the Apostles, having beaten them, they commanded
them that they should not speak in the name of Jesus, and they let them go.

41 Therefore they went rejoicing from the face of the council, because they
were counted worthy, to suffer reproach for his name.

42 And they did not cease daily in the Temple, and in every house to teach and
preach Christ Jesus.

40 Having beaten them, they commanded. He says that Gamaliel his counsel
was allowed: yet the Apostles are beaten, and forbidden to preach. Hereby we
gather how great the rage of the enemies was, who being now pacified or at
least mitigated, do yet notwithstanding rage immoderatlie. And it appears
also what evil success those doubtful counsels have, wherein men alone are
respected, and the truth of God set aside. Gamaliel obteineth thus much, that
the lives of the Apostles may be saved, but in the mean season, the son of
God is blasphemed and slaundered in their person. The truth of the Gospel is
buried in eternal silence, so much as in the enemies lies. God surely does by
this means wonderfully spread abroad his word: yet that counsel cease not
to be evil. Which we must note for this cause, because most men at this day
do think, that they do not a little obey God, if they save the lives of
those men which come in hazard for the doctrine of the Gospel, or somewhat
appease the enemies who are otherwise bloody: in the mean season they are not
afraid to drive them unto the wicked denial of Christ, the confessing of whom
is far more precious in the sight of God, then the life of all men. But what
could they do, who casting away all care of godliness, go about to redeem
Gods favor with the duty of courtesy?

41 Then they went rejoicing. We must not think that the Apostles were so
senseless, but that they felt some shame, and did also lament, when they felt
the punishment: for they had not quite put of nature: but when they considered
the cause, then joy gat the upper hand. So the faithful must be two manner
of ways affectioned so often as they suffer persecution for the Gospel, they
must be touched with the bitterness of punishments, yet so that they
overcome this sorrow with spiritual joy. For they should have changed their
mind, and stricken sail by and by, unless they had been strengthened and
encouraged by that joy. And it is not to be doubted but that even death was
sweet and pleasant to Peter on this fashion, which notwithstanding the Lord
does testify shall be bitter unto him.

Let us therefore learn that we must wrestle with sorrow and care, that we
hold on courageously to suffer the cross, and that we bear the same when it
is laid upon us.

That they were counted worthy. This might seem at the first blush absurd,
in that Luke places honor in reproach: but the disagreement which is between
God and the world causes this, that that which is counted amongst men most
reproachful, excels in dignirie and glory in the sight of God and his
angles. We know that the kind of death which Christ suffered, was of all other
most shameful, and yet did he triumph most nobly upon the cross: so when we
are made like unto him, we may worthily boast that it is a point of singular
excellency, that we suffer rebuke in the sight of the world. Galat. 6.17.
Thus does Paul boast of the marks of Christ. For we must here respect the
cause, which does associat us unto Christ, who does not only swallow up the
shame of the world with his glory, but does also turn reproaches, slanders,
and mockes of the world into great honor. Wherefore it is no marvel that
there be so few found which are strong and stout to bear the cross,
because we are almost all drowned and overwhelmed with the sense of the flesh:
and there is scarce one amongst an hundredth which considers that the reproach
of Christ does far excel all the triumphs of the world, which is the only
matter of comfort. Wherefore we must use the greater diligence in thinking upon
this sentence: that we are at this day made partakers of the sufferings of
Christ, that we may be partakers of his glory.

42 They ceased not. Constancy did also accompany their joy. For how is it
that we are discouraged with persecution, save only because none lifts up
himself unto Christ, that he may in mind lay hold upon the fruit of
victory, and so be pricked forward unto patience? But that man which thinks
with himself that he is happy when he suffers for Christ's sake, shall
never faint, though he must suffer hard conflictes. Therefore the Apostles
are after a sort armed with stripes, so that they valiantly make haste unto
death. Therefore woe be to our daintiness, who having suffered a little
persecution, do by and by resign up the light to another, as if we were now
old worn soldiers.

CHAP. VI.
1 ANd in those days, when the number of the disciples grew, there arose a
murmuring of the Greeks against the Hebrews, because their widows were
despised in the daily ministry.

2 Therefore when the twelve had called unto them the multitude of the
disciples, they said or It is not good.
It does not please that we should serve tables, having left the word of God.

3 Therefore brethren, look out seven men of you, of known honestic, full of
the holy Ghost, and of wisdom, whom we will appoint over this business,

4 And we will give our selves unto prayer, and to the ministration of the
word.

5 The speech pleased the whole multitude: and they chose Stephen, a man full
of faith and the holy Ghost: and Philip and Prochorus, and Timon, and
Parmenas, and Nicolas a Proselyte of Antioch.

6 These did they set before the Apostles: and when they had prayed, they laid
their hands upon them.

1 Luke declares here upon what occasion, and to what end, and also with what
rite Deacons were first made. He says, When there arose a murmuring amongst
the Disciples, it was appeased by this remedy, as it is said in the common
proverb, Good laws have taken their beginning of evil manners. And it may
seem to be a strange thing, seeing that this is a function so excellent and
so necessary in the Church, why it came not into the Apostles minds at the
first, before there was any such occasion ministered, to appoint Deacons, and
why the Spirit of God did not give them such counsel which they take now,
being as it were enforced thereunto. But that which happened, was both better
then, and is also more profitable for us at this day, to be unto us an
example. If the Apostles had spoken of choosing Deacons, before any necessity
did require the same: they should not have had the people so ready: they should
have seemed to avoid labor and trouble: many would not have offered so
liberally into the hands of other men. Therefore it was requisite that the
faithful should be convict by experience, that they might choose Deacons
willingly, whom they saw they could not want: and that through their own
fault. We learn in this history, that the Church cannot be so framed by and
by, but that there remain somewhat to he amended, neither can so great a
building be so finished in one day, that there may not something be added to
make the same perfect. Furthermore we learn that there is no ordinance of God
so holy and laudable, which is not either corrupt or made unprofitable through
the fault of men. We wonder that things are never so well ordered in the
world, but that there is always some evil mixed with the good; but it is the
wickedness and corruption of our nature which causes this. That was indeed a
godly order whereof Luke made mention before, when the goods of all men being
consecrated to God, were distributed to every man as he had need: when as the
Apostles being as it were the stewardes of God and the poor, had the chief
government of the alms. But shortly after there arises a murmuring which
trobleth this order. Here appears that corruption of me^ whereof I have spoken,
which does not suffer us to use our good things. We must also mark the
subtlety of Satan, who to the end he may take from us the use of the gifts of
God, goes about this continually, that it may not remain pure and sound: but
that being mixed with other discommodities, it may first be suspected, secondly
loathed, and lastly quite taken away. But the Apostles have taught us by their
example that we must not yield unto such engines and policies of Satan. For
they do not think it meet (being offended with the murmuring) to take away
that ministry which they know pleases God: but rather invent a remedy whereby
the offense may be taken away, and that may be retained which is Gods. Thus
must we do. For what offenses soever Satan raise, we must take good heed that
he take not from us those ordinances which are otherwise wholesome.

The number increasing. We ought to wish for nothing more then that God would
increase his Church, and gather together many on every side unto his people:
but the corruption of our nature hinders us from having any thing good or
happy in all points. For there arise many discommodities also, even of the
encreasings of the Church. For it is a hard matter to keep many hypocrites
from creeping into the multitude, whose wickedness is not by and by
discovered, until such time as they have infected some part of the flock with
their infection. Moreover many wicked, froward, and dissolute persons, do
insinuate themselves under a false color of repentance. And that I may pass
over innumerable things, there is never such agreement amongst many, but that
according to the diversity of their manners, their opinions are also diverse: so
that one thing cannot please all alike. This offense causes many to be
desirous to choose a few for a Church, it causes them to loath or else to hate
a multitude. But no trouble, ^e irksomnes ought so much to prevail, but that
we must always be desirous to have the Church increased, but that we must
studdie to enlarge the same, but that we must cherish so much as in us lies,
unity, with the whole body.

A murmuring of the Greeks. Hereby it appears that they were not fully
regenerate by the Spirit of God, to whom the diversity of nation and country
ministers occasion of disagreement. For in Christ there is neither Jews nor
Grecian: therefore this indignation smells of the flesh and the world.
Wherefore we must take good heed that the like fault be not found in us.
There is another fault, in that they declare their indignation by murmuring.
Furthermore it is uncertain whether the complaint were true or no. For when
Luke says that the Greeks murmured, because their widows were not honored,
he shows not what was done indeed, but what they thought was done. And it may
be that for as much as the Apostles did prefer the Jews, because they were
better known, the Greeks did th^^ke (though falsely) that their widows were
despised as strangers. And this seems to be more like to be true.
Furthermore the word ministering may be expounded two manner of ways,
actiuely or passiuely. For we know that at the first there were widows
chosen unto the ministration. Notwithstanding I do rather think that the
Greeks did complain, because their widows were not so liberally relieved as
they wished. So that the ministration shall be that daily distribution which
was wont to be made.

2 The twelve having called the multitude unto them. It is a point of patience
and meekenes that the Apostles are no more moved: It is a point of prudence and
godly carfulness, in that they prevent the evil which began to arise, without
deferring the remedy. For after that every dissension and division has
gathered strength, it is a wound hard to be cured. By this assembly it
appears that the Church was governed by order and reason, so that the
Apostles had the chiefest authority, and that yet they did impart their
counsels and purposes unto the people. Again we must note that the faithful
or Christians are in this place called disciples, in wh^m that of Isaias must
be fulfilled, That they were all taught of God. And again that of Jeremy,
They shall al know God from the least to the greatest.

It pleases not. It is in Greek ouc areston. By which word the Grecians do
now express every opinion or decree which is better then other, or which is
to be preferred as being better. I do rather think that the Apostles declare
what is profitable, than simply what they have decreed. But if it be not
expedient for them to meddle with this business, they seem not to acknowledge
some fault in that that they ministered hitherto. And surely that is true, that,
Use is the father of wisdom. Wherefore there shall be no absurdity, if we
shall say, that the Apostles desire of the Church to be unburdened of that
function, after that they have tried that it is not meet for them. But if
there were any fault, it ought rather to be ascribed unto necessity, than unto
them. For they took not this burden upon them greedily, but seeing there was
no other way as yet, they had leifer burden themselves out of measure, than
that the poor should be forslowed. And when as they say that it is not meet
that they should be occupied in providing for the poor, their meaning is
that they are unable to endure both burdens, so that they must needs let the
one alone. For it is as if they should say: If thou will enjoy our ministry in
the preaching of the Gospel, deliver us from the charge of the poor, because
we are not able to do both. But this seems to be spoken out of season by
them, because they had not left the charge of teaching before, although they
had the oversight of the alms. I answer, for as much as the administration
was confused, they were so inwrapped, that they could not wholly attend upon
doctrine, as was meet. Therefore they refuse that function which draws them
away from the free and perfect charge of teaching. Notwithstanding we may not
think that they had quite cast away all care of the poor, but that they did
only seek somewhat to be lightened and eased, that they might attend upon their
office. And in the mean season they declare that the ministry of the word is
so painful, that it requires a whole man, neither will it suffer him to be
occupied about any other business. Which if it had been well considered, there
had been a far other order taken in the Church. The popish bishops did sack up
great riches under color of the ministration or deaco^ship: nevertheless they
entangled themselves in diverse businesses: which they were scarce able to
overcome though every one of them had had ten heads. Notwithstanding such is
their wickedness that they say that there can be no church, unless it be
drowned in this depth: neither do they cease to brag and boast that they are
the successors of the Apostles whereas there is nothing which appears to be
more contrary. They were careful for this, that they might not be occupied
about serving of tables, and so be compelled to leave their own bankets. For
whosoever is careful for his own table, he takes leave to be vacant from
other men's tables. But omitting these things, let us mark this sentence. We
know what a holy thing it is to be careful for the poor. Therefore for as
much as the Apostles prefer the preaching of the Gospel before it, we gather
thereby that no obedience is m^re acceptable to God. Notwithstanding the
hardness is also declared, when as they say that they cannot discharge both
these duties. Surely we are not better than they. Therefore let every one of us
that is called unto the function of teaching addict himself wholly to order
this his estate well. For we are inclined to nothing more than to fall to
slouthfulnes. Again the flesh ministers goodly clokes and colors, so that
those men cannot see by and by that they are lead away from their calling,
which inwrappe themselves in strange business. Wherefor to the end Ministers
may prick forward themselves to do their duty, let them remember this
saying of the Apostles oftentimes, wherein they declare that forasmuch as they
are called unto the function of teaching, they must not any longer take charge
of the poor. Therefore what excuses have profane affairs (taken in hand even
for some private gain) where that is set aside which is otherwise accounted no
small part of the worship of God.

3 Therefore brethren look out. Now we see to what end Deacons were made: The
word it self is in deed general, yet is it properly taken for those which
are stewards for the poor. Whereby it appears how licenciously the Papists
do mock God and men, who assign unto their Deacons no other office but this,
to have the charge of the patten and Chalice. Surely we need no long
disputation to prove, that they agree in no point with the Apostles. But if the
readers be desirous to see any more concerning this point, they may repair
unto our Institution. As touching this present place, the Church is permitted
to choose. For it is tyrannous if any one man appoint or make ministers, at his
pleasure. Therefore this is the most lawful way, that those be chosen by common
voices, who are to take upon them any public function in the Church. And the
Apostles prescribe what manner persons ought to be chosen: to wit, men of tried
honesty and credit, men endewed with wisdom and other gifts of the Spirit.
And this is the mean between tyranny and confused liberty, that nothing be
done without the consent and approbation of the people: yet so that the
pastors moderate and govern this action, that their authority may be as a
bridle, to keep under the people, least they pass their bounds too much. In
the mean season this is worth the noting, that the Apostles prescribe an order
unto the faithful, least they appoint any save those which are fit. For we
do God no small injury, if we take all that come to hand to govern his
house. Therefore we must use great circumspection, that we choose none unto the
holy function of the Church, unless we have some trial of him first. The
number of Seven is applied unto the present necessity: least any man should
think that there is some mystery comprehended under the same. Whereas Luke
says, full of the Spirit and wisdom, I do interpret it thus: that it is
requisite that they be furnished both with other gifts of the Spirit, and also
with wisdom, without which that function cannot be exercised well: both that
they may beware of the liegerdemane of those men, who being too much given unto
begging, require that which is necessary for the poverty of the brethren: and
also of their slanders, who cease not to backbite though they have none
occasion given them. For that function is not only painful, but also subject
to many ungodly murmurings.

4 And we will give our selves unto prayer. They show again that they have
too much business otherwise, wherein they may exercise themselves during their
whole life. For the old proverb agrees hereunto very fitly, which was used
sometimes in the solemn rites, Do this. Therefore they use the word
proscarteresai, which signifies to be as it were fastened and tied to any
thing. Therefore Pastors must not think, that they have so done their duty
that they need to do no more, when they have daily spent some time in teaching.
There is another manner of study, another manner of zeal, another manner of
continuance required, that they may in deed boast that they are wholly given
to that thing. They adioyne thereunto prayer, not that they alone ought to pray
(for that is an exercise common to all the Godly) but because they have
peculiar causes to pray above all other. There is no man which ought not to be
careful for the common salvation of the Church, how much more then ought the
Pastor, who has that function enjoined him by name, to labor carefully for
it? Exodus 17.11 Romans 1.10. 1. Corin. 3.7.
So Moses did in deed exhort others unto prayer, but he went before them as
the ring leader. And it is not without cause that Paul does so often make
mention of his prayers. Again we must always remember that, that we shall
loose all our labor bestowed upon plowing, sowing and watering, unless the
increase come from heaven. Therefore it shall not suffice to take great pains
in teaching, unless we require the blessing at the hands of the Lord, that
our labor may not be in vain and unfruitful. Hereby it appears, that the
exercise of prayer is not in vain commended unto the ministers of the word.

5 Stephen full of faith. Luke does not therefore separate faith from the
Spirit, as if it also were not a gift of the Spirit: but by Spirit he
means other gifts wherewith Stephen was endewed, as zeal, wisdom,
uprightness, brotherly love, diligence, integrity of a good conscience:
secondly he expresses the principal kind. Therefore he signifies that
Stephen did excel first in faith, and secondly in other virtues, so that it
was evident that he had abundance of the grace of the Spirit. He does not so
greatly commend the rest, because undoubtedly they were inferior to him.
Moreover the ancient writers, do with great consent affirm that this
Nicholas, which was one of the seven, is the same of whom John makes mention
in the Revelation: to wit, Apoca. 2.15
that he was an author of a filthy and wicked sect: for as much as he would
have women to be common. For which cause we must not be negligent in choosing
ministers of the Church. For if the hypocrisy of men do deceive even those,
which are most vigilant and careful to take heed, what shall befall the
careless and negligent? Notwithstanding if when we have used such
circumspection as is meet, it so fall out that we be deceived, let us not be
trobled out of measure, for as much as Luke says, that even the Apostles were
subject to this inconvenience. Some will ask this question, Then what good
shall exhortation do? to what use serves prayer? seeing that the success it
self shows that the election was not wholly governed by the Spirit of God? I
answer, that this is a great matter that the Spirit directed their judgments
in choosing six men: in that he suffers the Church to go astray in the
seventh, it ought to seem no absurd thing. For it is requisite that we be
thus humbled diverse ways, partly that the wicked and ungodly may exercise us:
partly that being taught by their example, we may learn to examine our selves
thoroughly, least there be in us any hidden and privy starting corners of
guile: partly that we may be more circumspect to descerne, and that we may as
it were keep watch continually, least we be disceiued by crafty and
unfaithful men. Also it may be that the ministry of Nicolas was for a time
profitable, and that he fell afterward into that monstrous error. And if so be
it he fell in such sort from such an honorable degree; the higher that every
one of us shall be extolled, let him submit himself unto God with modesty
and fear.

6 Having prayed they laid their hands upon them. Laying on of hands was a
solemn sign of consecration under the Law. To this end do the Apostles now
lay their hands upon the Deacons, that they may know that they are offered to
God. Notwithstanding because this Ceremony should of it self be vain, they
add thereunto prayer, wherein the faithful commend unto God, those ministers
whom they offer unto him. This is referred unto the Apostles, for all the
people did not lay their hands upon the Deacons: but when the Apostles did make
prayer in the name of the Church, others also did add their petitions. Hence
we gather that the laying on of hands is a rite agreeing unto order and
comeliness, for as much as the Apostles did use the same: and yet that it has
of it self no force or power, but that the effect depends upon the Spirit
of God alone. Which is generally to be thought of all Ceremonies.

7 Furthermore the word of God grew, and the number of the disciples
increased greatly at Jerusalem, and a great company of the Priests obeyed
the faith.

8 And Stephen full of faith and power, wrought woonders and great signs
amongst the people.

9 But there arose certain of the Synagogue, which was called the Synagogue of
the Libertines and Cyrenians, and of Alexandria, and of those which were of
Cilicia and Asia, disputing with Stephen.

10 And they could not resist the wisdom, and Spirit wherewith he spoke.

Luke sets forth again the increasing of the Church, to the end he may the
better declare the power of God and his grace in the continual going forward
thereof. This was an excellent work of God that the church should suddenly, and
as it were in a moment be raised up: but this is worthy no less admiration, in
that he furthereth that work which he had begun amidst so many lets, in that
the number of those is increased, whom to diminish, and so consequently to
destroy the whole stock, the world does so greatly labor. In that he says
that the word of God did grow: his meaning is, that it was spread further
abroad. The word of God is said to grow two manner of ways, either when
new disciples are brought to obey the same, or as every one of us profits
and goes forward therein. Luke speaks in this place of the former sort of
increasing, for he expounds himself by and by, when he speaks of the
number of the disciples. Notwithstanding he restreineth this so great an
increasing of faith, unto one City. For although it be to be thought, that
the disciples were scattered abroad elsewhere, yet was there no certain body
save only at Jerusalem.

And a great company. Seeing that (in speaking properly) our faith does obey
the doctrine of the Gospel, it is a figurative speech uttered by Metonymia,
when Luke says, That they obeyed the faith. For the word faith is taken by
him for the word of God, and the very profession of Christianity. And he
reckons up the Priests by name, because they were for the most part
enemies: for which cause it was a wonderful work of God, that some should
be converted, and much more wonderful that many. For at the first they raged
against Christ with this brag, Has any of the rulers believed in him? But
this multitude which knows not the Law, are accursed.

And Stephen. Luke recites in this place a new cumbate of the Church, whereby
it appears that the glory of the Gospel was always joined with the cross
and diverse troubles. And this is the sum, that the Church was assaulted in
the person of one man. Whereby it came to pass, that the enemies were the more
bold, and being imbrewed with innocent blood, did rage sorer than they had
wont. For they had not gone as yet beyond the prison and rods. But to the end
we may know that the name of Christ was glorified as well in the life as in
the death of Stephen, Luke says at the first, that he was full of faith and
power. Whereby he signifies that his faith was excellent, and that he
excelled in power to do miracles. Neither ought we to imagine perfection of
faith, because he is said to be full of faith: but this manner of speaking,
is much used in the Scripture, to call those Full of the gifts of God, who are
abundantly endewed with the same. I take power (without question) for
ability to do miracles. Faith comprehends not only the gift of
understanding, but also the feruentnesse of zeal. For as much as his name was
famous by reason of this excellency, it came thereby to pass, that the rage
of the wicked was bent against him as it were with one consent to overthrow
him. For so soon as the force and grace of the Spirit does show it self,
the fury of Satan is by and by provoked.

And it shall appear by the text that Steephen was diligent and courageous in
spreading abroad the doctrine of the Gospel: but Luke passes over that, being
content to have commended his faith; which could not be slothful and sluggish.

And there arose certain. This was the beginning of persecution, because the
wicked after that they have assaied in vain to set themselves against Christ
by disputing, when they saw that that former attempt did take none effect, they
fly unto slanders, cauilling, and tumults, and at length they break out into
violence and murder. Therefore Luke means by the word Rise, that those of
whom he speaks, did assault the Gospel with their tongue, and did not by and
by bring Stephen before the judgment seat, but did first set upon him by
disputing against him. Furthermore he signifies that they were strangers,
which lived in Judea, either that they might exercise merchandise, or else get
learning. Therefore he says that some of them were Cyrenians, some of
Alexandria, some of Cilicia, some of Asia. He says that they were all of the
Synagogue of the Libertines. It is to be thought that the free men of the
citizens of Rome had caused a synagogue to be builded of their own charges,
that it might be proper to the Jews which came together out of the provinces.
Therefore those which were brought thither by the grace of God, and ought to
have embraced Christ so much the more willingly, assault him first, and inflame
the fury of others as it were with a trumpet. Also Luke will in many other
places afterward declare, that the Jews which were scattered abroad in the
provinces, were most deadly enemies to sound doctrine, and most venomous in
moving tumults. He reckons up many, to the end the victory of the truth
may be the more famous, whiles that many gathered of diverse countries, depart
being vanquished by one man, and it is not to be doubted but that they were
enforced to hold their peace with shame. Stephen had already woone great
favor, and gotten great dignity by miracles. He answers the disputers now in
such sort, that he gets the upper hand much. He puts not that Wisdom
and Spirit which he says his adversaries could not gainestande, as diverse
things. Therefore resolve these words thus: They could not resist the
wisdom which the Spirit of God gave him. For Luke meant to express, that
they fought not on both sides as men: but that the enemies of the Gospel were
therefore discouraged and overcome, because they did strive against the spirit
of God, which spoke by the mouth of Stephen. And forasmuch as Christ has
promised the same Spirit to all his servants, let us only defend the truth
faithfully, and let us crave a mouth and wisdom of him: and we shall be
sufficiently furnished to speak, so that neither the wit, neither yet the
babbling of our adversaries shall be able to make us ashamed. So the Spirit was
as effectual in our time, in the mouth of the Martyrs which were burnt, and it
utters the like force now daily, that though they were ignorant men, never
trained up in any schools, yet did they make the chief divines which
maintained popery no less astonished with their voice only, than if it had
thundered and lightened.

11 Then they suborned men which said: We have heard this man speak blasphemous
words against Moses, and God.

12 And they moved the people and the Elders and the Scribes. And inuading
him, they took him, and brought him into the Council,

13 And they brought forth false witnesses which said, This man cease not to
speak blasphemous words, against this holy place and the Law.

14 For we have heard him say, that this Jesus of Nazareth shall destroy this
place, and shall change the ordinances which Moses has given us.

15 And when all which sat in the Council had beholden him, they saw his face
as it had been the face of an Angel.

12 Being overcome with the power of the Spirit, they give over disputing, but
they prepare false witnesses, that with false and slanderous reports they may
oppress him. Whereby it appears that they did strive with an evil
conscience. For what can be more unmeet than in their cause to lean unto
lies? Admit he were a wicked man, and guilty, yet he must not have false
witness borne against him. But hypocrites which shrowde themselves under
zeal, do carelessly grant themselves leave to do that. We see how the
Papists at this day corrupt manifest places of Scripture, and that wittingly,
whiles that they will falsely wrest testimonies against us. I confess in deed
that they offend for the most part through ignorance. Yet can we find none of
them which does not grant himself liberty to corrupt both the sense and
also the words of the Scripture, that they may bring our doctrine into
contempt: yea they slander us monstrously even in the Pulpit. If you ask
these Rabbines, Whether it be lawful to slander a man or no: they will deny
that it is lawful generally: but when they come unto us, good zeal does
excuse them, because they think that nothing is unlawful, which may burden
us or our cause. Therefore they flatter themselves in lying, falsehoode and
dogged impudency. Such hypocrisy did also blind them of whom Luke speaks
in this place, which used false witness to put Stephen to death. For when
Satan reigns, he does not only prick forward the reprobate unto
cruelty, but also blind their eyes, so that they think that they may do
whatsoever they will. We are especially taught by this example, how dangerous
the color of good zeal is, unless it be governed by the Spirit of God: for
it breaks out always into furious madness and in the mean season it is a
marvelous visure to cover all manner of wickedness.

14 We have heard. It shall full well appear by Stephens defense, that he
never spoke any thing touching Moses or the Temple without reverence. And yet
notwithstanding this was not laid to his charge for nothing. For he had
taught the abrogating of the Law. But they are false witnesses in this, and
suborned to lie, because they corrupt purposely those things which were well
and godlilie spoken. So Christ was enforced to clear himself, that he came
not to destroy the Law, but to fulfill the Law, because when he had
preached of abrogating the Ceremonies, the wicked wrested this unto an other
purpose, as if he meant to abolish and take away the whole Law. Furthermore
they wrested that wickedlie unto the Temple of Jerusalem, which he spoke of
his body. What? was it not objected to Paul that he taught That evil is to
be done, that good may come thereof? Therefore there is no cause why we
should wonder at this day that that is so falsely misconstrued which we
teach godlily, well and profitablie. Yea we must rather persuade our selves
thus, that the doctrine of the Gospel can never be handled so warily and
moderately, but that it shall be subject to false accusations. For Satan, who
is the father of lying, does always bestirre himself in his office. Again,
because there be many things which are contrary to the reason of the flesh,
men are inclined to nothing more, than to admit false reports, which corrupt
the true and sincere sense of doctrine. This malice of Satan, and the sleights
ought to make us more wary, and more circumspect, that no preposterous thing,
or any thing that is improperly spoken escape us, wherewith they may be armed
to fight against us. For we must carefully cut off from the wicked that
occasion whereat they snatch. And if we see that doctrine which is by us well
and godlily delivered, corrupted, deformed and torn in pieces with false
reports, we must not repent that we have begun, neither yet is there any
cause why we should be more slack hereafter. For it is not meet that we
should be free from the poisoned and venomous bytings of Satan: which the son
of God himself could not escape. In the mean season it is our part and
duty to dash and put away those lies wherewith the truth of God is burdened:
like as we see Christ free the doctrine of the Gospel from unjust infamy.
Only let us so prepare our selves that such indignity and dishonest dealing
may not hinder us in our course. Because we teach that men are so corrupt,
that they are altogether slaves unto sin and wicked lusts: the enemies do
thereuppon infer this false accusation, that we deny that men sin
willingly, but that they are enforced thereunto by some other means, so that
they are not in the fault, neither bear any blame: yea they say farther that
we quench altogether all desire to do well. Because we deny that the works
of holy men are for their own worthiness meritorious, because they have
always some fault or imperfection in them, they cavil that we put no
difference between the good and the evil. Because we say that man's
righteousness consists in the grace of God alone, and that godly souls can
find rest no where else, save only in the death of Christ: they object that
by this means we grant liberty to the flesh to do what so ever it will,
that the use of the law may no longer remain. When as we maintain the
honor of Christ, which they bestow as it pleases them here and there, after
that they have rent it in a thousand pieces like a pray, they feign that we
are enemies to the Saints. They falsely report that we seek the
licentiousness of the flesh in steed of the liberty of the spirit. Whiles
that we endeavor to restore the supper of the Lord unto his pure and lawful
use, they cry out impudently that we overthrow and destroy the same. Others
also which take away all things as did the Academikes, because that does not
please them which we teach, concerning the secret predestination of God, and
that out of the scriptures lay to our charge dispitefullie, that we make God a
tyrant, which takes pleasure in putting innocent men to death, seeing that
he has already adjudged those unto eternal death, which are as yet unborn:
and other such things can be said on this behalf: 2. Cor. 2.16.
whereas notwithstanding they are sufficiently convict that we think
reverently of God, and that we speak no otherwise than he teaches with his
own mouth. It is an hard matter to endure such envy, yet must we not
therefore cease of to defend a good cause. For the truth of God is precious
in his sight, and it ought also to be precious unto us: although it be unto
the reprobate the savor of death unto death. But now I return unto Stephen
his accusation, the principal point whereof is this, that he blasphemed God
and Moses. They do for good considerations make the injury common to God and
to Moses: because Moses had nothing in his doctrine, which was his own or
separated from God. They prove this: because he spoke blasphemously against
the temple and the Law. Furthermore they make this the blasphemy, because he
said that the coming of Christ had made an end of the Temple and the
Ceremonies. It is not credible that Stephen spoke thus as they report: but they
maliciously wrest those things which were spoken well and godlily, that they
may color their false accusation. But although they had changed nothing in
the words, yet Stephen was so far from doing any injury to the Law and
the Temple, that he could no way better and more truly praise the same. The
Jews did suppose that the Temple was quite dishonored, unless the shadowish
estate thereof should endure for ever: that the Law of Moses was frustrate
and nothing worth, unless the Ceremonies should be continually in force.
But the excellency of the Temple and the profit of the Ceremonies consist
rather in this, whiles that they are referred unto Christ, as unto their
principal pattern. Therefore howsoever the accusation has some color, yet
is it unjust and wicked. And although the fact come in question, that is,
whether the matter be so as the adversaries lay to his charge, notwithstanding
the state is properly of quality. For they accuse Stephen, because he taught
that the form of the worship of God which was then used, should be
changed: and they interpret this to be blasphemy against God and Moses.
Therefore the controversy is rather concerning right (as they say) than the
fact it self. For the question is, Whether he be injurious and wicked against
God and Moses, who says that the visible Temple is an image of a more
excellent sanctuary, wherein dwells the fullness of the Godhead, and who
teaches that the shadows of the Law are temporal.

This Jesus of Nazareth. They speak thus of Christ disdainfully, as if the
remembrance of him were detestable. Nevertheless it may be gathered out of
their accusations, that Stephen did in the abrogating of the Law, set the
body against the shadows, and the substance against the figures. For if
Ceremonies be abolished by Christ, their truth is spiritual. The Jews which
would have them continue for ever, did consider nothing in them but that which
was gross, carnal, earthly, and which might be seen with the eyes. Briefly,
if the use of Ceremonies were continual, they should be frail and should
vanish away, because they should have nothing but the only external show: so
that they should have no soundnes. Therefore this is their true perpetuity
when as they are abrogated by the coming of Christ: because it follows here
upon, that the force and effect thereof does consist in Christ.

Shall change the ordinances. It is out of all doubt that Stephen meant this
of the ceremonial part only: but because men are wont to be more addicted to
external pomp, these men understand that which was spoken, as if Stephen
would bring the whole law to nothing. The principal precepts of the Law did
in deed concern the spiritual worship of God, faith, justice, and judgment:
but because these men make more account of the external rites, they call the
rites which are commanded concerning the sacrifices, ordinances of Moses, by
excellency. This was bredde by the bone from the beginning of the world, and
it will never out of the flesh so long as it lasts. As at this day the
Papists acknowledge no worship of God save only in their visures. Although
they differ much from the Jews, because they follow nothing but the frivolous
inventions of men, for the ordinances of God.

And when they had beheld. Men do commonly in places of judgment turn their
eyes toward the party arreigned, when as they look for his defense. He
says that Stephen appeared like to an Angel. This is not spoken of his
natural face, but rather of his present countenance. For whereas the
countenance of those which are areigned uses commonly to be pale, whereas they
stammer in their speech, and show other signs of fear, Luke teaches that
there was no such thing in Stephen: but that there appeared rather in him a
certain majesty. For the scripture uses sometimes to borrowe a similitude of
Angels in this sense, as 1. 1. Sam. 24.9. 2. Sam. 14.17 2. Sam. 19.27
Sam. 24. and 2.14. and 19.

CHAP. VII.
1 ANd the chief Priest said, Are these things so?

2 He answered, Men, brethren and fathers, harken, The God of glory appeared
to our father Abraham, when he was in Mesopotamia, before he dwelt in Charran.

3 And he said unto him, Come out of my country, and from amongst thy Kynred,
and come into the land which I will show thee.

4 Then he came out of the land of the Chaldees, and dwelt in Charran. After
that his father was dead, God brought him thence into this land, wherein ye
now dwell.

1 There appears as yet some color of equity in the highest priest and in
the council: and yet notwithstanding there is a most unjust prejudice in his
words. For he asks him not what cause he had to teach thus, neither does he
admit him unto the defense of right (which was notwithstanding the chief:) but
he demands precisely whether Steeuen uttered these words whatsoever they
were: as the Papists at this day will not demand what doctrine it is, and
whether it can be proved out of the scriptures: but they enquire whether any
man durst mutter against their superstitions, that so soon as he is co^uict,
they may forthwith burn him. Furthermore, Steeuens answer may seem at the
first blush absurd and foolish. He begins first at the very first beginning:
afterward he makes a long narration, wherein there is no mention made in a
manner of the matter in hand. And there can be no greater fault than to utter
many words, which are nothing appertinent unto the matter. But whosoever shall
thoroughly consider this long speech, he shall find nothing therein which is
superfluous: and shall full well perceive that Steven speaks very
appertinently, as the matter requires. He was accused as an Apostata or
revolt, which did attempt the overthrow of religion and the worship of God.
Therefore he beats in this diligently, that he reteineth that God which the
fathers have always worshipped. So that he turns away the crime of wicked
backsliding: and declares that his enemies were pricked forward with nothing
less than with the zeal of the law. For they bare a show that they were wholly
determined to increase the glory of God. Therefore he wringeth from them this
false boasting. And because they had the fathers always in their mouths
because they were puffed up with the glory of their nation: Steeuen declares
also, that they have no cause to be proud of this: but rather, that the
corruptions of the fathers was so great and so many, that they ought to to be
ashamed and humbled. As concerning the principal state of the cause, because
the question was concerning the temple and the ceremonies, he affirms
plainly that their fathers were elected of God to be a peculiar people before
there was any temple, and before Moses was born. And to this end tends that
exordium or beginning which is so far fet. Secondly he tells them that all
external rites which God gave by the hand of Moses, were fashioned according
to the heavenly pattern. Whereupon it follows, that the ceremonial law is
referred unto another end, and that those deal foolishly and disorderedly who
omit the truth and stay only in the signs. If the readers shall refer the
whole oration of Steeuen unto these points, they shall find nothing therein
which agrees not very well with the cause: as I shall declare again briefly in
the end. Nevertheless that scope of the whole oration shall not hinder, but that
we may discuss all things briefly, which are worth the noting.

2 Men, brethren, and fathers. Although Steeuen saw that those which sat in
the council were for the most part the sworn enemies of Christ, yet because
the ordinary government of the people did belong to the^, and they had the
oversight of the church, which God had not as yet cast of, therefore he is not
afraid for modesties sake to call them fathers. Neither does he flatteringly
purchase favor hereby. But he gives this honor to the order and government
appointed by god, until such time as the authority should be taken from them,
the order being altered. Nevertheless the reverence of the place which they
had, does not hinder him nor stop his mouth, but that he does freely
dissent from them. Whereby it appears how ridiculous the papists are, who will
have us so tied unto bare and vain invented titles, that they may enforce us to
subscribe unto their decrees though they be never so wicked.

The God of glory. By this beginning he declares that he does not disagree or
dissent from the fathers in true religion which they followed. For all religion,
the worship of God, the doctrine of the law, all prophesies did depend upon
that covenant, which God made with Abraham. Therefore when Steeuen confessed
that God appeared to Abraham, he embraces the law and the prophets, which
flow from that first revelation as from a fountain. Moreover he calls him
the god of glory, that he may distinguishe him from the false and feigned Gods,
who alone is worthy of glory.

When he was in Mesopotamia, It is well known that that region is called by
this name, which lies between the river Tygris and Euphrates. And he says
before, he dwelt in Charran: because Abraham being warned by an oracle, fled
from Chaldea to Charran, which is a City of Mesopotamia, famous by reason of
the slaughter of Crassus and the Roman army: although Pliny says that it was
a city of Arabia. And it is no marvel that Chaldea is in this place
comprehended under the name of Mesopotamia: because although that region which
is enclosed with Tygris and Euphrates, be properly Or Mesopotamia.
the country between two rivers. Yet those which set down any description of
countries, do call both Assyria and Chaldea by this name. The sum is this,
that Abraham being commanded by God, did forsake his country: and so he was
prevented with the mere goodness of god, when as he sought that which was
offered him at home of the own accord. Read the last chapter of Joshua. But it
seems that Moses his narration does somewhat disagree with this. For after
that about the end of the 11. chap. of Genesis he had declared, that Abraham
does go into another country to dwell, having left his house, he adds in the
beginning of the twelf, that god spoke unto Abraham. This is easily answered.
For Moses recites not in this latter place what happened after the departure of
Abraham: but least any man should think that Abraham wandered into other
countries having unadvisedly forsaken his own house (as light and indiscreet
men use to do sometimes) he shows the cause of his departure, to wit,
because he was commanded by God to flit into another place. And thus much do
the words of the Oracle import. For if he had been a stranger in an other
country, God could not have commanded him to depart out of his native soil,
forsaking his kinsmen and fathers house. Therefore we see that this place
agrees wondrous well with the words of Moses. For after that Moses has said
that Abraham went to Charran to the end he may show that this journey was
taken in hand not through any lightness of man, but at the commandment of
god, he adds that afterward, which he had before omitted, which manner of
speaking is much used of the Hebr.

3 Come out of thy country. God uses many words, to the end he may the more
wound the mind of Abraham, as if it were not a thing sharp enough of it self
to be banished out of his own country. And that served to try his faith: even
as that other thing also, that god assigns him no land wherein he may dwell,
but makes him stand in doubt and wait for a time. Wherefore the obedience of
Abraham was so much the more to be commended, because the sweetness of his
native soil keeps him not back from going willingly as it were into exile:
and in that he doubts not to follow God, although there appear no certain
resting place, but is commanded to wander to and fro for a time. Whereas the
showing of the land is deferred, it differs not much from deceiving of him
Furthermore we learn continually by our own experience, how profitable it was
for Abraham thus to be exercised and as it were trained by little and little.
Many men are carried with a godly affection to attempt great things. but by
and by so soon as their heat is waxen cold, it repents the^ of their
purpose, and they would gladly slip their necks out of the collar. Therefore
least Abraham should faint when he was in the midst of his course, through the
remembrance of those things which he had left behind him, god sits and
tries his mind thoroughly, immediately after he had begun, least he take any
thing in hand lightly, and unadvisedly. To this purpose serves the parable,
Luke 14.28.
which Christ sets before us concerning the building of the tower. For he
techeth that we must first cast the charges, least with shame we be enforced to
leave off building after we have begun. And though this were a particular thing
in Abraham, in that he was commanded to go out of his own country, and to go
into a far country: in that God carried him from place to place, yet
notwithstanding there is in these words some figure of the calling of us all.
We are not al simply commanded to forsake our country, but we are commanded
to deny our selves: we are not commanded to come out of our fathers house, but
to bid a due to our own will, and to the desires of our own flesh. Again, if
father and mother, wife and children hinder us from following God, we must
forsake them all. The commandment is given simply to Abraham to flit: but we
are commanded to do the same upon condition. For if in any place we cannot
serve god, we must rather make choice of exile, than to stay in our nest being
slothful and sluggish. Therefore let us have the example of Abraham always
before our eyes. He is the father of the faithful, he was tried all manner of
ways: does he forget his country, his friends, and himself, that he may give
over himself unto God? If we will be counted the children of God, To. 4.16.17.
we must not degenerate from him.

Which I shall show thee. We must note that which I touched a little before,
that Abraham is kept in dout, to the end his patience may be tried. And this
must we also apply to our own use, that we may learn to depend wholly upon god.
And surely this is a principal exercise of our faith, to put our trust in God,
even when we see nothing. God in deed will oftentimes show us a land wherein
he grants us an abiding place: yet notwithstanding because we are strangers
in the world, we have no certain and continual place of aboade any where.
Again, our life, as Paul says, Colos. 3.3.
is hid: and being like unto dead men, we hope for salvation which is hid in
heaven. Therefore as touching our perpetual habitation, God does cause us to
depend upon his providence alone when be commands us as it were to wander in
a strange country. Least such deferring discourage us, we must hold this
general rule of faith: that we must go whither god calls us, howsoever he do
not show that which he promises.

4 Then going out. The readiness and willingness of faith is commended in
these words. For when he is called, he makes no delay, but makes have and
subdueth all his affections, that they may obey the holy commandment of God.
It is uncertain for what cause he stayed at Charran: yet it may be that the
weakness of his father caused him to tarry there, who as we read, died there
shortly after: or else because he durst go no further until such time as the
Lord had told him whither he should go. It is more like to be true in mine
opinion, that he was stayed there a while with the wearisomnesse and sickness
of his father, because Steeuen says plainly, that he was brought thence after
the death of his father.

5 And he gave him none inheritance in it, no not the breadth of a foot: and
promised that he would give it him to possess, and to his seed after him, when
as he had no son.

6 And God spoke after this manner: Thy seed shall soiourne in a strange land,
and they shall bring it into bondage: and shall evil entreat it forty years.

7 But the nation whom they shall serve, will I judge, said God. And afterward
they shall come out and shall worship me in this place.

8 And he gave him the covenant of circumcision; and so he begat Isaach, and
circumcised him the eight day. And Isaach begat Jacob, and Jacob begat the
twelve patriarchs.

5 We must note three things in this place: that GOD exercised the patience of
his servant, because after that he had brought him out of his own country,
he dwelt in the land of Chanaan as a stranger. For Abraham possessed not one
footes breadth, save only that which he bought to bury in. And that is
counted no possession which serves not for the uses of this life. Secondly
forasmuch as that field was bought, Steven does for good causes say, that God
gave Abraham nothing. For that could not be gotten either with money, or by any
other means which man could invent, which Abraham did hope for of the promise.
Secondly we must note, that though God did not show Abraham the thing it self
as yet, yet did he uphold him by his word. And this is our stay, when God
promises that that is laid up for us, which as yet we possess not. Therefore
when as the thing, that is the possession of the land was wanting, Abraham had
for his help and stay the promise of God: and being content with the same
alone, he desired nothing in the land of Chanaan save only an uncertain
resting place wherein he might soiourne. For as much as epaggellesthai
signifies simply to promise. I thought there was no cause, why with Erasmus I
should translate it in this place, to promise again. For I resolve it
aduersatiuely. Although he had promised, that by the way we may note as it were
a show of deceiving, unless peradventure some man be disposed to apply it unto
the promises which are oftentimes repeated. Thirdly we must note that the
promise was such that it did not much differ from a mere mock. God promised
the land to the seed of Abraham when he was fourscore years old, and had to
wife one that was barre^, neither had he any hope to have any issue. This
seems to be more tha^ frivolous. For why does he not rather promise that he
will give him seed? but this was a notable trial of faith, in that Abraham
without asking any question, or any curious disputation, did obediently and
meekly embrace that which he had hard proceed out of the mouth of the Lord.
Therefore let us remember that God does so lift up and comfort his servant
with his word, that he does not only defer the giving of the thing, but
also he may seem after a sort to mock him: Iam. 2.5.
as he deals with us also in some respect. For although he call us the heirs
of the world, he suffers us oftentimes to want even a competent living and
necessary helps. And this does he of set purpose, that he may bring the
wisdom of the flesh to naught, seeing that we do not otherwise give due
honor to his word.

Thy seed shall be a stranger. Steven puts the Jews in mind in how miserable
and reproachful an estate their fathers were in Egypt: and shows that this
their servitude, wherewith they were oppressed came not by chance: because it
was fortolde long before by the oracle of God. This history ought to have bin
of great force, partly to tame their lofty courages, and to teach them
modesty, partly to set forth the grace of God: because God had always had a
care of that nation. For this is a singular benefit in that the people are
restored wonderfully as it were from death to life. In the mean season the
Jews are taught that the church of God was elsewhere, than in the land wherein
they dwelt: that the fathers were chosen to be a peculiar people, and that they
were kept safe under the tuition of God, before ever the temple was built: or
the external ceremonies of the law were instituted. These things appertain
unto the general scope or drift of the sermon. But hence may we gather a
profitable admonition. Bondage is of it self hard and bitter: but when
cruelty of masters is added thereunto, it seems to be intolerable.
Wherefore it must needs be that the mind of the godly man was sore wounded,
when he heard that his seed should serve and be villanouslie and cruelly
entreated. Moreover this was no small trial: forasmuch as these things were,
to look to, contrary, the enheritance of the land of Chanaan which was now
promised, and bondage in a strange country. For who would not have thought,
that god had as it were forgotten his former promise, when as he tells
Abraham that his seed shall endure miserable bondage? He says at the first
that he will give his seed the land. But he had as yet no seed: yea all hope of
seed was now cut off. But when does he promise that he will give it? After his
death. By and by he says, that that seed should be carried away to another
place, that it may serve strangers. And how long? Four hundred years. Does
he not seem by this means to pull back his hand, that he may not perform that
which he had promised? Let us know that this was done (not once only) for god
deals oftentimes with us thus, so that he may seem contrary to himself: and
he speaks also in such sort as that he may seem to call back that which he
had promised. Therefore it cannot be but that flesh will judge that he is
contrary to himself, but faith does know that his words do agree well together
amongst themselves, and with his works. And this is the purpose of God, to the
end he may extend the sight of our faith the farther, to show his promises a
far of, as it were a long place being put between. Therefore it is our duty to
go toward and to stiue to attain unto that salvation which is set before us
through many straits, through diverse lets, through long distance, through the
midst of deeps, and finally, through death it self. Furthermore seeing that
we see that the people which God had chosen, did serve the Egyptians, and was
discourteously afflicted, we must not be discouraged, if the like condition be
prepared for us at this day. For it is no new thing, neither any vnwo^ted
thing, for the church of God to lie oppressed under tyranny, and to be as it
were trodden under foot of the wicked.

7 The nation whom they shall serve. This judgment is joined with the
deliverance of the people. For whereas God does punish the cruelty and
tyranny of the wicked Egyptians, he does that for his peoples sake, whom he
took into his tuition, that it may be seen that he is the deliverer of his
church. Therefore so often as we are unjustly afflicted by the wicked, let us
remember that God is the judge of the world, who will let no injuries be
unpunished: let every man thus think with himself, Seeing that I am under the
tuition of God, who is the judge of the world, and to whom it belongs to
punish all injuries: Deu. 32.43. Romans 12.19
those shall not escape his hand who trouble me now. There is the like place in
Deuteronomy. 32. Where god says, that vengeance is his. Whence Paul gathers that we
must give place to wrath: as if he should say, that this ought to serve to
reform impatience, and to bridle our evil affections, in that god promises
that he will revenge. For he which reuengeth himself, does take Gods office
from him. And let us still remember that which I have already said, that God
is touched with an especial care to revenge injuries done to his children, as
it is in the Psalm, Hurt not mine anointed, and be not trouble some to my
prophets.

They shall come thence and serve me. Therefore their deliverance went before
the temple, and the worship of the law. Whereupon it follows, that the grace of
God was not tied to ceremonies. Nevertheless Steeuen notes the end of their
deliverance, that god chose both a peculiar people, and a peculiar place for
the true worship of his name. Whence we gather again, that we must regard what
he commands and allows. Other nations also were determined to worship God,
but because their rites were corrupt and bastardly, God does separate the Jews
from the rest, and assigns them a place, where he will have them to worship
him sincerely and duly as they ought. This place teaches us, that Gods
benefits must be referred to this end, that men might be brought to addict and
give over themselves wholly to him. Now since that god has dispearsed the
treasures of his grace throughout the whole world: we must endeavor to
sanctify him, by worshipping him purely and holily, in what country soever we
dwell.

8 He gave him the covenant. When as he confesses that circumcision is the
covenant of God, he cleereth himself sufficiently of that crime which was
laid to his charge: but in the mean season he shows that the Jews deal
amiss, if they place the beginning of their salvation in the external sign.
For if Abraham was called, and the land, and redemption promised to his seed
before such time as he was circumcised, it appears that the glory of the
whole stock does not depend upon circumcision. Paul uses the same argument in
the 4. chap. to the Romans. For seeing that Abraham obtained righteousness and
pleased God before he was circumcised, Romans 4.11.
he gathers thence that circumcision is not the cause of righteousness.
Therefore we see that Steeuen frames no vain and idle narration: because this
was very much appertinent unto the cause, that the Jews might remember how God
had adopted them with their Fathers. and it is to be thought that Steven did
plainly express both things: that although circumcision was given by God, that
it might be a sign of grace, yet was the adoption before it, both in order and
in time. But we have no need to dispute any longer in this place concerning
the nature and force of circu^cisio^, only let us note this, that god does
first promise those things to Abraham which he confirms afterward by
circumcision: that we may know that the signs are vain and nothing worth,
unless the word go before. Let us also note that there is a profitable doctrine
contained in the word covenant: to wit, that god makes his covenant with us in
the Sacraments, that he may declare his love toward us: which thing if it be
true, first they are not only works of external profession amongst men: but
they gave great force inwardly before god to confirm the faith. Secondly they
are no vain figures: because God who is true, figureth nothing there which he
does not perform.

9 And the Patriarks moved with envy, sold Joseph into Egypt. Notwithstanding
God was with him.

10 And he delivered him out of all his afflictions: and he gave him favor and
wisdom in the sight of Pharao king of Egypt, who made him ruler over Egypt, and
over all his house.

11 And there came a famine upon all the land of Egypt and Chanaan, and great
affliction: neither did our fathers find food.

12 And when Jacob had hard, that there was corn in Egypt, he sent our fathers
thither first.

13 And at the second coming Joseph was known of his brethren. And the kindred
of Joseph was made known to Pharao.

14 The^ Joseph sent, and called out his father Jacob, and al his kindred, lxxv.
souls.

15 And Jacob went down into Egypt, and he died and our fathers.

16 And they were carried into Sichem, and they were laid in the Sepulcher,
which Abraham had bought for money of the sons Hemor, the son of Sichem.

9 Now follows the greatest wickedness of the nation of Israel: that they
conspired together to oppress their innocent brother: which cruelty is
contrary to nature. Neither could the Jews object that it was a private
fault of a few: for the infamy reaches unto all the people. For as much as
all the patriarchs, Benjamin except, had polluted themselves with that
treachery. Therefore in that Steeuen vouchsafes to give them an honorable
name, that redoundeth to the greater reproach of the nation. They boasted
proudly of their fathers, he shows what manner persons the chief of them
were: to wit, murderers of their brother, so much as in them laid. For besides
that slavery was a kind of death, we know what they went about at the first,
and secondly what cruel punishments Joseph suffered of al which his brethren
were guilty. Hereby it appears that God was bountiful and merciful to those,
which were as it were unwilling, and which did resist him. For him (who was
about to be the author of health and help) would they have destroyed. Wherefore
they did what they could to renounce all the benefits of God. So he will
declare afterward that Moses was rejected, when he was offered of God to be a
redeemer. Therefore the Jews have small cause to brag of the excellency of
their kindred: but this alone remains for them, that being ashamed, they
confess that whosoever they are they have the same through the mere mercy of
God, and that they consider that the law was given to set forth the same.

God was with him. God was not so with him, that he did always show forth
his power in helping him. For that is no small thing which is said in the
Psalm, That the iron went through his soul. Surely it must needs be that he
was in great heaviness, Psalm. 105.18
when being destitute of all help, he suffered reproach also together with bands
and the punishment of an ungodly and wicked man: but God uses oftentimes to
be present with his in such sort, that he lies hid for a time. And the end
was an evident toke^ of his presence, which Joseph saw not at the first.
Furthermore we ought to remember this ever now and then, that Joseph was not
delivered because he had called upon God in the temple, but a far of in Egypt.

10 Steeuen adds the means, because God gave him favor in the sight of
Pharao. God could have delivered him by some other means, but his counsel had
respect unto a farther thing, that Joseph being ruler of the kingdom, might
entertain his father and al his family. In these two words favor and
wisdom, there is the figure Hipallage. For the wisdom wherewith Joseph was
endued, was the cause that he found favor. Although I confess that they were
two distinct benefits. For though Joseph were a faithful interpreter of
dreams, and did excel in divine wisdom, yet the proud tyrant would never
have brought him to so great honor, unless God had bent the mind of Pharao
unto a certain unwonted love: yet notwithstanding we must consider that order,
whereby God uses to bring him into favor. Wisdom does not only signify the
gift of prophecy in interpreting dreams, but prudence in giving counsel: for
Moses puts in both. That which Steeuen reports of one man in this place,
is extended unto all. For what aptnes and readiness soever is in men, it ought
to be reckoned amongst the gifts of God, and that his special gifts. And it
is he that gives good success as it pleases him, that his gifts may be
profitable to that end for which it seemed good to him to give them. Therefore
although Joseph be made chief ruler of Egypt by Pharao, yet is he lifted up
to so great honor properly by the hand of God.

11 There came a famine. Hereby it appears that the deliverance of Joseph was
such a benefit as was common to all the family of Jacob. For seeing the famine
drew on, Joseph was sent before in due time, to provide sustenance to feed the
hungry: as he himself does acknowledge the wonderful counsel of God in that
point. Nevertheless the free goodness of God appears plainly in the person
of Joseph, whiles that he is appointed to nourish and feed his brethren, who
had sold him, and by that means sent him far away, and thought that he was
gone away quite out of the world: he puts meat in their mouths, who had
thrown him into a pit, and had deprived him of the air and the common breath.
Finally, he nourishes and preserves their life, who were not afraid to take
from him his life. In the mean season Steeuen puts the Jews in mind of
this, that the patriarks were enforced to depart out of that land, which was
given them for an heritage, and that they died in another place. Therefore
forasmuch as they were soiourners in it, they are at length banished out of the
same.

14 Whereas he says that Jacob came into Egypt with seventy five souls, it
agrees not with the words of Moses. For Moses makes mention of seventy only.
Hierome thinks that Luke sets not down word for word those things which
Steeuen had spoken, or that he took this number out of the Greek translation
of Moses: either because he himself being a Prosylite had not the knowledge of
the Hebrew tongue: Gen-46.27
or because he would grant the Gentiles this, who used to read it thus.
Furthermore it is uncertain whether the Greek interpreters set down this
number of set purpose, or whether it crope in afterward through negligence.
Which (I mean the latter) might well be, forasmuch as the Grecians use to set
down their numbers in letters. August in his 26. book of city of God, thinks
that Joseph's nephews and kinsmen are comprehended in this number: and so he
thinks that the word went down, does signify all that time which Jacob
lived. But that conjecture can by no means be received. For in the mean space
the other patriarchs also had many children born to them. This seems to me a
thing like to be true, that the seventy interpreters did translate that truly
which was in Moses. And we cannot say that they were deceived: forasmuch as
Deu. 10. where this number is repeated, they agree with Moses, at least as that
place was read without all dout in the time of Hierome. For those coppies which
are printed at this day, have it otherwise. Therefore I think that this
difference came through the error of the writers which wrote out the books.
And it was a matter of no such weight, for which Luke ought to have troubled
the Gentiles which were accustomed with the Greek reading. And it may be that
he himself did put down the true number: and that some man did correct the same
amiss out of that place of Moses. For we know that those which had the new
testament in hand, were ignorant of the Hebrew tongue, yet skillful in the
Greek. Therefore to the end e the words of Steeuen might agree with the place
of Moses, it is to be thought that that false number which was found in the
Greek translation of Genesis was by them put in also in this place: concerning
which if any man contend more stubbornly, let us suffer him to be wise without
measure. Let us remember that it is not without cause that Paul does forbid us
to be too curious about genealogies. This so small a number is purposely
expressed, to the end the power of god may the more plainly appear, in so
great an enlarging of that kindred, which was of no long continuance. For such a
small handful of men could not by any humane manner of engendring grow to such
an infinite multitude as is recorded in Exodus, within 250. years. We ought
rather to weigh the miracle which the Spirit co^me^deth unto us in this place,
Exo. 12.37.
than to stand long about one letter, whereby the number is altered. There arise
other questions, (and those which are more hard to be answered) out of the rest
of the text.

16 Steeue^ says, that the Patriarks were carried into the land of Chanaan,
Genesis 50.13. Ios. 24.32.
after they were dead. But Moses makes me^tio^ only of the bones of Joseph. And
Joshua 24. it is reported, that the bones of Joseph were buried without making
any mention of the rest. Some answer that Moses speaks of Joseph for honors
sake, because he had given express commandment concerning his bones: which we
cannot read to have bin done of the rest. And surely when Jerome in the
pilgrimage of Paula, says, that she came by Sichem, he says that she saw
there the sepulchers of the 12. Patriarks: but in another place he makes
mention of Joseph's grave only. And it may be that there were empty tombs
erected to the rest. I ca^ affirm nothing concerning this matter for a
certainty, save only that this is either a speech wherein is Synecdoche: or
else that Luke rehearses this not so much out of Moses, as according to the old
fame: as the Jews had many things in times past from the fathers, which were
delivered as it were from hand to hand. And whereas he says afterward they
were laid in the sepulcher which Abraham had bought of the sons of Hemor, Genesis
23.9.
it is manifest that there is a fault in the word Abraham. For Abraham had
bought a double cave of Ephron the Hitite to bury his wife Sara in: but Joseph
was buried in another place: to wit, in the field which his father Jacob had
bought of the sons of Hemor, for an hundred lambs. Wherefore this place must
be amended.

17 And when the time of the promise drew near, which God had sworn to
Abraham the people increased, and was multiplied in Egypt.

18 Until another king arose which knew not Joseph.

19 This man dealt subtillie with our kindred, he evil entreated our fathers,
that they might cast out their infants, least they should be increased.

17 Steeuen passes over unto the deliverance of the people, before which, went
that innumerable issue, which had increased beyond the ordinary manner in no
long space of time. Therefore he sets down this as a singular gift of God:
that the people was increased, to the end we may know that that came not to
pass according to the common or wonted custom of nature. But on the other
side god seems to take from the Jews al hope: because Pharao does
tyrannously afflict the^, and their bondage grows greater daily. And when as
they are commanded to cast out their male infants, it seems that the
destruction of the whole nation was present. There is another token of
deliverance given, when Moses comes abroad: but because he is by and by
refused and enforced to fly into exile, there remains nothing but mere
despair. The sum is this, that God being mindful of his promise, did
increase the people in time, that he might perform that which he had sworn to
Abraham: but the Jews (as they were unthankful and froward) did refuse the
grace of god, so that they did what they could to shut up the way before
themselves. Furthermore we must note the providence of God in this place,
whiles that he does so order the course of times, that his works have always
their opportunity. But men who make have disorderedly in their desires, cannot
hope patiently and be at rest until such time as god shows forth his hand:
for this cause, because they take no heed to that moderation whereof I have
spoken. And to the end god may exercise the faith of his children, so often as
he appears with joyful tokens of grace, he sets other things against
those on the other side, which cut off suddenly the hope of salvation. For who
would not have said of the Hebrews, that they were utterly undone, when as the
kings commandment appoints all the men children to be put to death? For which
cause the meditating upon that doctrine is the most necessary for us, that god
does kill and restore to life: he leads unto hell and brings back again.

19 Dealt subtillie. The old interpreter did not translate this amiss to
deceive. For Steeuen means that the king of Egypt did craftily invent new
shifts, and wicked pretenses, that he might ever now and then lay heavier
burdens upon the people: like as almost all tyrants do: for how unjustly
soever they vex their subjects, they are too witty to invent excuses. And it
is not to be doubted but that Pharao abused this honest color, that it was not
meet that the Jews which were soiourners, should have a place of abode in his
realm for naught, and that they should be free from all burdens, seeing they did
enjoy great commodities. Therefore he deceitfully made the^ vile bonslaues of
free me^. When Steven says that this tyrant knew not Joseph, hereby it
appears how soon the remembrance of benefits passes away amongst men. For
although we do all with one consent detest unthankfulness, yet is there no
vice more common amongst us.

Least they should be increased. Erasmus translateth this improperly, in my
judgment. For Zoogoneisthai expresses more than, Least their children should
live. For the word is set thence, because the people does always remain
alive in the offspring. And furthermore, Steeuen does not reckon up all the
parts of their evil entreating: but putterh down one example of extreme
cruelty. Whence we may easily gather how near the whole seed of Abraham was
to destruction. For Pharao seemed to have murdered them all with that
commandment as with one stroke of a sword. But such violent barbarism did the
more set forth the unlooked for, and incredible power of God: because when
Pharao has by all means possible striuen against God, yet all is in vain.

20 All that time was Moses borne, who was acceptable to God. And he was
brought up three months in his fathers house.

21 And the daughter of Pharao took him up when he was cast out: and nourished
him up for her own son.

22 And Moses was taught in all wisdom of the Egyptians, and was mighty in
word and deed.

23 And when the time of forty years was fulfilled, it came into his mind to
go visit his brethren the children of Israel.

24 And when he saw one of them suffer wrong, he defended him, and revenged
him which had the wrong, having smitten the Egyptian,

25 And he thought that his brethren would have understood that God by his
hand should give them deliverance, but they understood not.

26 The next day he was seen as they strove, and set them at one again,
saying: Sirs, ye are brethren: why hurt ye one another?

27 And he which did injury to his neighbor, thrust him away, saying: Who
made thee a prince and a judge over us.

28 Will thou kill me, as thou did the Egyptian yesterday?

29 And Moses fled at this saying, and became a stranger in the land of Madian,
where he begat two sons.

20 It is not without cause that Steeuen notes the circumstance of time. Moses
was born at the very same time when the king had commanded that all the men
children should be cast out. Therefore it seems that the minister of
deliverance is dead before he is borne. But that time is most fit for God to
work in, 2. Cor. 12.9.
when there is no hope or counsel to be looked for at man's hands. And it
appears also most plainly, how God does make perfect his power in man's
weakness. Moses is kept three months, but at length his parents (that they may
save their own lives) are enforced to cast him out into the river. Only they
put him in a little cofer, that he may not by and by perish. When as Pharaoes
daughter takes him up, he escaped death in deed, yet so that he goes into
another nation being cut off from the kindred of Israel. Yea he was like to be
a most troublesome adversary to his nation, unless God had restrained his
mind. It is 40. years before he shows any token of brotherly goodwill.

22 Whereas Luke reports that he was taught in all wisdom of the Egyptians,
he puts that in his commendation as a point of excellency. Notwithstanding
it might have so fallen out, as it does oftentimes, that being puffed up with
profane sciences, he might have despised the base common people: yet because
god has determined to redeem his people, he does in the mean season frame
both the mind of Moses and al other things to finish his work. The reason of
man's flesh should murmur in this place, Why does God wink at so long miseries
of the people? Why doteh he suffer Pharao to rage more cruelly daily? Why
does he not suffer Moses to grow up amongst his own people? Why does he
after a sort cut him off from the kindred of Israel, being adopted by the kings
daughter? Why will he suffer him to remain amidst courtly pleasures, and does
not rather pull him thence? But the end it self is so wonderful, that we are
enforced to confess, that all these things were governed by singular counsel
and order, to set forth the glory of God. Whereas I said that Luke speaks in
this place of the learning of the Egyptians for honors sake, I would not have
it so taken, as if there were in the same no corruption. Forasmuch as
Astrology does consider the wonderful workema^ship of God, not only in the
placing of the stars, and in such excellent variety, but also in their
moving, force, and secret offices, it is a science both profitable and worthy
of praise. The Egyptians bestowed great study in this: but being not content
with the simple order of nature, they wandered also in many foolish
speculations, as did the Chaldeans. It is uncertain whether Moses were
infected with these superstitions or no. Yet howsoever it be, we see how
sincerely, and plainly he sets that before us to be considered in the frame
of the world, which is appertinent unto godliness. Surely this was excellent
modesty in that he which could reason with learned and witty men of the
secrets of nature, does not only omit higher subtilties, but does also
discende unto the common capacity of every most simple man, and does in a
common style set forth unto men unlearned, those things which they perceive
by experience. When Iustine bableth concerning Moses, he makes him a
Magician, which with iugling and inchauntments made passage for the people
through the red sea. So that Satan did not only go about to bury the power
of God, but also to blaspheme the same. But we know that Moses did not strive
with the enchaunters by Magike, but did that only which God had enioined him.
Furthermore the Egyptians had mystical divinity, wherewith they colored
their doting inventions, and monstrous abominations, as if they would prove
that they went mad not without reason: as the Papists, whereas they delude and
mock men like stage players; in their mass and other foolish rites, yet they
invent mysteries, that they may persuade me^ that there is nothing there but
that which is divine. The common sort of Priests cannot climb so high: but
those which amongst them will be accounted more cunning, do omit no rite, how
foolish and childish soever it be, affirming that there is some spiritual
mystery in every of them. There is extant concerning this matter a most
foolish mingle mangle, which they call the Rational of divine offices. But
forasmuch as Sacrificing Priests alone did use such dotings amongst
themselves, it is not to be thought that Moses spent any time in these, whose
bringing up was princely: But that he was taught in liberal arts.

He was mighty. This phrase does express amongst the Hebrews, a double
excellency, when as he which does excel in wit and learning, is also apt to
attempt and bring to pass great and weighty matters. Steeuen his meaning is
therefore, that Moses was furnished with rare gifts, so that they did all
confess that he was a singular man. But seeing he was in such estimation, the
Israelits had the less hope that he should be the minister which should work
their deliverance.

23 When the time was fulfilled. Many gather by this that Moses was never
estranged in mind from his nation: but the words of Steven incline rather
toward the contrary: to wit, that the Spirit of God did at length awake his
mind as it were out of sleep, that he might at length go visit his brethren,
whom he had long time neglected. It is to be thought that he was not ignorant
of what stock he came, seeing he had some token thereof in his flesh, and
seeing the rumor thereof was spread abroad in the court: because the kings
daughter could not adopt him to be her son, without some suspicion of
wickedness, unless his kindred had been known: yet was it long before he was
of such courage that he durst make known the love which he bare toward his
kindred. And this serves not a little to set forth the glory of God, that
Moses being ignorant of his calling, does remain a long time idle in the kings
court: and is afterward called of the Lord contrary to the hope of all men and
his own also. Therefore this new care for his brethren, which came into his
mind, proceeded from a new and unwonted motion of Gods Spirit.

24 When he saw a certain man. Moses came not to this spectacle by chance,
but forasmuch as God had appointed him to be the deliverer of his people, he
would have him show forth this token, and as it were make this beginning. For
Steeuen does plainly express, that he did attempt nothing unadvisedly: but did
that which became him, that was appointed to be a deliverer of the people,
knowing that he was thereunto called. For unless God had armed him and made
him puissaunt, it had been a thing altogether unlawful for him to kill any
man, how wicked soever he had bin. It is a godly deed and praise worthy, for a
man to set himself against the wicked, to defend the good against the injuries
of the wicked, to bridle their violence: but it is not for a private person to
punish or take vengeance. Therefore it was unlawful for Moses to slay the
Egyptia^, save only in as much as the Lord had put the sword in his hand
according to the right of his calling. But this heroical courage and
nobleness of heart was a work of the holy ghost: because God does mightily
show forth his power in those who^ he appoints unto great matters, that they
may be able to fulfill their function. In sum, Steeuen means that Moses was
even then offered to be the minister of deliverance, when the day was at hand
according to the covenant made with Abraham: yet did the people hope for
nothing less.

26 The day following he appeared Steeuen declares now that the fathers did
not only neglect, but maliciously reject the grace of god. For although the
evil which he mentions did proceed from one man only, yet does he by
right assign the fault unto them al. For if they had been thankful to God,
they would all with one consent have repressed his frowardnes. But they are
whisht, and suffer that good turn which Moses had done, to be vpbraided unto
him: and so much as in them lies, they bring him into extreme danger, whom
they ought to have defended by endangering themselves. Therefore his drift is
this, that the people themselves were in the fault, that they were no sooner
delivered and eased. So the wickedness of men does oftentimes hinder God from
doing that he would do. He is ready to help those that be his in due time, but
we keep back his hand from our selves with diverse lettes: and afterward we
complain of his slownes, but unjustly. Furthermore this unthankfulness was
too wicked against God, and too cruel against Moses. They were to thank God,
for giving them such a faithful patron in the kings court. They were to love
and reverence Moses. But they rewarded him full evil with threatenings and
reproaches. Furthermore, in as much as the fact was brought to the kings ears,
we must needs impute that to the treachery of the people. Therefore as when
afterward the people could see the land of Chanaan, they did through their
own folly keep themselves from entering in: so now refusing the grace of God
in the person of one man, they cause the time of their deliverance to be
deferred forty years. For although God had determined what he would do, yet
those are justly blamed for the delay, which hinder Moses in his office.

Men, ye are brethren. There is indeed amongst men a general conjunction, so
that they ought to use great courtesy one toward another, and to abstain from
al injuries: but this is more unmeet, and intolerable when those hurt one
another, who are nearer linked together. Therefore Moses does not only use a
general reason, that it may revoke their minds which were desirous to do
harm: but he mentions their kindred and fellowship of blood to mollify their
cruelty: yet all in vain: for he which had done injury to his neighbor,
does frowardly thrust him from him, and adds thereunto threatening. And this
is a common thing amongst men. For an evil conscience does drive men into
fury, and the worse every man's cause is, the more boldly and cruelly does he
extol himself. But under what color does he which has the worse cause set
himself so stubbornly against Moses? He says, he is no judge but he did not
reprove them according to authority: but did only friendly admonish them. Is
it the duty of a judge alone to admonish us when we do amiss? But this is
a common vice used of al stubborn and unruly persons, to give place to no
admonitions, save only when they are enforced by violence and authority: yea
they are like frantike men who rail upon their physicians. For which cause we
must be the more careful to bridle our lusts: least we run headlong with
such blind fury against those which are desirous to cure our vices.
Furthermore we are taught by this example, that the servants of God cannot so
do their duty in reproving such vices of men, but they shall suffer many
injuries, offend many, and incur dangers: and chiefly when they do well,
they shall surely hear evil. But they must swallow up the unworthiness of
these evils, that they may not therefore cease to do that which the Lord
commanded the^, and which he allows. Moses is burdened here with a cruel
false accusation that he usurps the authority of a ruler, and by this means
they lay treason to his charge. Secondly it is objected unto him reprochfully,
that he slew an Egyptian? both these were very odious. Whereby we may gather
with how dangerous a temptation the mind of the holy man was stricken. And
forasmuch as we see that he was neither discouraged by exile, neither by any
other evils, so that it did not repent him of his well doing, let us also
learn by his example, to bear a valiant and strong mind and courage against
all such assaults of Satan.

30 And when forty years were expired, there appeared unto him in the desa^t
of mount Sina, the angel of the Lord in a flambe of fire in a bush.

31 And so soon as Moses saw it, he wondered at the vision. Furthermore, when
he drew near to consider, the voice of the Lord came unto him:

32 I am the God of thy fathers, the God of Abraham, the God of Isaach, the god
of Jacob And Moses was afraid, and durst not draw near.

33 And the Lord said unto him: Put of thy shoes from thy feet. For the place
wherein thou stand is holy ground.

34 In seeing I have seen the affliction of my people in Egypt, and have hard
their mourning, and I am come down to deliver them. And now come, I will send
thee into Egypt.

30 And when forty years were expired. As Moses was no blockishe man, every
one of us may easily gather, how many things might have come into his mind,
which might have caused him to mistrust his calling. The shifts and sleights of
Satan are captious: we are more than bent naturally to distrustfulnes, what
doubts soever arise in our minds concerning the word of god, we do easily
admit the same. It was a hard exchange, to be thrust from earthly delights, and
a sumptuous life, unto the painful and base office of feeding sheep: and
especially forasmuch as Moses saw so much time spent, and being in the mean
season sent into the wilderness, what other thing could he imagine with him
self, but that that was vain, and a plain mock which the Lord had promised?
Forasmuch as being now fourscore years of age, he was occupied about the
feeding of his father in law his sheep, when could he have hoped that there
should have been any use of him in delivering the people? It is good for us
oftentimes to call to mind these cumbates of the godly until they be thoroughly
imprinted in our memory, least our minds faint, and our hearts fail us, if
the Lord make us stay longer than we could wish. Again, Moses gives a
notable example of modesty, seeing that in all that time he attempteh
nothing, he raises no tumults, neitheir intrudeth himself any way, to bear
rule: as troublesome men use to do: but employeth himself in his sheepheardes
function, as diligently as if he should never have been called unto any
greater charge. But whiles he tarryeth the Lords leisure so patientlye, he
appears unto him at length.

The Angel of the Lord appeared unto him. It is first demanded who this angel
was: and secondly why he appeared in such a form? For after that Luke had
called him an Angel, he brings him in immediately speaking thus: I am the God
of Abraham etc. Some answer. As God does sometime attribute and impart unto
his ministers those things which are most proper to himself: so is it no
absurd or inconvenient thing if they have his name given them. But seeing this
Angel affirms manifestly, that he is the eternal God, who alone is, and in
whom all things have their being, we must needs restreine this title unto the
essence of God: for it can by no means agree to the Angels. It might be said
more fitly, that Because the Angel speaks in the name of the Lord, he takes
upon him his person: as if he declared his commandments word for word, as out
of the mouth of God. Which manner of speaking is usual in the Prophets. But
when Luke shall say afterward that this was the same Angel, through whose
assistance and guiding Moses delivered the people: and Paul in the tenth
Chapter of the former to the Corinthians does affirm that Christ was that
guide, 1. Cor. 10.4.
there is no cause why we should now wonder, that the Angel takes to himself
that which is proper to God alone. Therefore let us first of all set down this
for a surety that there was never since the beginning any communication
between god and men, save only by Christ. For we have nothing to do with
God, unless the mediator be present to purchase his favor for us. Therefore
this place, does plentifully prove the Divinity of Christ, and teaches that
he is of the same essense with the father. Furthermore he is called an Angel
not only bccause he had the Angels always to bear him company, and to be as
it were his apparitours, but because that deliverance of the people did shadow
the redemption of us all, for whose sake Christ was to be sent of his father,
that he might take upon him the shape of a servant together with our flesh. It
is certain in deed that God did never appear unto men as he is, but under
some shape, agreeable to their capacity. Notwithstanding there is another
reason why Christ is called by this name, because he being appointed by the
eternal counsel of God to be unto men the minister of salvation, does
appear unto Moses to this end. Neither is that contrary to this doctrine,
which is written in the second Chapter to the Hebrews, Hebr. 2.16.
that Christ never took the Angels, but the seed of Abraham. For although he
took upon him the shape of an Angel for a time, yet did he never take the
nature of Angels: as we know that he was made very man. It rests that we
speak somewhat of the burning bush. That is common that God does apply the
signs unto the things by a certain likelihood. And this is almost the common
order and way of the sacraments. Furthermore this was the fittest thing that
could have been showed to Moses, to confirm his faith in the present
business. He knew in what state he had left his nation, although there were
a greater number of men, yet were they not unlike to a bush. For the thicker
the bush is, and the more store of shrubbes it has, the more subject is it to
take fire, that it may burn on every side: so the people of Israel were but a
weak band, and such as was laid open to all injuries, and this unwarlike
multitude being pressed down even with their own weight, had incensed the
cruelty of Pharao only with the prosperous success of increasing. Therefore
the people being oppressed with cruel tyranny, is as it were a pile of wood
set on fire at every corner, neither is there any thing which keeps it from
being consumed to ashes, save this, because the Lord sits in the midst
thereof. And although the undoubted fire of persecution did then burn, yet
because the Church of God is never free from afflictions in the world, the
continual estate thereof is after a sort painted out in this place. For what
other thing are we but fuel for fire? And there fly abroad innumerable fire
brands of Satan continually, which set on fire both our bodies and also our
minds: but the Lord delivers and defends us by his wonderful and singular
goodness, from being consumed. Therefore the fire must needs burn, that it may
burn us in this life: but because the Lord dwells in the mids of us, he
shall so preserve us, that afflictions shall do us no harm: as it is also said
in the six and fourtith Psalm. Psalm. 46.6.


31 He wondered at the vision. Let us know that God did use thus to deal with
our fathers, that they might assuredly know his majesty. For he meant to make
a manifest distinction between the visions which he showed, and the iuggling
casts of Satan. And this certainty is more necessary. For what credit should
the Oracles of God otherwise carry, wherein the covenant of eternal life is
contained? Therefore forasmuch as this a love is the true stay of faith, it must
needs have God to be the author thereof, that he may undoubtedly declare that
it is he that speaks. Again forasmuch as Satan walks about continually, and
does by many and strange shifts insinuate himself, and has so many ways to
deceive, and especially seeing he does pretend the name of God craftily: we
must take great heed of his mocks. We see how in times past he deluded all
nations, and the Papists also. For all the monsters of superstitions, all the
dotings of errors which were in times past, and do as yet reign in popery, did
proceed from dreams, visions, and false revelations. Yea furthermore even the
Anabaptists have their illusions thence. Therefore this is the only remedy,
that God do distinguish by certain marks those visions which he shows. For
then are we without danger of erring, when he has revealed his majesty unto
us. For this cause was the mind of Moses stricken with admiration, and then
afterward he draws near to consider: after that he is come nearer, the Lord
touches him with a more lively feeling of his presence, so that he is afraid.
For I confess that there is none of al these things which Satan cannot imitate:
yet falsely, like an Ape. And the Lord does not only show himself by such
signs, but helping our dulnes, he does also open our eyes, that we may not be
deceived. Again the holy ghost does imprint in our minds certain marks and
tokens of Gods presence, that there may no doubt remain.

32 I am the God of thy fathers. Now we see to what end the vision was offered
to Moses, to wit, that the word of God might have his authority. For bare
visions should do but a little good, unless doctrine were joined therwithal.
And it is joined with them not as an inferior part, but as the cause of al
visions and the end. And whereas he calls himself the God of Abraham,
Isaach, and Jacob, there is a double reason why he calls himself so. As the
majesty of God is infinite, if we will comprehend it, it does rather swallow
up our senses: if we endeavor to ascend unto it, we vanish away. Therefore he
adorneth himself with titles, under which we may comprehend him. But we must
mark that God makes choice of such titles, as that he may by them call us
back unto his word. For he is called the God of Abraham, Isaach, and Jacob,
for this cause, because he committed unto them the doctrine of salvation, that
he might thereby be made known to the world. But God had respect properly
unto the present circumstance, when he spoke to Moses on this wise. For both
this vision, and the hope of the delivery of the people, and the commandment
which he was about to give to Moses, did depend upon the covenant, which he had
made in times past with the fathers. So that the suspicion of novelty is taken
way, and the mind of Moses is lifted up to hope for redemption, which was
grounded in the old promise. Therefore this title is as much as if God had
said: I which have promised in times past to your fathers, that I have a care
of your safety, which have taken the kindred of Abraham to my tuition by a free
covenant, yea which have appointed this time for an end of your bondage, I
appear now unto thee, that I may perform that which I promised. Like as at
this day all the promises of God must lean and be stayed upon this foundation,
that they may be sure and certain to us, that God has adopted us in Christ,
and has promised that he will be our God and our father. And Christ
gathers out of this place by good reason, that the godly live after they be
dead. Mat. 22.32.
For if the whole man perish in death, this were an unfit speech, I am the
God of Abraham. Let us suppose that there is no Rome: shall not he be laughed
at, which shall call himself Consul of Rome? For this is requisite in Relation,
that the members be aunswerable between themselves. There is also another
reason to be considered, that for as much as God has in his hand both life and
death, without all doubt he preserves those alive whose father he will be, and
whom he counts his children. Therefore though Abraham, Isaach, and Jacob,
died concerning the flesh, yet do they live in spirit with God.

And Moses being afraid. This might seem to be an absurd thing, that a
voice full of consolation does rather terrify Moses than make him glad: but
it was good for Moses to be thus terrified with the presence of God, that he
might frame himself unto the greater reverence: Neither does the voice of God
alone strike his mind: but his majesty, whereof he saw a sign in the burning
bush. And what marvel is it, if man be afriade when he feeth God? And
especially let us remember, that men's minds are by this means prepared unto
fear and reverence, as in Exodus xx. Thou have seen signs, Exodus 20.22.
thou have heard the sound of the trumpe, that thou may learn to fear the
Lord. But some will say, Why dare not Moses now for fear consider, who was not
afraid to draw near before? I answer, that the nearer we draw unto God, the
more his glory does appear, so are we the more afraid, and that by right.
And God makes Moses afraid for none other cause, save only that he may make
him obedient unto him. This fear was a preparation not unfit for greater
boldness. And to this end tends that which follows, Put off thy shoes from
thy feet, for he is admonished by this sign with reverence to receive the
commandments of God, and to give him due glory by all means.

33 Because the place wherein. The Lord meant by this commendation which he
gives to the place, to lift up the mind of Moses into heaven, that he might
not think upon any earthly thing. And if so be it Moses was to be pricked
forward with so many pricks, that having forgotten the earth, he might harken
to God: must not we have our sides eue^ as it were dug through, seeing we
are an hundredth times more slow than he? Notwithstanding here may a question
be asked, how this place became so holy? For it was no more holy than other
places before that day. I answer that this honor is given to the presence of
God, and not to the place, and that the holiness of the place is spoken of for
man's sake. For if the presence of God do make the earth holy, how much more
force thereof ought men to have. Notwithstanding we must also note, that the
place was thus bewtified only for a time, so that God did not fix his glory
there: Gene. 35.7.
as Jacob erected an altar to God in Bethel, after that God had showed some
token of his presence there. When as his posterity did imitate the same
afterward, it was such worship as was reproved. Finally the place is called
holy for Moses his sake only, that he may the better address himself to
fear God, and to obey him. Forasmuch as God does now show himself unto us
every where in Christ, and that in no obscure figures, but in the full light,
and perfect truth, we must not only put off our shoes from our feet, but
strippe our selves stark naked of our selves.

34 In seeing I have seen. God promises now that he will deliver his people,
that he may appoint Moses to be his minister afresh; because the former
objection was taken away by so long space of time. For God is said to see our
miseries, when he has respect to us, and is careful for our safety: as he
is said again, to shut his eyes, and turn his back, when as he seems to
set light by our cause. In like sort is he said to come down. He needs not
to move out of his place to help us, for his hand reaches throughout the
heaven and earth: but this is referred unto our understanding. For seeing that
he did not deliver his people from their affliction, it might seem that he was
a far off, and was busied about some other thing in heaven. Now he says
that the Israelites shall perceive that he is nigh unto them. The sum
tends to this end, that Moses knowing the will of God, may not doubt to
follow him as a guide, and the more boldly to employ himself about the
delivery of the people, which he knew was the work of God. For we must note
that he says that he heard the mourning of the people. For although he has
respect unto those which are in misery, and unjustly oppressed, yet when we lay
our mournings and complaints in his lap, he is especially moved to have
mercy. Although this word may be taken for those blind and confused
complaints which are not directed unto God, as it is taken oftentimes else where.

35 This Moses whom they had denied saying: Who made thee a ruler and judge?
him I say, has God sent to be a ruler and a redeemer in the hand of the Angel,
which appeared unto him in the bush.

36 He brought them out, having showed woonders and signs in the land of
Egypt, and in the red sea, and in the wilderness forty years.

37 This is Moses which said unto the Children of Israel, The Lord your God
shall raise up unto you a Prophet, out of the midst of your brethren, like unto
me: hear him.

35 Stephen passes over many things, because he makes haste unto this sum,
that the Jews may understand, that the fathers were not delivered therefore,
because they had deserved that with their godliness, but that this benefit
was bestowed upon them being altogether unworthy: and secondly that there is
some more perfect thing to be hoped for of these beginnings. When Moses being
ordained of God to be their revenger and deliverer, was now in a readiness,
they stopped the way before him: therefore God does deliver them now, as it were
against their will. That which is added touching miracles and wonders, serves
as well to the setting forth of the grace of God, as to make known the calling
of Moses. It is surely a strange thing, that God does vouchsafe to declare his
power by diverse wonders, for such an unthankful peoples sake. But in the mean
season he brings his servant in credit. Therefore whereas the Jews set
less by him afterward, whereas they assaie sometimes to drive him away by
railing, whereas they scould sometimes, sometimes murmur, sometimes set upon him
outragiously, they bewray thereby both their wickedness, and also their contempt
of the grace of God. Their unthankfulness and ungodliness was so increased
always, that God must needs have striuen with wonderful patience with such a
froward and stubburne people.

A ruler and a deliverer. We must understand the contrarieties which augment
the fault. They would have obeyed Moses if a tyrant had appointed him to be a
judge, but they contemn him proudly and refuse him disdainefully being
appointed of God, and that to be a deliverer. Therefore in despising him, they
were wicked: and in rejecting grace, unthankful. And whereas Moses has such an
honorable title given him, God does not so give and resign unto man that
honor which is due to himself, that he loses any whit of his authority
thereby. For doubtless Moses was not called a Redeemer or deliverer in any
other respect, save only because he was the Minister of God. And by this
means the glory of the whole work remains in the power of God wholly.
Therefore let us learn, that so often as men have the titles which belong to
God given them, God himself is not dispoyled of his honor: but because the
work is done by their hands, they are by this means commended. To this end
tends that which Stephen says, that this charge was committed to Moses in
the hand of the Angel. For by this means Moses is made subject to Christ, that
under his conduct and direction, he may obey God. For Hand is taken in this
place not for ministry, but for principality. Wherefore God did so use the
service of Moses, that the power of Christ did surpass him, as he is even at
this day the chief governor in accomplishing the salvation of the Church, yea
he uses the ministry of men in such sort, that the force and effect
depends upon him alone.

37 A Prophet shall God raise up. Stephen indeuoureth undoubtedly to prove by
these words, that Christ is the end of the Law: although he does not express
the same in plain words. And assuredly (as we have already said) Luke
recites not word for word all those things which Stephen uttered: but it is
sufficient for him to note the principal points of matters. Furthermore we
have said before in the third Chapter that this testimony is so applied to
Christ, that notwithstanding it agrees to the other prophets also. For after
that Moses had forbidden the people to be carried to and fro with the wicked
superstitions of the Gentiles, he shows what ought to follow. There is no
cause (says he) why thou should desire Magicians and inchaunters: for God
will never suffer thee to want Prophets to teach thee faithfully. And now it
is certain that the ministry of the Prophets was temporal, as was also the
ministry of the Law: until Christ should bring the full perfection of
wisdom into the world. Therefore Steephen his speech tends to this end,
that Moses does not keep the people fast bound to himself alone, when as he
sets before them and commends unto them another teacher. The Prophets
were in deed interpreters of the Law, and all their doctrine was as it were an
addition or appertenance of those things, which were uttered by Moses: but for
as much as this was also certain, that Christ should bring a more perfect
kind of doctrine, because he should make an end of all the Prophecies: it
follows that he is made the chief: and that the principal mastershippe
(that I may so call it) is his, least the faith of the Gospel should be
doubtful. Now we know to what end Stephen intermingleth Moses his
testimony: to wit, that he may prove that the Jews did no less contemn him
(of whom they made boast with open mouth to be their only teacher) even now
when he is dead, than they did in times past whiles he lived wickedly, and
frowardly reject him. For whosoever believes Moses, he will not refuse to be
the disciple of Christ, John 5.46.
whose messenger and crier he was. Fet the rest out of the third Chapter.

38 This is he which was in the congregation in the wilderness, with the Angel
which or did speak to him in the mount.
had spoken unto him in mount Sina, and with our fathers: who received lively
Oracles that he might give them to us:

39 Whom our fathers would not obey, but they refused him, and they turned
back in their hearts into Egypt.

40 Saying unto Aaron, Make us gods to go before us: for we know not what is
happened to this Moses which brought us out of the land of Egypt.

41 And they made a Calfe in those days, and they offered sacrifice to the
Idol, and they rejoiced over the works of their own hands.

38 Stephen proceeds to set forth the frowardness of the people, who though
they were provoked with so many benefits of God, yet did they never cease
maliciously to reject him. If they had been disobedient and unthankful to God
before, yet this so wonderful a deliverance ought to have brought them into a
better mind: but he declares that they were always like themselves. It was
meet that so many miracles should not only have stuck fast in their minds,
but also have continued still before their eyes. But having forgotten all, they
fly back suddenly unto the superstitions of Egypt. The memorial of their
cruel servitude was yet fresh, which they had escaped by passing over the red sea: and yet they prefer those tyrants by whom they were more than
cruelly handled, before their deliverer. This was therefore a heap of
ungodliness most desperate, that their stubbornness could not be broken or
overcome with so many benefits of God, but that they did awayes return unto
their nature. This does greatly augment the greatness of the offense, where
Steephen says that Moses was then with them in the wilderness. For besides
that there appears here rare goodness and long sufferance of the Lord, in
bearing with them, they make themselves to be without all excuse, whiles that
being beset on every side with so many straites, being brought into so great
distress, having Moses to be their guide in their journey, and the faithful
keeper of their life, they fall away nevertheless treacherously from God.
Finally it appears that they were like untamed beasts, whom God could not
keep in obedience with so many bands. Therefore in as much as Moses left
not off to govern them even through the wilderness under the conduct and aid
of the Angel, it is an easy matter to gather by this circumstance of time, how
incurable and obstinate their frowardness was. As it was a point of monstrous
rebellion, not to be humbled with miseries, and even with the very sight of
death. Where as he says that Moses was with the Angel and the fathers, there
is a contrary respect. He was present with the fathers, that he might be
their guide, according to the commandment of the Lord: he was with the
Angel as a minister. Where upon it follows that he was no private person
to whom this injury was done, but it was done to the governance of God: when
the people could be kept back with the reverence of neither, from running
headlong into wicked rebellion. We have already spoken of the Angel. But the
participle lalonutos, or, which spoke, has a double meaning. For it may be
understood either of the first vision, whereby Moses was called to redeem the
people, or of that speech which god had with Moses, after they were come over
the red sea. And because Christ declared both ways that he was the author of
their deliverance, it is no great matter whether we choose: yea there is no
let, but that it may be extended unto both. For he which began to speak to
Moses from the beginning, that he might send him into Egypt, did continue the
tenor of his speech afterward, until the work was finished.

Which received lively Oracles. Erasmus translated it Lively speech: but those
which are expert in the Greek tongue, they shall know that I have more truly
translated the words of Stephen For there is greater majesty in Oracles then
in Speech. I speak only of the word: for I know that whatsoever proceeds
out of the mouth of God, the same is an Oracle. Moreover he purchases
authority for the doctrine of Moses in these words, because he uttered
nothing but that which proceeded from God. Whereupon it follows that they did
not so much rebel against Moses as against God. Whereby their stubbernes is
more discovered. And this is a general way to establish doctine: when men teach
nothing but that which is commanded them by God. For what man dare make Moses
inferior to him: who (as the Spirit affirms) ought only to be believed for
this cause, because he faithfully unfolded and delivered the doctrine which he
had received of God? But some man may ask this question why he calls the law
a living speech? For this title seems to disagree much with the words of
Paul: 1. Cori. 3.7.
where he says that the law is the ministry of death, and that it works
death, and that it is the strength of sin. If you take lively speech for that
which is effectual, and cannot be made frustrate by the contempt of men, there
shall be no contrariety: but I interpret it as spoken actiuely, for that which
makes to live. For seeing that the Law is the perfect rule of godly and holy
life, and it shows the righteousness of God, it is counted for good causes
the doctrine of life and salvation. And to this purpose serves that solemn
protestation of Moses, when he calls heaven and earth to witness, that he
has set before them the way of death and life. In which sense the Lord himself
complains, Ezechiel 20
that his good Law is broken, and his good commandments whereof he had said, He
which shall do these things, shall live in them. Therefore the Law has life in
it self. Yet if any man had leiffer take living, for that which is full of
efficacy and strength, I will not greatly stand in contention. And whereas it
is called the ministry of death, that is accidental to it, because of the
corrupt nature of man. For it does not engender sin, but it finds it in us.
It offers life, but we which are altogether corrupt, can have nothing but
death by it. Therefore it is deadly in respect of men alone. Though Stephen had
respect unto a farther thing in this place: for he does not only speak of
the bare commandments, but comprehends all Moses his doctrine, wherein the
free promises are included, and so consequently Christ himself, who is the
only life and health of men. We must remember with what men Stephen had to
do. They were such as were preposterously zealous of the law, who stayed only
in the dead and deadly letter of the Law: and in the mean season they raged
against Stephen, because he sought Christ in the Law, who is in deed the soul
thereof. Therefore by touching the ^eruerse ignorance glancingly, he gives
them to understand, that there is some greater and some more excellent thing
hidden in the Law, than they have hitherto known. For as they were carnal,
and content with an outward show, they sought no spiritual thing in it, yea
they would not so much as suffer the same to be showed them.

That he might give them to us. This serves to refute the false accusation,
wherewith he was falsely burdened. For seeing he submits his neck to the
yoke of the Law, and professes that he is one of Moses his scholars, he is
far from discrediting him amongst others. Yea, rather he turns back the
fault which was laid to his charge, upon those which were the authors of the
slander. That was as it were a common reproach for all the people, because the
fathers would not obey the Law. And therewithal he tells them, that Moses
was appointed to be a Prophet, not only for his time: but that his authority
might be in force with the posterity, even when he was dead. For it is not
meet that the doctrine of God should be extinguished together with the
ministers, or that it should be taken away. For what is more unlikely than
that that should dye, whereby we have immortality. So must we think at this
day: as the Prophets and Apostle spoke unto the men of their time, right so
did they write unto us, and that the force of their doctrine is continual,
because it has rather God to be the author thereof, than men. In the mean
season he teaches, that if any reject the word appointed for them, they reject
the counsel of God.

39 They refused and were turned away. He says that the fathers rejected
Moses: and he shows the cause also, because they gave themselves rather unto
the superstitions of Egypt: which was horrible and more than blind fury, to
desire the customs and ordinances of Egypt, where they had suffered such
grievous things of late. He says that they were turned away into Egypt in
their hearts, not that they desired to return thither bodily, but because
they returned in mind unto those corruptions, which they ought not so much as
to have remembered, without great detestation and hatred. It is true in deed,
that the Jews did once speak of returning: but Stephen touches not that
history now. Furthermore he does rather express their stubbernesse, when he
says that they were turned away. For after that they had taken the right way,
having God for their guide and governor, they start aside suddenly: as if a
stubberne unbroken horse not obeying his rider, should frowardly run backward.

40 Make us. Though the Jews be turned back diverse ways, yet Stephen
makes choice of one notable example above all the rest, of their filthy and
detestable treachery: to wit, when they made themselves a Calfe, that they
might worship it in steed of God. For there can no more filthy thing be
invented, than this their unthankfulness. They confess that they were delivered
out of Egypt: neither do they deny that this was done by the grace of God and
the ministry of Moses: yet notwithstanding they reject the author of so great
goodness together with the minister. And under what color? They pretend that
they cannot tell what is become of Moses. But they know full well that he is in
the mount. They saw him with their eyes when he went up thither, until such
time as the Lord took him unto himself, by compassing him about with a
cloud. Again, they know that Moses is absent for their healths sake, who had
promised that he would return, and bring unto them the Law which God should
give. He badde them only be quiet a while They raise mad vprores suddenly
within a small time, and without any cause: yet to the end they may cover
their madness with the color of some reason, they will have Gods present with
them, as if God had showed unto them no token of his presence hitherto: but his
glory did appear daily in the cloud and pillar of fire. Therefore we see what
haste they make to commit idolatry through wicked contempt of god, that I may
in the mean season omit to declare how filthy and wicked their
unthankfulness was, in that they had so soon forgotten those miracles, which
they ought to have remembered even until the end of the world. Therefore by
this one backsliding it appears sufficiently what a stubberne and rebellious
people they were. Moreover it was more expedient for the cause which Stephen
had in hand, to recite this history of their rebellion than the other. For the
people does quite overthrow the worship of God, they refuse the doctrine of
the Law, they bring in a strange and profane religion. And this is a notable
place, because it points out the fountain from which all manner of
superstitions did flow since the beginning, and especially, what was the first
beginning of making Idols: to wit, because man which is carnal, will
notwithstanding have God present with him, according to the capacity of his
flesh. This is the cause why men were so bold in all ages, to make Idols. And
God does in deed apply himself to our rudeness thus far, that he shows
himself visiblie after a sort under figures. For there were many signs under
the Law to testify his presence. And he comes down unto us even at this day
by Baptism, and the Supper, and also by the external preaching of the word.
But men offend two manner of ways in this: for first being not content with
the means which God has appointed, they boldly get to themselves new means.
This is no small fault, because their fingers itch always to have new
inventions without keeping any mean, and so they are not afraid to pass the
bounds which God has appointed them. But there can be no true image of God,
save that which he appointed. Therefore what images so ever are feigned and
invented by man besides his word, they are false and corrupt. There is also
another vice no less intolerable, that as man's mind conceiueth nothing of
God but that which is gross and earthly, so it translateth all tokens of Gods
presence unto the same grossness. Neither does man delight in those idols
only, which he himself has made, but also does corrupt whatsoever God has
ordained, by wresting it unto a contrary end. God comes down unto us in
deed as I have already said: but to this end, that he may lift us up into
heaven with him. But we, because we are wholly set upon the earth, will in like
sort have him in the earth. By this means is his heavenly glory deformed, and
that fulfilled altogether which the Israelites say here, Make us gods. For
whosoever he be that does not worship God spiritually, he makes unto himself
a new God. and yet if ye thoroughly weigh al things, the Israelites will not
have a God made of set purpose by them, but they think rather that they have
the true and eternal God under the shape of the golden Calfe. For they are
ready to offer the appointed sacrifice, and they approve that with their
consent, which Aaron says, that those are the gods by whom they were brought
out of Egypt. But God passes not for those frivolous imaginations: but he
complains that men put strange gods in his place, so soon as they depart
even a very little from his word.

41 And they made a Calfe. We may easily gather by that which goes before, why
they were more delighted in that figure than in any other. For although Egypt
did swarm with innumerable idols, yet it is well known, that they made the
greatest account of an Ox. And whence is it that they are so desirous to have
an Idol, save only because they were turned back into Egypt, as Stephen
has already said? We must note the speech, when he says that they offered
sacrifice to the Idol. Aaron commands the people to assemble themselves
together to worship God: they come altogether. Therefore they testify that
they mean nothing less than to defraud God of his worship, howsoever they
translate the same unto the Calfe. Yea rather they are determined, to worship
God in the image of the Calfe. But because they forsook the true God, by
making an Idol, whatsoever follows afterward, it is judged to be given to
the Idol: because God refuses al wicked worshipping. For it is not meet to
account that as bestowed upon him, which he has not commanded, and because
he forbid them expressly to erect any visible image unto him, that is mere
sacrilege what soever is done afterward in honor thereof.

They rejoiced over the works. This speech is taken out of Iesaias, yea out of
the Prophets, who in like sort vpbraide unto the Jews that they were delighted
in their own inventions. And surely it is wonderful madness, when men
arrogate unto themselves any thing in Gods matters. I take this rejoicing to
be that solemn daunsing whereof Moses speaks in the two and thirtith
Chapter of Exodus. Yet Stephen touches a common vice, wherewith Idolaters are
infected. For although it be altogether unlawful for men to attempt any thing
in religion which God has not appointed: yet do they invent every thing
unadvisedly, and setting light by the word of God, they make choice of the
works of their own hands. But Stephen shows that whiles they take such
pleasure in this liberty, they displease God so much the more. But if we will
have God to allow our worship, we must abstain from the works of our hands,
that is from our own inventions For all that which men invent of themselves,
is nothing else but sacrilegious profanation. The Idol is properly so called
reprochfully, as it were a thing nothing worth, because no reason does suffer
man to make God.

42 And God turned himself, and gave them up to worship the host of heaven:
as it is written in the book of the Prophets, Have ye offered unto me slain
beasts, and sacrifices by the space of forty years in the wilderness O ye
house of Israel?

43 And ye took to you the Tabernacle of Moloch, and the star of your God
Rempham, and figures which ye made to worship them. Therefore I will carry you
away beyond Babylon.

Steven will here declare, that the Jews did never make an end of sinning, but
that they wandered farther in their froward errors: so that that first fall of
theirs, was unto them as it were an entrance into a Labyrinth. And this does he
assign unto the just vengeance of God, that after that time their madness
grew so, that they gat for one Idol infinite. This example teaches us to be
careful to follow the rule which God has set down: because so soon as we
are turned even but a little a side from the same, we must needs be carried too
and fro with diverse dotings, we must needs be entangled in many superstitions,
and be utterly drowned in the huge sink of errors. Which punishment God in
justice laith upon men, which refuse to obey his word. Therefore Stephen says
that God was turned away; which word imports as much as if he should say,
that he turned his back. For he had fastened his eyes after a sort upon the
people, when he showed his singular care which he took in governing them,
being offended with their falling away, now he turns his face another way.
We may also hereby gather that we can no otherwise follow the right way, save
only when the Lord watches over us to govern us: out so soon as his face is
turned away, we run by and by into errors. The Israelites were forsaken of
God even then, when they made the Calfe: but Stephen meant to express the
greatness of the punishment, as if he should have said, that they were
altogether cast off into a reprobate sense then, as Paul also teaches, that
those which gave not glory to God when he had showed himself unto them, were
by the just judgment of God given up unto blindness, and blockishnesse, Romans
1.28.
and unto shameful lusts. Hereby it came to pass, that after that religion
began to be corrupt, innumerable abominations succeeded a few superstitions,
and gross monsters of Idolatry, came in place of light corruptions. For
because men neglected the light which was set before them, they became
altogether blockish by the just judgment of God, so that they had no more
judgment than brute beasts. Idolatry surely is very fertile, that of one
feigned God, there should by and by come an hundredth, that a thousand
superstitions should flow from one. But this so great madness of men
springs hence, because God reuengeth himself by delivering them to Satan:
because after he has once taken in hand to govern us, there is no change
in his part, but he is plucked away from us by our rash lightness.

Amos 5.25.
Have ye offered unto me slain beasts and sacrifices. This place is taken
out of the first Chapter of Amos. The speech which Stephen uses shows that
all the prophecies were gathered into one body. And Amos adds (after that he
had inueighed against the Idolatry and sundry sins of the people) that this
is no new evil, that the Jews are rebellious against God, because their
fathers had fallen away from true godliness even in the wilderness. Furthermore
he denies that they offered slain beasts to him, not because there were
there no sacrifices at al, but because god refused their corrupt worship: like
as he reproves and chideth the people in Isaias, because they honored him with
no sacrifice, Thou (says he) O Jacob, have not called upon me, Isa. 43.22.
neither have thou honored me with thy sacrifices, neither have I made thee
serve in offering or incense. Thou have not bought for me calamus, neither
have thou filled me with fatness. But thou have been burdenous unto me in
thy sins, and have caused me to serve in thine iniquities. Assuredly the
Jews did all these things daily, but God accepts not the obedience of the
wicked, neither does he approve the same. Again he abhors all that which is
polluted with such mingle mangles as are added. Thus does Amos speak of the
fathers which were reuolts. That which is added forthwith, may be referred
either unto them or unto their posterity.

43 You took to you the tabernacle of Moloch. Some take the copulative for the
aduersatiue, as if he should say, Yea rather ye worshipped the Idol. It may
be resolved also into the conjunction causall, thus, You did not offer
sacrifices to me, because ye erected a tabernacle to Moloch. But I expound it
somewhat otherwise, to wit, that God does first accuse the fathers for the more
vehemency: and then afterward he adds, that their posterity did increase
the superstitions, because they gat to themselves new and diverse Idols: as if
the Prophet had spoken thus in the person of God, If I shall rippe up from the
beginning (O house of Jacob) how your kindred has behaved it self toward me,
your fathers began to overthrow and corrupt, even in the wilderness, that
worship which I had commanded: but you have far passed their ungodliness,
for you have brought in an infinite company of Gods. And this order is fitter
for Stephen his purpose. For he intends to prove (as we have already said)
that after the Israelites fell away unto strange and bastardly rites: they never
made an end of sinning: but being stricken with blindness, they polluted
themselves ever now and then with new Idolatries, until they were come even
unto the last end of impiety. Therefore Steephen confirms this sentence
fitly with the testimony of the Prophet, that the Jews descending of wicked
and rebellious fathers, had never ceased to wax worse and worse. And although
the Prophets words be somewhat unlike to these, yet is the sense all one. It
is to be thought that Stephen who had to deal with the Jews, did repete word
for word in their tongue, that which is in the Prophet: Luke which wrote in
Greek, did follow the Greek interpreter. The Prophet says Ye honored
Succuth your king, and Ciium your image, the star of your gods. The Greek
interpreter made a nowne common of anowne proper, because of the aliance of the
word Succoth, which signifies a Tabernacle. Furthermore I cannot tell whence
he fetches that his Rempham; unless it were because that word was more used
in that time.

And figures which ye made. The word Image which is in the Prophet, does of
it self signify no evil thing. Moreover the word typos is taken amongst the
Grecians in good part. For the Ceremonies which God appointed, are called
typoi. Notwithstanding the Prophet condemns expreslie the figures which the
Jews had made. Why so? Because God will not be worshipped under a visible and
external form. If any man object that he speaks in this place, of stars:
that is true I confess: but I stand only upon this, that although the
Prophet does give their Idols some honest name, yet does he sharply condemn
their corrupt worship. Whereby the foolish and childish cauilling of the
Papists is refuted. Because they deny that those images which they worship,
are Idols, they say that that mad worship of theirs is eiconodouleia or
serving of Images, and not eidolodouleia or worshipping of Idols. Seeing they
mock God sophistically, there is no man that is indewed even but with common
understanding, which does not see that they are more than ridiculous even in
such toys. For although I move no question about the word, it is certain
that the word typos is more honorable than eiconos. But those same typoi or
figures are simply condemned in this place, which men make to themselves not
only pros ten latreian, or that they may worship them, but pros ten
proscunesin, that is, that they may give them even any reverence at all.
Therefore that filthy distinction falls flat to the ground, wherein the
Papists think they have a crafty starting hole.

Beyond Babylon. The Prophet names Damascus: neither does the Greek
interpretation dissent from the same. Wherefore it may be that the word Babylon
crope in here through error. Though in the sum of the thing there be no
great difference. The Israelites were to be carried away to Babylon: but
because they thought that they had a sure and strong fortress in the kingdom
of Syria, whose head Damascus was: therefore the Prophet says, that Damascus
shall not help them, but that God shall drive them farther, as if he should
say, So long as you have Damascus set against your enemies, you think that you
are well sensed: but God shall carry you away beyond it: even into Assyria and
Chaldea.

44 Our fathers had the testimony of witness in the wilderness, like as he
had appointed speaking to Moses, that he should make it according to the form
which he had seen.

45 Which tabernacle our fathers which succeeded, brought with Jesus into the
possession of the Gentiles, which God drove out before the face of our fathers,
until the days of David.

46 Who found favor before God: and desired that he might find a tabernacle
for the God of Jacob.

47 But Solomon built him an house.

48 But the most highest dwells not in temples made with hands: as the
Prophet says,

49 Heaven is my seat, and the earth is my footestoole. What house will ye
build for me? says the Lord: or what place is it that I should rest in?

50 Has not my hand made all these things.

44 The Tabernacle of witness. Stephen shows here that the blame cannot be
laid upon God, because the Jews polluted themselves with diverse
superstitions, as if God had suffered them to wander freely. For he says that
God had commanded how he would be worshipped by them. Whereupon it follows
that they were entangled in so many errors, because they would not follow
that form which God had appointed. Although he girdeth them for two causes:
Because being not content with that rule alone which God had prescribed, they
invented to themselves strange worships: secondly because they had no respect
unto the right end of the temple, and of the ceremonies which God had
appointed. For whereas they ought to have been unto them exercises of the
spiritual worship, they apprehended nothing but that which was carnal,
according to their carnal nature, that is, they took the shadow for the
body.

Therefore we see that the Jews were first reprehended for their boldness,
for because that being not content with the plain word of God, they were
carried away after their own inventions. Secondly they are reproved for the
preposterous abuse of the true and sincere worship: because they followed the
flesh in steed of the Spirit. They had, says he, the Tabernacle of witness.
Therefore it was their own wantonness and rashness only, which caused them to
sin. For seeing they were well taught, what was the right way and order of
worshipping God, all cloak and color of ignorance was taken away. Which thing
is worth the noting. For seeing God does after a sort bridle us, when he
makes his will known unto us, if after we have received his commandment,
we turn aside either unto the right hand or to the left, we be twice guilty:
because the servant which knows his masters will, and does it not, shall
suffer more stripes. This is the first mark whereby the holy Spirit does
distinguish all bastardly and corrupt worshipings from the true and sincere
worship. Yea (to speak more briefly) the first difference between true
worship and Idolatry is this, when the godly take in hand nothing but that
which is agreeable to the word of God: but the other think all that lawful
which pleases themselves: and so they count their own will a Law, whereas God
allows nothing but that which he himself has appointed. To this end
serves the word witness.

The Hebrewe word Moed, signifies in deed an appointed place, and time, or
an assembly of men: but the reason expressed in Moses, shows that there is
another cause why it is so named. For in Moses this is oftentimes repeated, I
will meet with you there. Therefore the Tabernacle was consecrated by the
covenant and word of the Lord, and his voice was heard there continually,
that it might be distinguished from all profane places.

According to the form which he had seen. This is referred unto the second
point which I have touched. For it may be that he which shall use the
Ceremonies only which God appointed, shall notwithstanding worship God amiss
for God cares not for external rites, save only in as much as they are
tokens of the heavenly truth. Therefore God would have the Tabernacle to be
made like unto the heavenly figure, that the Jews might know that they were
not to stay still in the external figures. Furthermore let him which is
disposed, read my commentaries upon the Epistle to the Hebrews, Exo. 25.40.
Hebre. 8.5.
and he shall see what that figure whereof mention is made Exodus 25. did
signify. Stephen does only briefly tell them in this place that the
worship which God commanded the Jews, is spiritual, and that they according
to their carnal blockishnesse were evil and false interpreters. Therefore as
we have said that God allows no worship but that which is grounded in his
commandment: so we are taught here, that it is requisite in the right use
of the commandment, that the spiritual truth be present. Which thing being
granted, it was the like question which we said did consist principally in
this issue, Whether the shadows ought to yield to the body or no. Whereas
Moses is said to have seen a form or figure, the Spirit of God signifies
thereby, that it is unlawful for us to invent forms at our pleasures, but
that all our senses must be set upon that form which God shows, that all
our religion may be formed according to it. The word figure signifies here
in this place the principal pattern which is nothing else but the spiritual
truth.

45 Which they brought in. This serves to increase the frowardness of the
nation, that where as the Tabernacle did continue with them, and they carried
the same whither so ever they went, yet could they not be kept within the
bounds of Gods covenant, but they would have strange and profane rites, to
wit, declaring that God dwelt amidst them, from whom they were so far
distant, and whom they did drive out of that inheritance which he had given
them. To this purpose serves that also, that God did bewtifie the Tabernacle
with diverse miracles: for the worthiness thereof was established by those
victories which the Jews had gotten, as it appears by diverse places of the
holy history. Therefore it must needs be that they were very disobedient,
which did not cease oftentimes to start aside from that worship which was so
many ways approved.

Until the days of David. Although the Ark of the Lord continued long in
Silo, yet it had no certain place until the reign of David. For it was
unlawful for men to erect a place for the same, 1. Sam. 1.3. 2. Sam. 24.11.
but it was to be placed in that place which the Lord had showed, as Moses
says oftentimes.

Neither durst David him self after he had taken it from the enemies, bring
it into the threshing floor of Areuna, until the Lord had declared by an
Angel from heaven, that that was the place which he had chosen. And Steeuen
counts this a singular benefit of God not without great cause, that the
place was showed to David, wherein the Israelites should hereafter worship God.
As in the Psalm, Psalm. 132.3.
he rejoices as over some notable thing: I was glad when they said unto me, We
will go into the house of the Lord, our feet shall be stable in thy courts, O
Jerusalem. The priesthood was coupled with the kingdom. Therefore the stabilitie
of the kingdom is showed in the resting of the arc. Therefore it is said that
he desired this so earnestly, that he bound himself with a solemn vow, that
he would not come within his house, that his eyes should enjoy no sleep, nor
his temples any rest, until he should know a place for the Lord, and a
tabernacle for the God of Jacob. Furthermore the place was showed to David, 1.
Reg. 5.5.
but it was granted to Solomon to build the temple.

47 Solomon built. Steeuen seems to gird Solomon glauncinglye in this place,
as if he did not regard the nature of God in building the temple, yet did he
attempt that work not without the commandment of God. There was also a
promise added, wherein God did testify that he would be present with his
people there. I answer that when Steeuen denies that God dwells in temples
made with hands, that is not referred unto Solomon, who knew full well that God
was to be sought in heaven, and that men's minds must be lifted up thither by
faith. Which thing he uttered also in that solemn prayer which he made. The
heavens of heavens do not contain thee: and how much less this house? but he
reproves the blockishnesse of the people, which abused the temple: as if it
had had God tied to it. Isay. 6.6.
Which appears more plainly by the testimony of Isaias, which he cites
also: God, says he, would have Solomon to build him a temple, but they were
greatly deceived who thought that he was as it were included in such a
building: as he complains by his Prophet, that the people do him injury
when as they imagine that he is tied to a place. But the Prophet does not for
that cause only inueigh against the Jews, because they worshipped. God
superstitiously, thinking that his power was tied to the temple, but because
they did esteem him according to their own affection, and therefore after that
they had ended their sacrifices and external pomp, they imagined that he was
pleased, and that they had brought him indebted to them. This was almost a
common error in all ages, because men thought that cold ceremonies were
sufficient enough for the worship of God. The reason is, because for as much as
they are carnal and wholly set upon the world, they imagine that God is like to
them. Therefore to the end God may take from them this blockishnesse, he says
that he fills all things.

49 For whereas he says, that heaven is his seat, and the earth his
footestoole: it must not be so understood, as if he had a body, or could be
divided into parts after the manner of men: but because he is infinite, therefore
he says, that he cannot be comprehended within any spaces of place. Therefore
those men are deceived, who esteem God or his worship according to their own
nature. And because the Prophet had to deal with hypocrites, he does not only
dispute about the essence of God: but also teaches generally, that he is far
unlike to men, and that he is not moved with the vain pomp of this world, as
they are. Here arises that question also, why the Prophet says that the Lord
has no place of rest in the world, Psalm. 132.14
whereas notwithstanding the Spirit affirms the contrary else where, Psalm.
132. This is my rest for ever. Moreover Isaias does adorn the church with this
self same title, that it is the glorious rest of God: alluding unto the
temple. I answer, that when GOD appointed signs of his presence in the temple
and sacrifices in times past, he did not this to the end he might settle and
fasten himself and his power there. Therefore the Israelites did wickedly, who
setting their minds wholly upon the signs, did forge to themselves an earthly
God. They dealt also vngodlilie, who under this color took to themselves
liberty to sin, as if they could readily and easily pacify god with bare
ceremonies. Thus does the world use to mock God. When God does declare by the
external rites that he will be present with his, that he may dwell in the
midst of them, he commands them to lift up their minds, that they may seek
him spiritually. Hypocrites which are entangled in the world, will rather pluck
God out of heaven: and whereas they have nothing but vain and bare figures, they
are puffed up with such foolish confidence, that they pamper themselves in their
sins carelessly. So at this day the Papists include Christ in the bread and
wine in their imagination: that don so sone as they have worshipped their idol
with a foolish worship, they vaunte and crack, as if they were as holy as
angels. We must diligently note these two vices, that men do superstitiously
forge to them selves a carnal and worldly God which does so come down unto
them, that they remain still having their minds set upon the earth, and that
they rise not up in mind to heaven. Again they dream that God is pacified
with frivolous obedience. Hereby it comes to pass that they are befotted in
the visible signs: and secondly that they go about to bring God indebted to
the^ after a childish manner, and with things which be nothing worth. Now we
understand in what sense the prophet says, that god has no place of rest in
the world. He would indeed that the temple should have been a sign and pledge
of his presence, yet only to the godly which did ascend into heaven in heart,
which did worship him spiritually with pure faith. But he has no place of rest
with the superstitious, who through their foolish inventions, tie him unto the
elements of the world, or do erect unto him an earthly worship: neither yet
with Hypocrites, who are puffed up with dru^ken confidence, as if they had done
their duty toward god well, after that they have played in their toies. In
sum, the promise received by faith, does cause God to hear us in his temple,
as if he were present, to show forth his power in the sacraments: but unless
we rise up unto him by faith, we shall have no presence of his. Hereby we may
easily gather, that when he dwells amidst those that be his, he is neither
tied to the earth, neither comprehended in any place, because they seek him
spirituallie in heaven.

50 Has not mine hand. The Prophet tells the people in these words, that
god has no need either of gold, either of precious furniture of the temple,
either of the sacrifices: whereupon it follows that his true worship is not
contained in ceremonies. For he desires none of all these things which we
offer unto him, for his own sake, but only that he may exercise us in the
study of godliness, which argument is handeled more at large Psalm. 50. For
although this be a shameful foolishnes, to go about to feed god with
sacrifices: yet unless hypocrites were drowned in the same, they would make no
such account of toys: because all that is unsavory before God, which
dissenteth from the spiritual worship. Therefore let us know that God seeks us
and not ours, which we have only at pleasure. And hereby it appears also what
great difference there is between true religion and the carnal inventions of
men.

51 You stiffenecked and of an uncircumcised heart and ears, ye have always
resisted the holy Ghost: as your fathers did, so do ye.

52 Which of the Prophets have not your fathers persecuted? and they have
slain those which foretold of the coming of the Just, of whom you are now made
the betraiers and murderers.

53 Who have received the law in the dispositions of Angels, and have not
kept it.

51 For as much as Steeuen does not expressly answer the points of the
accusation, I am of their mind who think that he would have said more, if his
oration had not been broken off with some uproar. For we know what a sessions
of judges he had. Therefore no marvel if they enforced him to hold his peace
with noise and outcries. And we see also, that he did use long insinuation of
set purpose, that he might tame and appeace them, who were like brute beasts
most cruel. But it is likely that their madness was then incensed, when he
proved that they had most wickedly corrupt the law, that the temple was
polluted with their superstitions, and that there is nothing sincere amongst
them, because whiles they did stick in bare figures, they did not worship God
spiritually: because they did not refer the ceremonies unto the heavenly
figure. But though Steeuen did not enter the cause straight way, but assayed to
make their fierce minds somewhat more gentle by little and little: yet did he
reason very fitly to purge him self of the crime laid to his charge. These two
things, as we have said, were the principal points of the question, That
Steeuen had blasphemed God and his temple, That he went about to disanull the
law. That Steeuen might clear himself of both these false flanders, he began
at the calling of Abraham, and declares that the Jews excelled the Gentiles,
not of their own nature, not by any right of their own, not by any merits of
works, but by a f^ privilege, because god had adopted the^ in the person of
Abraham. This is also very pertinent to the cause, that the covenant of
salvation was made with Abraham, before any temple or ceremonies were, yea
before circumcision was appointed. Of which things the Jews did so boast, that
they said there was no worship of God without them, neither any holiness. After
that he set down how wonderful and manifold the goodness of God was toward
Abraham his stock, and again how wickedly and frowardly they had refused so
much as in them lay, the grace of God. Whereby it appears that it cannot be
ascribed to their own merits, that they are counted Gods people: but because
God did choose them of his own accord being unworthy, and did not cease to do
the^ good, though they were most unthankful. Their lofty and proud spirits
might by this means have bin subdued, tamed, and humbled, that being emptied
of that wind of foolish glory, they might come unto the mediator. Thirdly, he
declared that the Angel was the governor and chief in giving the law and
delivering the people: and that Moses did so serve in his function, that he
taught that there should come other prophets hereafter, who should
notwithstanding have one which should be the chief of the^, that he might make
an end of all prophesies, and that he might bring the perfect accomplishment of
them all. Whereby it is gathered that these are nothing less than Moses his
disciples, who reject that kind of doctrine which was promised and commended
in the law, together with the author thereof. Last of all he shows that all
the old worship which was prescribed by Moses, is not to be esteemed of it
self, but that it ought rather to be referred to another end, because it was
made according to the heavenly pattern: and that the Jews have always been
wicked interpreters of the law: because they conceived nothing but that which
was earthly. Hereby is it proved that there is no injury done to the temple
and the law, when Christ is made as it were the end and truth of both. But
because the state of the cause did consist chiefly in this: that the worship
of GOD does not properly consist in sacrifices and other things, and that all
ceremonies did nothing else but shadow Christ. Steeuen was purposed to stand
upon this point, if the Jews would have permitted him: but because when he
was come to the pith of the matter, they cannot abide to hear any more, they
were so incensed with fury; the application of those things which he had
said, unto this cause which he had in hand, is wanting. And he is enforced to
use a sharp reprehension for a conclusion: Exodus 32.9. and 33.3.5.
Ye of an hard neck, says he. We see how soon he is offended with them with
an holy zeal: but because he saw that he spoke many things to small end,
especially before deaf men, he breaks off his doctrine. This is a Metaphor
taken from horses or oxen, which Moses uses often, when he will say that his
people is a rebellious people and disobedient to God, and also unruly. The
vpbraiding which follows, was of greater force with them. Circumcision was
unto them a veil and covering to cover all vices. Therefore when he calls
them uncircumcised in heart, he does not only mean that they are rebellious
against god and stubborn: but that they were found treacherous and covenant
breakers even in that sign whereof they did so greatly boast, and so he
turns that back most fitly to their shame, whereof they made boast to their
glory. For this is all one as if he should have said, that they had broken
the covenant of the Lord, so that their circumcision was void and profane. This
speech is taken out of the law and the prophets. For as god has appointed the
sign, so he would have the Jews know to what end they were circumcised: to
wit, that they might circu^cise their hearts and all their corrupt affections
to the Lord, as we read, And now circumcise your hearts to the Lord. Romans
2.28.
Wherefore the letter of circumcision, as Paul calls it, is a vain visure
with God. So, forasmuch as at this day, the spiritual washing is the truth of
our baptism, it is to be feared least that may well be objected to us, that
we are not partakers of Baptism, because our souls and flesh are polluted
with filthiness.

Ye have always resisted. At the first Steeuen vouchsafed to call these men
Fathers and brethren, against whom he inueigheth thus sharply. Therefore so
long as there remained any hope, that they might be made more gentle, he dealt
not only friendly with them, but he spoke honorably unto them: now so soon as
he espieth their desperate stubbornness, he does not only take from them all
honor, but least he should have any fellowship with them, he speaks unto
them as unto men of another kindred. You, says he, are like to your fathers,
who have always rebelled against the spirit of God. But he himself came of
the same Fathers: and yet that he may couple himself to Christ, he forgets
his kindred, in as much as it was wicked. And yet for all this, he binds them
not all in one bundle as they say, but he speaks unto the multitude. And
those are said to resist the Spirit, who reject him when he speaks in the
prophets. Neither does he speak in this place of secret revelations,
wherewith God inspireth every one: but of the external ministry. Which we
must note diligently. He purposes to take from the Jews, all color of
excuse. And therefore he vpbraideth unto them, that they had purposely, and not
of ignorance, resisted God. Whereby it appears, what great account the Lord
makes of his word, and how reverently he will have us to receive the same.
Therefore least like Giants we make war against God, let us learn to hearken
to the ministers, by whose mouth he teaches us.

52 Which of the Prophets. For as much as they ought not to bear their fathers
fault, Steeuen seems to deal unjustly, in that he reckons this amongst
their faults, unto whom he speaks: but he had just causes so to do. First
because they did vaunt that they were Abraham his holy progeny, it was worth
the labor to show unto them how great vanity that was, as if Steven should
say, that there is no cause why they should vaunt of their stock, for as much as
they come of those who were wicked murderers of the prophets. So that he
touches that glancinglie, which is more plainly set down by the prophets,
that they are not the children of prophets, but a degenerate and bastardly
issue, the seed of Chanaan etc. Which thing we may at this day object to the
papists, when as they so highly extol their fathers. Furthermore, this
serves to amplify withal, whereas he says, That it is no new thing for them
to resist the truth: but that they have this wickedness, as it were by
inheritance from their fathers. Furthermore, it was requisite for Steeuen by
this means to pluck from their faces the visure of the church, wherewith they
burdened him. This was an unmeet prejudice against the doctrine of the
Gospel, in that they boasted that they are the church of God, and did challenge
this title by long succession. Therefore Steeuen prevent them on the contrary,
and proves that their Fathers did no less than they, rage against the
prophets, through wicked contempt and hatred of sound doctrine. Lastly this is
the continual custom of the scripture, to gather the fathers and children
together under the same giltinesse, seeing they pollute themselves with the
same offenses, and that famous sentence of Christ answers thereto. Fulfill the
measure of your fathers until the just blood come upon you, from Abell unto
Zacharias.

Who have foretold. Hereby we gather that this was the drift of all the
prophtes to direct their nation unto Christ: as he is the end of the law. It
were too long to gather all the prophesies wherein the coming of Christ was
foretold. Romans 10.4.
Let it suffice to know this generally, that it was the common office of all
the prophets to promise salvation by the grace of Christ. Christ is called in
this place the Just, not only to note his innocence, but of the effect:
because it is proper to him, to appoint justice in the world. And even in this
place does Steeuen prove that the Jews were altogether unworthy of the
benefit of redemption: because the fathers did not only refuse that in times
past, which was witnessed unto them by the prophets, but they did also cruelly
murder the messengers of grace: and their children endeavored to extinguish the
author of righteousness and salvation which was offered unto them. By which
comparison Christ teaches that the wicked conspiracy of his enemies was an
heap of al iniquities.

53 Who have received the law. They called that fury wherewith they raged
against Steven, zeal of the law: as if he had been a forsaker of the law, and
a revolt, and had enforced others to fall away in like sort. Although he was
determined to clear himself of this false accusation, yet he did not go
through with his answer. For he could not be heard, and it was to no end to
speak to deaf men. Therefore he is content at a word to take from the^ their
false color and pretense. It is evident, says he, that you lie when you
pretend the zeal of the law, which you transgress and break without ceasing:
and as he objected unto them in the words next going before, the treacherous
murder of the Just. so now he vpbraideth unto them their reuolting from the
law. Some man will say that Steeuens cause is no whit bettered hereby, because
the Jews break the law. But as we have already said, Steeuen does not so
chide them, as if his defense did principally consist in this issue, but that
they may not flatter themselves in their false boasting. For hypocrites must be
handled thus, who will notwithstanding seem to be most earnest defenders of
Gods glory, though in deed they contemn him carelessly. And here is also a fit
Antistrophe, because they made semblance that they receive the law which was
committed to them, which was notwithstanding reprochfully despiced by them.

In the dispositions of angels. It is word for word, into the dispositions, but
it is all one. Furthermore we need not seek any other interpreter of this
saying than Paul, who says, that the law was disposed or ordained by angels.
For he uses the participle there, whereof this nowne is derived. Gal. 3.16.
And his meaning is that the angels were the messengers of God, and his
witnesses in publishing the law, that the authority thereof might be firm and
stable. Therefore forasmuch as God did call the angels to be as it were solemn
witnesses when he gave the Jews his law, the same Angels shall be witnesses of
their unfaithfulness. And to this end does Steven make mention of the Angels,
that he may accuse the Jews in presence of them, and prove them guilty,
because they have trangressed the law. Hereby we may gather what shall become
of the despisers of the gospel, which does so far excel the law, that it does
after a sort darken the glory thereof, as Paul teaches 2. Cor. 3.

54 Furthermore when they heard these things, they were cut asunder in their
hearts, and they gnashed upon him with their teeth.

55 But forasmuch as he was full of the holy Ghost, he looked up steadfastly
into heaven, and saw the glory of God, and Jesus standing at the right hand of
God.

56 And he said: Behold, I see the heavens open, and the Son of man standing
at the right hand of God. And they cried with a loud voice, and stopped their
ears.

57 And with one accord they ran upon him:

58 And having cast him out of the city, they stoned him.

54 When they heard. The beginning of the action had in it some color of
judgment: but at length the Judges can not bridle their fury. First they
interrupt him with murmuring and noise, now they break out into envious and
deadly cryings, least they should hear any one word. Afterward they hale the
holy man out of the city, that they may put him to death. And Luke expresses
properly, what force Satan has to drive forward the adversaries of the word.
When he says, that they burst asunder inwardly, he notes that they were not
only angry, but they were also stricken with madness. Which fury breaks out
into the gnashing of the teeth, as a violent fire into flame. The reprobate who
are at Satan his commandment, must needs be thus moved with the hearing of
the word of God: and this is the state of the Gospel, it drives hypocrites
into madness, who might seem before to be modest: as if a drunken man which
is desirous of sleep, be suddenly awaked. Luke. 2.35,
Therefore Simeon assigns this to Christ as proper to him, to diclose the
thoughts of many hearts. Yet notwithstanding this ought not to be ascribed to
the doctrine of salvation, whose end is rather this, to frame men's minds to
obey god, after that it has subdued them. But so soon as Satan has possessed
their minds, if they be urged, their ungodliness will break out. Therefore
this is an accidentarie evil, yet we are taught by these examples, that we must
not look that the word of God should draw all men unto a sound mind.

Which doctrine is very requisite for us unto constancy. Those which are
teachers cannot do their duty as they ought, but they must set themselves
against the contemners of God. And forasmuch as there are always some wicked
men, which set light by the majesty of God, they must ever now and then, have
recourse unto this vehemency of Steven. For they may not wink, when Gods
honor is taken from him. And what shall be the end thereof? Their ungodliness
shall be the more incensed, so that we shall seem to power oil into the fire
(as they say). But whatsoever come of it, yet must we not spare the wicked, but
we must keep them down mightily: although they could power out all the
furies of hell. And it is certain that those which will flatter the wicked, do
not respect the fruit, but are faint hearted through fear of danger. But as
for us, howsoever we have no such success as we could wish, let us know that
courage in defending the doctrine of godliness, is a sweet smelling sacrifice
to God.

55 For as much as he was full. We cannot almost express into what straites the
servant of Christ was brought, when he saw himself beset round with raging
enemies: the goodness of his cause was oppressed, partly with false
accusations and malice, partly with violence and outrageous outcries: he was
inuironned with stern countenaunces on every side: he himself was hailed unto
a cruel and horrible kind of death, he could epsy succor and ease no where.
Therefore being thus destitute of man's help, he turns him self to ward God.
We must first note this, that Steven did look unto God, who is the judge of
life and death, (turning his eyes from beholding the world) when he was brought
into extreme despair of all things, whiles that there is nothing but death
before his eyes. That done, we must also add this, that his expectation was
not in vain, because Christ appeared to him by and by. Although Luke does
signify, that he was now armed with such power of the Spirit, as could not be
overcome, so that nothing could hinder him from beholding the heavens.
Therefore Steven looks up toward heaven, that he may gather courage by
beholding Christ, that dying he may triu^phe gloriously, having ouercom death.
But as for us, it is no marvel if Christ do not show himself to us, because we
are so set and tied upon the earth. Hereby it comes to pass, that our hearts
fail us at every light rumor of danger, and even at the falling of a leaf.
And that for good causes, for where is our strength but in Christ? But we pass
over the heavens, as if we had no help any where else, save only in the world.
Furthermore this vice can be redressed by no other means, then if God lift us
up by his Spirit being naturally set upon the earth. Therefore Luke assigns
this cause, why Steue^ looked up steadfastly toward heaven: because he was full
of the spirit. We must also ascend into heaven having this spirit to be our
directer and guide, so often as we are oppressed with troubles. And surely
until such time as he illuminate us, our eyes are not so quick of sight, that
they can come unto heaven. Yea the eyes of the flesh are so dull, that they
cannot ascend into heaven.

He saw the glory of God. Luke signifies as I have said, that Christ appeared
forthwith to Steven so soon as he lifted up his eyes toward heaven. But he
tells us before, that he had other eyes given him than the fleshly eyes,
seeing that with the same he flies up unto the glory of God. Whence we must
gather a general comfort, that God will be no less present with us, if
forsaking the world, all our senses strive to come to him: not that he
appears unto us by any external vision, as he did to Steeuen, but he will
so reveal himself unto us within, that we may in deed feel his presence.
And this manner of seeing ought to be sufficient for us, when God does not only
by his power and grace declare that he is nigh at hand, but does also prove
that he dwells in us.

56 Behold I see the heavens. God meant not only privately to provide for his
servant, but also to wring and torment his enemies: as Steeuen does
courageously triumph over them, when he affirms plainly that he saw a
miracle. And here may a question be moved, how the heavens were opened. For
mine own part, I think that there was nothing changed in the nature of the
heavens: but that Steeuen had new quickness of sight granted him, which
pierced through all lets even unto the invisible glory of the kingdom of
heaven. For admit we grant, that there was some division or parting made in
heaven, yet man's eye could never reach so far. Again, Steeuen alone did see
the glory of God. For that spectacle was not only hid from the wicked, who
stood in the same place, but they were also so blinded within themselves, that
they did not see the manifest truth. Therefore he says, that the heavens are
opened to him in this respect, because nothing keeps him from beholding the
glory of God. Whereupon it follows that the miracle was not wrought in heaven,
but in his eyes. Wherefore there is no cause, why we should dispute long about
any natural vision: because it is certain that Christ appeared unto him not
after some natural manner, but after a new and singular sort. And I pray you of
what color was the glory of GOD, that it could be seen naturally with the eyes
of the flesh? Therefore we must imagine nothing in this vision, but that which
is divine. Moreover, this is worth the noting, that the glory of God appeared
not unto Steeuen wholly as it was, but according to man's capacity. For that
infiniteness cannot be comprehended with the measure of any creature.

The son of man standing. He sees Christ reigning in that flesh, wherein
he was abased: so that in very deed the victory did consist in this one thing.
Therefore it is not superfluous, in that Christ appears unto him, and for
this cause does he also call him the son of man, as if he should say, I see
that man, whom ye thought ye had quite extinguished by death, enjoying the
government of heaven: therefore gnash with your teeth as much as you list: there
is no cause why I should fear to fight for him even unto blood, who shall not
only defend his own cause, but my salvation also. Notwithstanding here may a
question be moved, why he saw him standing, who is said elsewhere to sit.
Augustine as he is sometimes more subtle than needs, says, that he
sits as a judge, that he stood then as an advocate. For mine own part I
think that though these speeches be diverse, yet they signify both one thing,
For neither sitting, ne yet standing notes out, how the body of Christ was
framed: but this is referred unto his power and kingdom. For where shall we
erect him a throne, that he may sit at the right hand of God the Father:
seeing God does fill all things in such sort, that we ought to ymagine no
place for his right hand? Therefore the whole text is a Metaphor, when Christ
is said to sit or stand at the right hand of God the Father, and the plain
meaning is this, that Christ has all power given him, that he may reign in
his Fathers steed in that flesh wherein he was humbled, and that he may be
next him. And although this power be spread abroad through heaven and earth,
yet some men imagine amiss, that Christ is every where in his humane nature.
For though he be contained in a certain place, yet that hinders no whit, but
that he may and does show forth his power throughout all the whole world.
Therefore if we be desirous to feel him present by the working of his grace,
we must seek him in heaven: as he revealed himself unto Steeuen there. Also
some men do affirm ridiculously out of this place, that he drew near unto
Steeuen that he might see him. For we have already said that Steeuen his
eyes were so lifted up by the power of the Spirit, that no distance of place
could hinder the same. I confess in deed that speaking properly, that is,
philosophically, there is no place above the heavens. But this is sufficient
for me, that it is peruers doting to place Christ any where else, save only in
heaven, and above the elements of the world.

57 Crying with a loud voice. This was either a vain show of zeal, as
hypocrites are almost always pricked forward with ambition, to break out
into immoderate heat as Caiphas when he heard Christ say thus, After this
ye shall see the son of man etc. did rent his clothes in token of
indignation, as if it were intolerable blasphemy: or else certainly the
preaching of the glory of Christ was unto them such a torment, that they must
needs burst through madness. And I am rather of this mind for Luke says
afterward, that they were carried violently as those men which have no hold of
themselves, use to leap out immoderately.

58 They stoned. God had appointed this kind of punishment in the law, for
false Prophets: as it is written in the thirteenth chapter of Deuteronomie:
but God does also define there, who ought to be reckoned in that number: to
wit, he which does attempt to bring the people unto strange Gods, therefore
the stoning of Steeuen was both unjust and also wicked, because he was unjustly
condemned. So that the martyrs of Christ must suffer like punishment with the
wicked. It is the cause alone which makes the difference: but this difference
is so highly esteemed before God and his angels, that the rebukes of the
martyrs do far excel al glory of the world. Yet here may a question be
moved, How it was lawful for the Jews to stone Steven who had not the
government in their hands. For in Christ's cause they answer, It is not lawful
for us to put any man to death. I answer, that they did this violently and in
an vproare. And whereas the president did not punish this wickedness, it may
be that he winked at many things, least he should bring that hatred upon his
own head which they bare against the name of Christ. We see that the Roman
presidentes did chiefly wink at the civil discordes of that nation even of set
purpose: that when one of them had murdered another, they might the sooner be
overcome afterward.

And the witnesses laid down their clothes at a young man's feet, named
Saul.

59 And they stoned Steeuen, calling on, and saying: Lord Jesus, receive my
spirit.

60 And he kneeled down, and cried with a loud voice: Lord, lay not this
sin to their charge. And when he had said thus, he fell on sleep.

61 And Saul consented to his death.

And the witnesses. Luke signifies that even in that tumult they observed some
show of judgment. This was not commanded in vain that the witnesses should
throw the first stone: because seeing they must commit the murder with
their own hands, many are holden with a certain dread, who otherwise are
less afraid to cut the throtes of the innocent with perjury of the tongue.
But in the mean season we gather how blind and mad the ungodliness of
these witnesses was, who are not afraid to imbrue their blooddie hands with
the blood of an innocent, who had already committed murder with their
tongues. Whereas he says, that their clothes were laid down at the feet of
Saul, he shows that there was no let in him, but that being cast into a
reprobate sense, he might have perished with the rest. For who would not
think that he was desperate, who had infected his youth with such cruelty?
Neither is his age expressed to lessen his fault, as some unskillful men go
about to prove: for he was of those years, that want of knowledge could no
whit excuse him. And Luke will shortly after declare, that he was sent by the
high Priest to persecute the faithful. Therefore he was no child, he might well
be counted a man. Why then is his youth mentioned? That every man may consider
with him self, what great hurt he might have done in Gods Church, unless
Christ had brideled him betimes. And therein appears a most notable token
both of Gods power, and also of his grace, in that he tamed a fierce and wild
beast in his chief fury, even in a moment, and in that he extolled a
miserable murderer so highly, who through his wickedness was drowned almost
in the deep pit of hell.

59 Calling on. Because he had uttered words enough before men though in
vain, he turns himself now unto God for good causes, and armeth himself
with prayer to suffer all things. For although we have need to run unto Gods
help every minute af an hour during our whole warfare, yet we have greatest
need to call upon God in the last conflict which is the hardest.

And Luke expresses again how furious mad they were: because their cruelty
was not aswaged even when they saw the servant of Christ praying humbly.
Furthermore, here is set down a prayer of Steeuen having two members. In the
former member where he commends his spirit to Christ, he shows the
constancy of his faith. In the other, where he prays for his enemies, he
testifies his love toward men. Forasmuch as the whole perfection of
godliness consists upon these two parts, we have in the death of Steeuen a
rare example of a godly and holy death. It is to be thought that he used many
mo words, but the sum tends to this end.

Lord Jesus. I have already said, that this prayer was a witness of
confidence: and surely the couragiousnesse and valiantness of Steeuen was
great, that when as he saw the stones fly about his ears, wherewith he should
be stoned by and by, when as he hears cruel curses and reproaches against his
head, he yet stays himself meekely upon the grace of Christ. In like sort
the Lord will have his servants to be brought to naught as it were sometimes, to
the end their salvation may be the more wonderful. And let us define this
salvation not by the understanding of our flesh but by faith. We see how
Steeuen leans not unto the judgment of the flesh, but rather assuring
himself even in very destruction that he shall be saved, he suffers death with
a quiet mind. For undoubtedly he was assured of this, Col. 3.3.
that our life is hid with Christ in God.

Therefore casting off all care of the body, he is content to commit his
soul into the hands of Christ. For he could not pray thus from his heart,
unless having forgotten this life, he had cast of all care of the same. Psalm.
31.6.
It behooves us with David to commit our souls into the hands of God daily,
so long as we are in the world, because we are environed with a thousand
deaths: that God may deliver our life from all dangers: but when we must die
indeed, and we are called thereunto, we must fly unto this prayer, that
Christ will receive our spirit. For he commended his own Spirit into the
hands of his Father, to this end that he may keep ours for ever. This is an
inestimable comfort, in that we know our souls do not wander up and down
when they flit out of our bodies, but that Christ receives them, that he may
keep them faithfully, if we commend them into his hands. This hope ought to
encourage us to suffer death patiently. Yea whosoever commends his soul to
Christ with an earnest affection of faith, he must needs resign himself
wholly to his pleasure and will. And this place does plainly testify that the
soul of man is no vain blast, which vanishes away, as some frantike fellows
imagine dotingly, but that it is an Essential spirit, which lives after this
life. Furthermore we are taught hereby, that we call upon Christ rightly and
lawfully, because all power is given him of the Father for this cause, that all
men may commit themselves to his tuition.

60 Kneeling down, he cried. This is the other part of his prayer, wherein he
joins the love of men with faith in Christ: and surely if we desire to be
gathered to Christ for our salvation, we must put on this affection. Whereas
Steeuen prays for his enemies, and those most deadly, and even in the very
instant, when their cruelty might provoke him unto desire of revenge, he
declares sufficiently what affection he bears toward all other men. And we
know that we are all commanded to do the same which Steven did: Mat. 5.93.94.
but because there is nothing more hard than so to forgive injuries, that we
will wish well to those who would have us undone, therefore we must always set
Steeuen before our eyes for an example. He cries in deed with a loud voice,
but he makes show of nothing before men, which was not spoken sincerely and
from the heart, as God himself does witness. Yet he cries aloud, that he may
omit nothing which might serve to assuage the cueltie of the enemies. The
fruit appeared not forthwith, yet undoubtedly he prayed not in vain: and
Paul is unto us a sufficient testimony, that this sin was not laid to all
their charges. I will not say as Augustine, that unless Steeuen had prayed, the
church should not have had Paul: for this is somewhat hard: only I say this,
that whereas God pardoned Paul, it appears thereby, that Steeuen his prayer
was not in vain. Here arises a question, How Steeuen prays for those, which
he said of late, did resist the holy ghost. but this seems to be the sin
against the Spirit, which shall never be forgiven. We may easily answer, that
that is pronounced generally of all, which belongs to many every where.
Therefore he called not the body of the people rebellious in such sort, that he
exempted none: again I have declared before, what manner of resisting he
condemned in that place: for it follows not by and by that they sin against
the holy ghost, who resist him for a time. When he prays, that God will not
lay the sin to their charge, his meaning is, that the guiltines may not
remain in them.

And when he had said thus, he fell on sleep. This was added that we may
know that these words were uttered even when he was ready to yield up the
Ghost, which is a token of wonderful constancy: also this word sleep notes
a meek kind of death. Now because he made this prayer when he was at the
point of death, he was not moved with any hope of obtaining pardon, to be so
careful to appease his enemies: but only that they might repent. When this
word sleep is taken in the scripture for to die, it must be referred unto
the body: least any man imagine foolishly with unlearned men, that the souls
do also sleep.

CHAP. VIII.
1 AND at that day there was great persecution raised against the church which
was at Jerusalem. Therefore they were all scattered abroad throughout all
regions of Judea, and Samaria, except the Apostles.

2 And religious men dressed Steeuen together, and they mourned sore for him.

3 But Saul made havoc of the church, and entering into houses, and drawing
thence men and women, he cast them into prison.

4 And they being dispersed, did go about preaching the word of God.

1 In this history we may first see the state of the godly in this world: to
wit, that they are like sheep appointed to be slain, as it is in the Psalm:
Psalm. 43.32.
and especially when the Lord lets loose the bridle to his enemies, that
they may put that cruelty in execution which they have in mind conceived.
Secondly, here is set down the end of persecutions: to wit, that they are so
far from breaking off the course of the Gospel, that they are rather made
helps to further the same, through the wonderful counsel of God. Like as it
was a manifest miracle, that the scattering abroad, mentioned by Luke,
gathered many unto the unity of faith, who were estraunged from God before.
Now let us consider every thing in order.

At that day. The persecution began at Steeuen: after that when their madness
was thereby set on fire, it waxed hot against all both one and other. For the
wicked are like brute beasts, for when they have once tasted blood, they are
more desirous thereof, and become more cruel through committing murder. For
Satan who is the father of all cruelty, does first take from them all feeling
of humanity, when they are once imbrued with innocent blood: that done he
stirs up in them an unquenchable thirsting after blood: whence those violent
assaults to commit murder, come: so that when they have once begun, they will
never make an end, with their will. Moreover, when they have power once
granted the^ to do hurt, their boldness increases in tract of time, so that
they are carried headlong more immoderately, which thing Luke also notes when
he says, The persecution was great. Undoubtedly the church had but small rest
before, neither was it free from the vexatio^ of the wicked, but the Lord
spared his for a time, that they might have some liberty: and now they began
to be sorer set on. These things must be applied unto our time also. If the
furiousness of our enemies seem at any time to be as it were fallen on
sleep, so that it casts not out flames far: let us know that the Lord
provides for our weakness: yet let us not in the mean season imagine that we
shall have continual truce, but let us be in readiness to suffer sorer
bruntes, as often as they shall break out suddenly. Let us also remember,
that if at any time the constancy of one man have whetted the cruelty of our
enemies, the blame of the evil is unjustly ascribed to him. For Luke does not
defame Steeuen, when as he says, that by means of him the church was sorer
vexed than before: but he rather turns this to his praise, because he did
valiauntly as the Standard Bearer encourage others with his example, to fight
courageously. When he calls it the church which was at Jerusalem, his meaning
is not, that there were churches elsewhere, but he passes over unto these
things which ensued thereupon. For whereas there was but this one only body of
the godly in all the world, it was rent in pieces through flight: yet there
sprang up more churches by and by of those lame members, which were dispersed
here and there, and so the body of Christ was spread abroad far and wide,
whereas it was before shut up within the walls of Jerusalem.

They were all scattered abroad. It is certain that they were not all scattered
abroad, but the scripture uses an universal note, for that which we say,
Every where, or abroad. The sum is this, that not only a few were in danger:
because the cruelty of the enemies raged throughout the whole church. Many do
oftentimes take themselves to their feet, through faintness of heart, even
when they hear any light rumor, but these are in another case. For they fled
not unadvisedly being discouraged, but because they saw no other means to
pacify the fury of the adversaries. And he says that they were scattered not
only through diverse places of Judea, but that they came even unto Samaria: so
that the middle wall began to be pulled down, Ephe. 2.14.
which made division between the Jews and the Gentiles. For the conversion of
Samaria, was as it were the first fruits of the calling of the Gentiles. For
although they had circumcision as had the people of God, yet we know that
there was great dissension, and that not without great cause, forasmuch as
they had in Samaria only a forged worship of god, as Christ affirms, because
it was only an unsavory emulation. Therefore God set open the gate for the
gospel then, that the scepter of Christ sent out of Jerusalem, might come unto
the Gentiles. He exempteth the Apostles out of this number, not that they were
free from the common danger: but because it is the duty of a good pastor, to
set him self against the invasions of wolves, for the saftie of his flock.
But here may a question be asked, forasmuch as they were commanded to preach
the Gospel throughout the whole world, why they stayed at Jerusalem, Mark. 16.16
even when they were expelled thence with force and hand? I answer, that
seeing Christ had commanded them to begin at Jerusalem, they employed
themselves there, until such time as being brought into some other place by
his hand, they might know for a surety that he was their guide. And we see
how fearfully they proceeded to preach the Gospel: not that they foreslowed
that function which was enjoined them: but because they were amassed at a new
and unwonted thing.

Therefore seeing they see the Gospel so mightily resisted at Jerusalem, they
dare go to no other place, until such time as they have broken that first huge
heap of straites. Assuredly they provide neither for their case, ne yet for
their own commodities, either for being void of care, by staying at
Jerusalem: for they have a painful charge: they are continually amiddest
diverse dangers, they encounter with great troubles: wherefore undoubtedly they
are purposed to do their duty. And especially, whereas they stand to it, when
all the rest fly, that is an evident testimony of valiant constancy. If any
man object, that they might have divided the Provinces amongst them, that they
might not all have been occupied in one place: I answer, that Jerusalem alone
had business enough for them all.

In sum, Luke reckons up this as a thing worthy of praise, that they
followed not the rest into voluntary exile, to avoid persecution: and yet he
does not reprehe^d the flight of those me^, whose state was more free. For the
Apostles did consider what particular thing their calling had: to wit, that
they should keep their standing, seeing the wolves did invade the sheepefolde.
The rigor of Tertullian and such like was too great, who did deny
indifferently that it is lawful to fly for fear of persecution. August. says
better, who gives leave to fly in such sort that the churches being
destitute of their Pastors, be not betrayed into the hands of the enemies.

This is surely the best moderation, which bears neither too much with the
flesh, neither drives those headlong to death, who may lawefully save their
lives. Let him that is disposed read the 180. Ep. to Honoratus. That I may
return to the Apostles, if they had been scattered here and there with fear
of persecution, even at the beginning, all men might have rightly called them
hirelings. How hurtful and filthy had the forsaking of the place bin, at the
present time? how greatly would it have discouraged the minds of all men? What
great hurt should they have done with their example among the posterity? It
shall sometimes so fall out in deed, that the pastor may also fly: that is,
if they invade him alone, if the laying waste of the church be not feared, if
he be absent. But and if both his flock and he have to encounter with the
adversary, he is a treacherous forsaker of his office, if he stand not
stoutlye to it even until the end. Private persons have greater liberty.

2 They dressed Steeuen. Luke shows that even in the heat of persecution, the
godly were not so discouraged, but being always zealous, they did those
duties which did belong to godliness. Burial seems to be a matter of small
importance: rather than they will foreslowe the same, they bring themselves in
no small hassarde of life. And as the circumstance of time does declare that
they contemned death valiantly: so again we gather thereby that they were
careful to do this thing not without great and urgent cause. For this served
greatly to exercise their faith, that the body of the holy martyr should not
be left to the wild beasts, in whom Christ had triumphed nobly according to
the glory of his Gospel. Neither could they live to Christ, unless they were
ready to be gathered unto Steeuen into the society of death. Therefore the
care they had to bury the martyr, was unto them a meditation unto invincible
constancy of professing the faith. Therefore they sought not in a superfluous
matter with an unadvised zeal to provoke their adversaries. Although that
general reason which ought always and every where to be of force amongst the
godly, was undoubtedly of great weight with them. For the rite of burying does
appertain unto the hope of the resurrection, as it was ordained by God since
the beginning of the world to this end.

Wherefore this was always counted cruel Barbarism, to suffer bodies to lie
unburied willingly. Profane men did not know why they should count the right of
burial so holy: but we are not ignorant of the end thereof: to wit, that
those which remain alive may know, that the bodies are committed to the earth
as to a prison, until they be raised up thence. Whereby it appears that this
duty is profitable rather for those which are alive, than for those which are
dead. Although it is also a point of our humanity, to give due honor to
those bodies to which we know blessed immortality to be promised.

They made great lamentation. Luke does also commend their profession of
godliness and faith in their lamentation. For a doleful and unprosperous end
causes men for the most part to forsake those causes wherein they were
delighted before. But on the other side these men declare by their mourning,
that they are no what terrified with the death of Stephen, from standing
stoutly in the approbation of their cause: considering therewithal what great
loss Gods church suffered by the death of one man. And we must reject that
foolish Philosophy, which wills me^ to be altogether blockish, that they may
be wise. It must needs be that the Stoics were void of common sense, who would
have a man to be with out all affection. Certain mad fellows would gladly
bring in the same dotings into the Church at this day, and yet notwithstanding
although they require an heart of iron of other men, there is nothing softer or
more effeminate than they. They cannot abide that other men should shed one
tear: if any thing fall out otherwise than they would wish, they make no end
of mourning. God does thus punish their arrogance iestingly (that I may so
term it) seeing that he sets them to be laughed at even by boys. But let us
know that those affections which God has given to man's nature, are of
themselves no more corrupt, than the author himself: but that they are first
to be esteemed according to the cause: secondly if they keep a mean and
moderation. Surely that man which denies that we ought to rejoice over the
gifts of God, is more like a block than a man: therefore we may no less
lawfully sorrow when they be taken away. And least I pass the compass of
this present place, Paul does not altogether forbid men mourning, when any
of their friends is taken away by death, but he would have a difference
between them and the unbelievers: because hope ought to be to them a comfort,
and a remedy against vnpatience. For the beginning of death causes us to
sorrow for good causes: but because we know that we have life restored to us
in Christ, we have that which is sufficient to appease our sorrow. In like
sort when we are sorry that the Church is deprived of rare and excellent men,
there is good cause of sorrow: only we must seek such comfort as may correct
excess.

3 But Saul. We must note two things in this place, how great the cruelty
of the adversaries was, and how wonderful the goodness of God was, who
vouchsafed to make Paul a Pastor of so cruel a wolf. For that desire to lay
wast the Church wherewith he was incensed, did seem to cut away all hope.
Therefore his conversion was so much the more excellent afterward. And it is
not to be doubted but that this punishment was laid upon him by God, after
that he had conspired to put Stephen to death together with the other wicked
men, that he should be the ringleader of cruelty. For God does oftentimes
punish sins more sharply in the Elect than in the reprobate.

4 And they were scattered abroad. Luke declares in this place also, that it
came to pass by the wonderful providence of God, that the scattering abroad of
the faithful, should bring many unto the unity of faith: thus does the Lord
use to bring light out of darkness, and life out of death. For the voice of the
Gospel which was heard heretofore in one place only, does now sound
euerywhere: in the mean season we are taught by this example, that we must not
yield unto persecutions: but rather be encouraged unto valiantnes. For when the
faithful fly from Jerusalem, they are not afterward discouraged either with
exile, or with their present miseries, or with any fear, that they degenerate
unto slouthfulnes: but they are as ready to preach Christ even in the midst of
their calamity, as if they had never suffered any trouble. Moreover Luke
seems to note that they lead a wandering life, in that they changed their
lodgings often. Therefore if we desire to be counted their brethren, let us
prick forward our selves so diligently, that no fear or bitterness of
cross discourage us, but that we go forward in showing forth the profession
of faith: and that we never be weary of furthering the doctrine of Christ. For
it is an absurd thing that exile and flight which are the first exercises of
martyrdom, should make us dumb and faint-harted.

5 And when Philip came into the city of Samaria, he preached Christ to them.

6 And the multitude gave ear to those things which Philip spoke, hearing
with one consent, and seeing the signs which he showed.

7 For where as many were possessed with unclean spirits, they came out crying
with a loud voice. And many that had the palsy, and which were lame, were
healed.

8 So that there was great joy in that city.

9 And a man named Simon, had been before in the city, exercising the art
magike, and bewitching the people of Samaria: saying, that he was some great
man.

10 To whom they all gave heed both small and great, saying: This man is the
great power of God.

11 And they had given heed unto him, because they had been bewitched long
time with his witchcraft.

12 But as soon as they believed Philip preaching concerning the kingdom of
God, and in the name of Jesus Christ, they were baptized both men and women.

13 And Simon himself believed, and being baptized, did cleave to Philip: and
when he saw the signs and great powers which were done, he wondered.

5 Luke said that they all preached the word of God, now he makes mention of
Philip alone, both because his preaching was more fruitful and effectual than
the preaching of the rest, and also because there followed notable histories,
which he will add afterward. He put the city of Samaria, for the city
Samaria, which was laid waste by Hircanus, and built again by Herod, and
called Sebaste. Read Josephus in his thirteenth and fifteenth books of
Antiquities. When he says that Philip preached Christ, he signifies that
the whole sum of the Gospel is contained in Christ. The other speech which he
uses shortly after, is more perfect: yet it is al one in effect. He joins
the kingdom of God and the name of Christ together: but because we obtain
this goodness through Christ, to have God to reign in us, and to lead an
heavenly life, being renewed into spiritual righteousness, and dead to the
world, therefore the preaching of Christ contains this point also under it.
But the sum is this, that Christ does repair with his grace the world,
being destroyed, which comes to pass when he reconcileth us to the father:
secondly when he regenerateth us by his spirit, that the kingdom of God may
be erected in us, when Satan is put to flight. Moreover whereas he declared
before, that the Apostles did not stir one foot from Jerusalem, it is to be
thought that he speaks of one of the seven Deacons, in this place, whose
daughters did also prophecy.

6 And the multitude gave ear. Luke declares how the Samaritans did embrace
Philips doctrine. For he says that they heard, whereby they took some
taste: there was also another prick whereby they were pricked forward, and
that was miracles: at length there followed attentiveness. This is the right
going forward unto faith. Romans 10.14.
For those which refuse that doctrine which they have not heard: how is it
possible that they should ever come unto faith, which comes by hearing?
Therefore where as they were ready to hear, that was the first step unto
reverence and attentiveness. And therefore it is no marvel, if faith be so
rare and almost none in the world: for how many be there which vouchsafe to
hearken when God speaks? Whereby it comes to pass that the more part
rejects the truth before they know the same, and have not so much as
lightly tasted it. And as hearing is the beginning of faith: so it should not
be sufficient of it self, unless the majesty of doctrine should also move
the hearts. And surely whosoever considers that he has to do with God,
cannot hear him contemptuously when he speaks: and the very doctrine which
is contained in his word, shall purchase authority for it self: so that
attentiveness shall flow of it self from hearing. As touching miracles we
know that there is a double use thereof: they serve to prepare us to hear the
Gospel: and to confirm us in the faith thereof. The aduerbe with one accord,
may be joined as well with hearing, as with attentiveness. This latter does
like me better, that they were attentive with one accord. And therein does
Luke commend the force and efficacy of Philips preaching, because a great
number of men was suddenly won to hear attentively with one consent.

7 Unclean Spirits. He touches certain kinds briefly, that we may know
with what miracles they were brought, to attribute any authority to Philip.
That crying wherewith the unclean spirits cried, was a token of resistance.
Wherefore this served not a little to set forth the power of Christ, that he
did bind the diuils with his commandment though they resisted stubbornly.

8 The ioy^ whereof he speaks, is a fruit of faith. For it cannot be but that
so soon as we know that God will be favorable and merciful, our minds shall be
rapt with incomparable joy, and such as does far pass all understanding.
Philip. 4.7.


9 A certain man named Simon. This was such a let, that it might seem that the
Gospel could have no passage to come unto the Samaritans. For the minds of
them all were bewitched with Simons iuglings. And this amasednesse was grown
to some strength by reason of long space of time. Furthermore experience
teaches what a hard matter it is to pluck that error out of the minds of
me^, which has taken root through long continuance, and to call them back
unto a sound and right mind, who are already hardened. Superstition made them
more obstinate in their error, because they counted Simon not only as a
Prophet of God, but even as the spirit of God.

10 For the surname great power, tended to this end, that whatsoever should
otherwise be divine, might wax vile through this greatness. Therefore the power
of Christ appears hereby more plainly, in that Philip brake through these
lets. Which thing Luke amplifieth.

11 When he says, that they were astonyed from the least to the greatest. For
seeing all men of what estate so ever they were, were deluded, what entrance
could the Gospel have: especially sythence it was no mean seducing? For all
their senses were besotted. And besides that we see thereby how mighty the
truth is, there is also set before us an example of constancy in Philip: who
though he see no way, yet does he set hand to the Lords work with a valiant
courage, waiting for the success which God should give. And thus must we do,
we must valiantly attempt whatsoever the Lord commands, even when our
endeavors seem to be vain. Furthermore whereas Satan did bewitch the
Samaritans: let us know that it is the common punishment of infidelity. Al men
are not bewitched in deed with the iuglings of inchaunters, neither are there
Simons every where, which can so seduce and deceive: but my meaning is, that it
is no wonder, if Satan do mock men diversely in the dark. For they are
subject to all errors whosoever are not governed by the Spirit of God.
Furthermore when Luke says that they were all seduced one with another: we are
taught that neither wit, neither all that reason and wisdom which we have,
are sufficient to avoid the craftiness of Satan withal. And surely we see
in what foolish and doting errors they were entangled, who were counted in the
world wiser than others.

The great power of God. Therefore Satan abused the name of God to deceive:
which is the most pestilent kind of deceiving, so far is it from being any
excuse. It has been said before, that Simon did take to him self the name
of the principal power of God, that he might suppress and surpass whatsoever
was elsewhere divine: as the sun darkneth all the stars with his light.
This was wicked and ungodly profaning of the name of God. But we read of
nothing which was done here, which is not done as yet daily. For men are bent
to nothing more than to translate that to Satan, which is proper to God. They
pretend religion, but what did this pretense help the Samaritans? Therefore it
goes well with us when God sets forth to us his power in Christ, and
declares therewith that we must not seek the same any where else: and does
discover the sleights and iugling casts of Satan which we must avoid, to the
end he may keep us still in himself.

12 When they had believed. That is the miracle whereof I spoke, because they
heard Philip, who were altogether made astonyed with the illusions of Simon:
in that they were made partakers of the heavenly wisdom who were blockish and
dull. So that they were after a sort brought from hell to heaven. Whereas
Baptism followed faith, Mark. 16.47
it agrees with Christ's institution, as concerning strangers and those which
were without. For it was meet that they should be engraffed into the body of
the church, before they should receive the sign: but the Anabaptists are too
foolish, whiles they endeavor to prove by these places, that infants are not to
be baptized. Men and women could not be baptized without making confession of
their faieth: but they were admitted unto baptism upon this condition, that
their families might be consecrated to God: for the covenant goes thus: I will
be thy God, Genesis 17.7.
and the God of thy seed.

13 Simon also himself. He which had besotted the whole city with his
witcherie, receives the truth together with others. He which had boasted
himself to be the principal power of God, submits himself to God: though
he were brought to the knowledge of the Gospel, not so much for his own sake
alone, as for the whole countries sake, that that offense might be taken out of
the way, which might have hindered the unskillful. And to this end tends that
which Luke sets down afterward, that he wondered at the signs. For God
meant to triumph over this man, whom the Samaritans counted a petit God: which
comes to pass whiles he is enforced to give glory to the true miracles,
after that his vain boasting is taken away. And yet he gives not himself
over syncerely to Christ: for then his ambition, and that wicked and profane
account which he made of the gifts of God, should not break out. And yet I am
not of their mind, who think that he made only a semblance of faith, seeing
he did not believe. Luke says plainly that he believed, and the reason is
added, Because he was touched with wondering. How then does he shortly after
bewray himself to be but an hypocrite? I answer, That there is some mean
between faith and mere dissimulation. The Epicures and Lucianists do
profess that they believe, where as notwithstanding they laugh inwardly,
whereas the hope of eternal life is unto them a vain thing, finally whereas
they have no more godliness than dogs and swine. But there be many, who
(howsoever they be not regenerate with the Spirit of adoption, and do not
addict themselves unto God with the true affection of the heart, being overcome
with the power of the word, do not only confess that that is true which is
taught, but are also touched with some fear of God, so that they receive
doctrine. For they conceive that God must be heard, that he is both the author
and also the judge of the world. Therefore they make no semblance of faith
before men, which is none, but they think that they believe. And this faith
continues only for a time, whereof Christ speaks in Mark: Mark. 4. Luke
8.13
to wit, when the seed of the Word conceived in the mind, is notwithstanding
choked forthwith with diverse cares of the world, or with wicked affections,
so that it never comes to any ripeness, yea rather it grows out of kind
unto unprofitable corn nothing worth. Such therefore was Simons faith: he
perceives that the doctrine of the Gospel is true, and he is enforced to
receive the same with the feeling of his conscience: but the groundwork is
wanting: that is, the denial of himself. Whereupon it followed that his mind
was inwrapped in dissimulation, wihch he utters forthwith. But let us know
that his hypocricie was such, as he deceived himself in: and not that gross
hypocrisy whereof Epicures and such like make boast: because they dare not
confess the contempt of God.

He was baptized. It appears plainly by this example of Simon, that all men
have not that grace given them in Baptism, which grace is there figured. The
opinion of the Papists is this, That, unless mortal sin be the cause of
let, all men receive the truth and effect with the signs. So that they
attribute unto the sacraments magical force, as if they did profit without
faith. But let us know, that the Lord offers to us by the Sacraments,
whatsoever the annexed promises do sound, and that they are not offered in
vain, so that being directed unto Christ by faith, we fette from him
whatsoever the Sacraments do promise. And although the receiving of Baptism
did profit him nothing then, yet if conversion followed afterward, as some
men suppose, the profit was not extinguished nor abolished. For it comes to
pass oftentimes that the Spirit of God works afterward after long time,
that the Sacraments may begin to show forth their force.

Did cleave to Philip. Whereas Philip admitted him into his company, it
appears thereby how hard a matter it is to know hypocrites. And this is a
trial of our patience. 2. Tim. 4.10.
So Demas was a companion of Paul for a time, afterward he became an
unfaithful revolt. Finally we cannot escape this evil, but that wicked men
and deceitful will sometimes join themselves unto us, and if at any time the
wicked creep craftily into our company, proud Censors burden us unjustly,
as if we were to answer for their misdeeds. Though we must take great heed
of facility, which causes the Gospel to be slaundered oftentimes, and we must
be so much the more vigilant, that we admit none without great choice,
forasmuch as we hear that great men have been deceived. He says that he was
made astonyed with the greatness of the signs: that we may know that that
great power, whereof he boasted, was nothing else but iugling and smokes. And
Luke speaks not in this place of any plain wondering, but of a dampe or
trance which causes a man to forget what he does.

14 And when the Apostles which were at Jerusalem, had heard: that Samaria had
received the word of God, they sent unto them Peter and John.

15 Who when they were come down, they prayed for them, that they might
receive the holy Ghost.

16 For he was not as yet come down upon any of them: but they were only
baptized in the name of Christ Jesus.

17 Then they laid their hands upon them, and they received the holy Ghost.

14 Luke describes in this place the proceedings of the grace of God in the
Samaritans, as he uses to enrich the faithful continually with greater
gifts of his Spirit. For we must not think, that the Apostles took that
counsel whereof Luke speaks, without the instinct of the same God, who had
already begun his work in Samaria by the hand of Philip. And he uses his
instruments diuersely unto diverse parts of his work, according to his good
pleasure. He used Philip as an instrument to bring them unto the faith: now he
ordains Peter and John to be ministers to give the spirit. And thus does he
foster the unity of his Church, when one helps another: and does not only
knitte man and man together, but whole Churches also. He could have finished
that which he had begun by Philip: but to the end the Samaritans might
learn to embrace brotherly fellowshippe with the first Church, he meant to
bind them heerewith as with a band: secondly he meant to grant the
Apostles (whom he had commanded to preach the Gospel throughout the whole
world, Mark. 6.15.
) this privilege, that they might the better all grow together into one faith
of the Gospel. And we know that it was otherwise dangerous, least, seeing the
Jews and Samaritans were much unlike in mind and manners, being so divided,
they should by this means divide Christ: or at least feign to themselves a
new Church. In the mean season we see how careful the Apostles were to
help their brethren. For they stay not until they be requested, but they take
this charge upon them of their own accord. The Apostles do not this through
any distrust, as if they did suspect that Philip did not his duty so
vprightlie as he ought: but they set too their hand to help him in his
work: and Peter and John came not only to help him and to be partakers of
his labors, but also to approve the same. Again Philip is not grieved because
other men finish that building which he had begun, but they one help
another full gently and faithfully. And surely it is ambition alone which will
not suffer holy fellowshippe and mutual imparting of duties to enter.
Whereas Luke says that Peter was sent by the rest: we may hereby gather
that he was not the chief ruler over his fellows in office, but did so
excel amongst them, that yet notwithstanding he was subject to, and did obey
the body.

Which were at Jerusalem. This may carry a double meaning, either that all the
Apostles were at Jerusalem then, or that there were certain resident there,
when the rest went hither and thither. And I do rather allow this later: for
it is to be thought that they did so divide themselves, that always some of
the number might take upon them diverse ambassages, as occasion was offered:
that some might stay at Jerusalem, as in the principal standing. Again it may
be, that after every man had spent some time in his voyage, they were wont to
assemble themselves there. It is certain in deed that that time which they
spent at Jerusalem was not spent in idleness: and secondly that they were not
tied to some one place, Mark. 16.15
for as much as Christ had commanded them to go over all the world.

15 They prayed. Undoubtedly they taught first: for we know that they were no
dombe persons: but Luke passes over that which was common to them and Philip,
and declares only what new thing the Samaritans had by their coming: to
wit, that they had the spirit given them then.

16 But here arises a question. For he says that they were only baptized
into the name of Christ, and that therefore they had not as yet received the
holy Ghost. But Baptism must either be in vain and with out grace, or else it
must have all the force which it has from the holy Ghost. In Baptism we are
washed from our sins: but Paul teaches that our washing is the work of the
holy Ghost. Titus 3.5. 1. Pet. 1.2. Romans 6.6. Gal. 3.27.
The water used in Baptism is a sign of the blood of Christ: but Peter says
that it is the Spirit, by whom we are washed with the blood of Christ. Our
old man is crucified in Baptism, that we may be raised up unto newness of
life: and whence comes all this, save only from the sanctification of the
Spirit? And finally what shall remain in Baptism, if it be separate from
the spirit? Therefore we must not deny but that the Samaritans who had put on
Christ in deed in Baptism, had also his spirit given them. And surely Luke
speaks not in this place of the common grace of the spirit, whereby God does
regenerate us, that we may be his children, but of those singular gifts,
wherewith God would have certain indewed at the beginning of the Gospel, to
bewtifie Christ's kingdom. Thus must the words of John be understood, that
the disciples had not the spirit given the^ as yet, forasmuch as Christ was yet
conversant in the world: not that they were altogether destitute of the
spirit, seeing that they had from the same both faith, and a godly desire to
follow Christ, but because they were not furnished with those excellent
gifts, wherein appeared afterward greater glory of Christ his kingdom. To
conclude, for as much as the Samaritans were already endewed with the spirit
of adoption, the excellent graces of the spirit are heaped upon them, in
which God showed to his Church for a time as it were the visible presence of
his spirit, that he might establish for ever the authority of his Gospel, and
also testify that his spirit shall be always the governor and directer of the
faithful.

They were only baptized. We must not understand this as spoken contemptuously
of Baptism: but Luke his meaning is, that they were only endewed then with
the grace of common adoption and regeneration, which is offered to all the
godly in Baptism. As for this, it was an extraordinary thing, that certain
should have the gifts of the Spirit given them, which might serve to set
forth the kingdom of Christ and the glory of the Gospel: for this was the
use thereof, that every one might profit the Church, according to the measure
of his ability. We must note this therefore, because whiles the Papists will
set up their feigned confirmation, they are not afraid to break out into this
sacilegious speech, that they are but half Christians, upon whom the hands
have not been as yet laid. This is not tolerable now, because whereas this
was a sign which lasted only for a time, they made it a continual law in the
Church, as if they had the Spirit in readiness to give to whom soever they
would. We know that when the testimony and pledge of Gods grace is set
before us in vain and without the thing it self, it is too filthy mockery,
but even they themselves are enforced to grant, that the Church was bewtified
for a time only with these gifts: Whereupon it follows that the laying on of
hands which the Apostles used, had an end when the effect ceased. I omit that,
Mark. 6.13.
that they added oil unto the laying on of hands: but this, as I have already
said, was a point of too great boldness, to prescribe a perpetual law to the
Church, that that might be a general sacrament, Galat. 3.37. Romans 6.6.
which was peculiarly used amongst the Apostles: that the sign might continue
still after that the thing it self was ceased. And with this they joined
detestable blasphemy, because they said that sins were only forgiven by
Baptism: and that the Spirit of regeneration is given by that rotten oil,
which they presumed to bring in without the word of God. The scripture does
testify that we put on Christ in Baptism, and that we are engraffed into his
body, that our old man may be crucified, and we renewed into righteousness.
These sacrilegious robbers have translated that to adorn the false visure of
their sacrament, which they have taken from Baptism: neither was this the
invention of one man only, but the decree of one Council, whereof they babble
daily in all their schools.

17 When they had laid their hands. The laying on of hands follows prayers,
whereby they testify that the grace of the Spirit is not included in the
external ceremony, which they crave humbly at the hands of another. And yet
when they confess that God is the author, they neglect not the ceremony
which was delivered them by God to this use: and because they usurp it not
rashly, the effect is also annexed. This is the profit and efficacy of signs,
because God works in them, and yet he remains the only giver of grace, and
distributeth the same according to his good pleasure: but let us remember, that
the laying on of hands was the instrument of God, at such time as he gave the
visible graces of the Spirit to his, and that since that the Church was
deprived of such riches, it is only a vain visure without any substance.

18 And when Simon saw that the holy Ghost was given by the laying on of the
Apostles hands, he offered them money.

19 Saying: Give me also this power: that on whom I shall lay my hands, he may
receive the holy Ghost.

20 And Peter said unto him, Thy money perish with thee: because thou have
thought that the gift of God is obtained with money.

21 Thou have no part nor inheritance in this business. For thy heart is not
right before God.

22 Therefore repent of this wickedness, and pray unto God, if peradventure the
cogitation of thy heart may be forgiven thee.

23 For I see that thou art in the gall of bitterness, and in the bond of
unrighteousness.

24 And Simon answering, said: Pray ye for me unto God, that none of these
things may happen to me which ye have said.

25 Then when they had testified and spoken the word of God, they returned to
Jerusalem, and they preached the Gospel in many streets of the Samaritans.

18 And when Simon. Simons hypocrisy is now discovered, not because that he
had feigned before that he believed: for when he was convict, he gave Christ his
hand in earnest, like as many yield unto the Gospel, least they strive
against God, but in the mean season they continue like to themselves: whereas
the denial of our selves ought to follow true faith. And this is to mix
Christ with Satan, when doctrine pearceth not unto the hidden affections of the
heart, but the inward uncleanness lies hidden there. Therefore God wipeth away
that false color now in Simon, least by professing the name of Christ, he
deceive both himself and others. For that ambition which was hidden before,
breaks out now, when as he desires to be equal with the Apostles. This is
now one vice: an other is, because whiles he thinks that the grace of God
is to be sold, he will get some greedy gain thereby. Whereby it appears that
he is a profane man, and such as had not tasted the first principles of
godliness: for he is touched with no desire of Gods glory: yea he does not
once think what it is to be a minister of God. As he had heretofore gotten
gain by his magike, so he thought that it would be gainesome, if he might
give the graces of the Spirit. For undoubtedly he hunted after riches, and
sought to purchase praise in the sight of the world: and he did God great
injury also, because he thought that this heavenly power did nothing differ
from his magical enchantments. Now we understand briefly what and how many
ways Simon offended. In the gifts of the Spirit he does not adore neither
acknowledge the power of Christ: he does not confess that the Apostles were
endewed with heavenly power, to set forth Christ's glory by their ministry:
his own ambition drives and carries him headlong, so that he desires to
become excellent, and to make the world subject to himself, setting God
apart; he will buy the holy Ghost, as if he could be bought with money.

20 Peter answered. Peter gives him the repulse here stoutly: and being not
content to chide him, he adds a bitter curse or wish, That Simon and his
money may perish together. Though he does not so much wish unto him
destruction, as he tells him that the just vengeance of God hangs over his
head, that he might terrify him. In sum he shows what he has deserved, when
he has made the spirit of God subject to filthy buying, and selling: as if he
should have said, Thou art worthy to perish with thy money, when thou do so
blaspheme the Spirit of God. For we may easily gather by that which follows,
that Peter would rather have had Simon saved than destroyed. But as it were
supplying the place of a judge, he pronounces what punishment Simon his
ungodliness deserves: and it was requisite that he should be thus accused
with such vehemency, that he might perceive the greatness of his offense. To
the same end tends that, that he judged his money to perish. For he
signifies that it was as it were infe^^ed and polluted with cogitation of
wickedness, because it was offered to such a wicked use. And surely we ought
rather to wish that all the whole world perish, than that those things should
darken the glory of God, which in comparison thereof are nothing worth. When he
wishes thus to a sacrilegious man, he does not so much respect the person as
the fact. For we must be offended with the offenses of me^ in such sort, that
we must pity the men themselves. 1. Cor. 6.9. Ephesians. 5.5.
Such are those sentences of god which adiudge adulterers, thieves, drunkards,
and wrongful dealers to destruction. For they do not cut off al hope of
salvation from the^, but they are only referred unto their present estate: and
declare what end is prepared for them, if they go forward obstinately.

21 Thou have no part. Some do frame this sentence otherwise, that Simon is
not partaker of grace, because he sets a price thereof. But the other
reading which we have followed, is more usual: to wit, that that reason be
joined to the former member. And surely it is better to knitte the two
sentences together thus, Thy money perish with thee, because thou think that
the inestimable gift of the Spirit can be bought with money. Whereas the old
interpreter had put, In this word: Erasmus translated it more fitly, In this
business. For Peter his meaning is, that that sacrilegious person has nothing
to do in all that administration, who does wickedly profane the same.
Furthermore both the Papists and also the old divines have disputed much
concerning Simon: but that which the Papists call simonie, does not agree with
Simons fact. Simon would have bought the grace of the Spirit with money: the
Papists apply the crime of symonie unto their idle revenues. And yet I
speak not this, that I may extenuate those horrible sins which reign at
this day in popery, in bying and selling spiritual promotions. Now this
wickedness is filthy enough of it self, in that they hold such a mart in the
Church of God. And in the mean season we must note the true definition of
symony: to wit, that it is a wicked buying and selling of the gifts of the
Spirit, or some other such like thing, whiles that a man abuses the^ unto
ambition or other corruptions. Though I confess that al those imitate Simon, who
strive to attain unto the government of the church by unlawful means: which
thing we see committed at this day without shame, as if it were lawful: and
we can scarce find one Priest in all popery which is not manifestly a
symonaical person in this respect: because none can but up his head amongst
them, but he must creep in by indirect means. Although we must confess,
(which thing even children see, to our great shame,) that this vice is too
common even amongst the false professors of the Gospel. But let us remember
first, to the end we may be free from the infection of Simon, that the gifts
of the Spirit are not gotten with money, but that they are given of the free
and mere goodness of God, and that for the edifying of the Church: that is,
that every man may study to help his brethren according to the measure of his
ability: that every man may bestow that about the common good of the Church,
which he has received: and that the excellency of no man may hinder, but that
Christ may excel all. Notwithstanding it may seem a marvelous matter, that
Peter excludes Simon from being a partaker of the Spirit, as concerning
special gifts: because his heart is not right before God. For the wickedness of
Judas did not let him from having the gifts of the Spirit in great measure:
neither had the gifts of the spirit ben so corrupted amongst the Corinthians,
if their heart had been right in the sight of God. Therefore that reason which
Peter alleges, seems insufficient: because many men excel oftentimes in
the gifts of the spirit, who have an unclean heart. But first of all there
follows no absurdity, if God give such graces to men which are unworthy
thereof. secondly Peter prescribes no general rule in this place, but because
the church alone is for the most part made partaker of the gifts of the spirit,
he pronounces that Simon who is a stranger to Christ, is unworthy to have the
same graces given him (which are bestowed upon the faithful) as if he were one
of Gods household. Moreover he had blasphemed those gifts whereof he is deprived.

22 Repent therefore. Whereas he exhorts him unto repentance and prayer, he
puts him in some hope of pardon thereby: for no man shall ever be touched
with any desire of repentance, save only he which shall believe that God will
have mercy upon him: on the other side despair will always carry men
headlong unto boldness. Furthermore the Scripture teaches that God is not
called upon aright, save only by faith. Therefore we see how Peter raises
up Simon now, unto hope of salvation, whom he had thrown down before with
the cruel lightnings and thunderbolts of words: and yet Simon his sin was
no small sin. But, if it could be, we ought to pluck men even out of hell.
Therefore until such time as even the most wicked men do by manifest signs
bewraie themselves to be reprobates, no one of them is to be handled so
sharply, but that remission of sins is to be set before him. Yea we must
so deal with those for whom sharp chiding is profitable by reason of their
hardness and stubbernenesse, that we throw them down with one hand, and set
them on foot with the other. For the Spirit of God does not suffer us to
accurse them. But Peter seems to bring him into some fear and doubt when he
says If peradventure. And the Papists go about to prove by this place and such
like, that we must pray with doubtful minds: because men may unadvisedly
promise themselves certain success in their petitions: but we may readily
answer them. For the word ei ara signifies as much as if a man should say, If
by any means thou may obtain pardon of God. Peter uses this word, not that
he may leave Simons mind in a perplexity, but that he may the more prick him
forward to be earnest in prayer. For the very difficulty does not a little
serve to stir us up: because when we see the thing at hand, we are too
careless and sluggish. Therefore Peter does not terrify Simon, that he may
overthrow or trouble all hope of obtaining, in his heart, but putting him in
sure hope, if he shall crave pardon humbly and from his heart, he tells him
only that pardon is hard to be gotten, by reason of the greatness of his
offense, to the end he may provoke him unto feruentnesse. For it is requisite
that we be lightened by faith when we go unto God, yea that she be the mother of
prayer.

23 In the gall of bitterness. Peter does sharply reprove Simon again, and
strikes him with Gods judgment. For unless he had been compelled to descend
into himself, he would never have been turned in good earnest unto God. For
there is nothing more deadly for men which are blockish, than when we flatter
them, or when we do but a little scrape the skin, whereas they ought rather
to be thrust through. Therefore until such time as a sinner shall conceive
sorrow and true heaviness by reason of his sin, we must use such severity
as may wound his mind: otherwise the rotten sore shall be nourished within,
which shall by little and little consume the man himself. Yet let us always
observe this mean, that we provide for men's salvation, so much as in us lies.
Moreover there be two excellent fine metaphors in Peter's words: the one
whereof seems to be taken out of Moses, where he forbids that there be
not in us any root, from which springs gal and wormwood. Deuteronomy. 29. By which
speech is noted the inward wickedness of the heart: when as it has so
conceived the poison of ungodliness, that being therewith infected, it can
bring forth nothing but bitterness. To the same end tends the binding of
iniquity: to wit, when the whole heart is kept bound and tied by Satan. For it
falls out sometimes, that men which are otherwise given very godlily, do
break out into evil works, who have not their heart corrupt inwardly with
poison. We know that hypocrisy is engendered in man's nature: but when as the
Spirit of God does shine, we are not so blinded in our vices, that we nourish
them within as if it were some hidden bundle. Therefore Peter his meaning is,
that Simon fell not only in one point, but that his very heart root was
corrupt and bitter: that he fell into Satan's snares not only in one kind of
sin, but that al his senses were ensnared, so that he was wholly given over to
Satan, and was become the bond slave of iniquity. In the mean season we are
taught, that the greatness of offenses is esteemed not so much according to the
fact which appears, as according to the affection of the heart.

24 Simon answered. Hereby we gather, that he did not so take that which
Peter had threatened unto him, but that he did consider that his salvation was
sought. And though Peter alone spoke, yet he attributes the speech, unto al,
by reason of the consent. Now arises a question what we ought to think of
Simon. The Scripture carries us no farther, save only unto a conjecture.
Whereas he yields when he is reproved, and being touched with the feeling of
his sin, fears the judgment of god: and that done, flies unto the mercy of
God, and commends himself to the prayers of the church: these are assuredly
no small signs of repentance: therefore we may coniect that he repented. And
yet the old writers affirm with one consent, that he was a great enemy to
Peter afterward, and that he disputed with him by the space of three days at
Rome. The disputation is also extant in writing under the name of Clement, but
it has in it such filthy dotings, that it is a wonder that Christian cares can
abide to hear them. Again, Augustine writing to Iannarius, says, that there
were diverse and false rumors spread abroad in Rome in his time, concerning
that matter. Wherefore nothing is more safe than bidding adue to uncertain
opinions, simply to embrace that which is set down in the Scriptures. That
which we read elsewhere of Simon, may justly be supected for many causes.

25 And they testified. In these words Luke teaches, that Peter and John came
not only, that they might enrich the Samaritans with the gifts of the Spirit,
but also that they might establish them in the faith which they had already
received, by approving Philip his doctrine. For thus much does the word
testify import: as if he should say that it came pass by their testimony, that
the word of God had full and perfect authority, and that the truth was of force,
as being well testified and authentical. Notwithstanding Luke teaches
therewithal, that they were faithful witnesses of God, when he adds that they
uttered the word of god. This was therefore the sum of the Apostles doctrine,
faithfully to utter those things which they had learned of the Lord, and not
their own inventions or the inventions of any man else. He says, that they did
this not only in the city, but also in villages. Therefore we see that they
were so inflamed to further the glory of Christ, that whither soever they came,
they had him in their mouth. So that the seed of life began to be sown
throughout the whole region, after that it was preached in the City.

26 And an Angel of the Lord spoke to Philip, saying: Arise, and go toward the
South, to the way which goes down from Jerusalem to Gaza: it is waste.

27 And when he arose, he went. And behold a man an Ethiopian, an Eunuch, a
man of great authority with Candace Queen of Aethiopia, which had the rule of
all her treasure, which came to Jerusalem to worship:

28 And as he returned and sat in his Chariot, he read Isaias the Prophet.

29 And the Spirit said to Philip: Draw near, and be thou joined to this
Chariot.

30 And as Philip ran unto it, he heard him reading the Prophet I say, and he
said: Understand thou what thou read?

31 He said, How can I, unless some man direct me? And he requested Philip,
that he would come up and sit with him.

26 And The Angel. Luke passes over unto a new history, to wit, how the
gospel came even unto the Aethiopians. For though he reports there was but
one man converted unto the faith of Christ, yet because his authority and
power was great in all the realm, his faith might spread abroad a sweet smell
far and wide. For we know that the Gospel grew of small beginnings: and
therein appeared the power of the Spirit more plainly, in that one grain of
seed did fill a whole country in a small space. Philip is first commanded by
the Angel, to go toward the South: the Angel tells him not to what end.
And thus does God oftentimes use to deal with those that be his, to prove
their obedience. He shows what he will have them to do: he commands them
to do this or that: but he keeps the success hidden with himself.
Therefore let us be content with the commandment of God alone, although the
reason of that which he inioineth, or the fruit of obedience appear not by and
by. For although this be not plainly expressed, yet all the commandments of God
contain an hidden promise, that so often as we obey him, all that work which we
take in hand, must needs fall out well. Moreover this ought to be sufficient for
us, that God does allow our studies, when as we take nothing in hand rashly or
without his commandment. If any man object that Angels come not down daily
from heaven, to reveal unto us what we ought to do: the answer is ready: that
we are sufficiently taught in the word of God, what we ought to do, and that
they are never destitute of counsel, who ask it of him, and submit themselves
to the government of the Spirit. Therefore nothing does hinder and keep us
back from being ready to follow God, save only our own slothfulness, and
coldness in prayer.

To the way which goes down to Gaza. All the learned grant that that is called
Gaza here, which the Hebrews call Haza. Wherefore Pomponius Mela is deceived,
who says that Cambyses king of Persia called that city by this name: because
when he made war against the Egyptians, he had his riches laid up there. It
is true in deed that the Persians call treasure or plenty, Gaza: and Luke
uses this word shortly after in this sense, when as he says that the Eunuch
was the chief governor of the treasure of Candace: but because that Hebrew
word was used before such time as Cambyses was borne, I do not think but that
it was corrupt afterward, the letter Heth being changed into G, which thing
we see was done in all other almost. The Epitheto^ waste, is added for this
cause, because Alexander of Macedonia laid waste that old Gaza. Also Luke
refuteth those who make Constantinus the builder of the second and new Gaza,
who affirms that it was an hundredth and fifty years before: but it may be
that he bewtified and enlarged the city after it was built. And all men
confess that this new Gaza was situate on the sea coast, distant twenty
forlongs from the old City.

27 Behold a man an Ethiopian. He calls him a man, who he says shortly
after was an Eunuch: but because kings and Queens in the East were wont to
appoint Eunuchs over their weightiest affairs: thereby it came to pass that
Lords of great power were called generally Eunuchs, whereas notwithstanding
they were men. Furthermore Philip finds in deed now at length, that he did
not obey God in vain. Therefore whosoever commits the success to God, and
goes on forward thither whither he bids him, he shall at length try, that
all that falls out well, which is taken in hand at his appointment. The name
Candace was not the name of one Queen only: but as all the Emperors of Rome
were called Caesar's, so the Ethiopians, as Pliny witnesses, called their
Queens Candaces. This makes also unto the matter, that the writers of
histories report that that was a noble and welthy kingdom, because it may the
better be gathered by the royalty and power thereof, how gorgeous the
condition and dignity of the Eunuch was. The head and principal place was
Meroe. The profane writers agree with Luke, who report that women used to
reign there.

Came to worship. Hereby we gather, that the name of the true God was spread
far abroad, seeing he had some worshippers in far countries. Certes it
must needs be that this man did openly profess another worship than his
nation: for so great a Lord could not come into Judea by stealth: and
undoubtedly he brought with him a great train. And no marvel if there were
some every where in the East parts which worshipped the true God: because that
after the people were scattered abroad, there was also some smell of the
knowledge of the true God spread abroad with them throughout foreign
countries: yea the banishment of the people was a spreading abroad of true
godliness. Also we see that though the Romans did condemn the Jewish religion
with many cruel edicts, yet could they not bring to pass, but that many even
on heaps would profess the same. These were certain beginnings of the
calling of the Gentiles, Ephe. 2.14.
until such time as Christ having with the brightness of his coming put away
the shadows of the Law, might take away the difference which was between the
Jews and the Gentiles, and having pulled down the wall of separation, he
might gather together from all parts the children of God. Whereas the Eunuch
came to Jerusalem to worship, it must not be accounted any superstition, he
might in deed have called upon God in his own country: but this man would not
omit the exercises which were prescribed to the worshippers of God: and
therefore this was his purpose, not only to nourish faith privily in his heart,
but also to make profession of the same amongst men. And yet notwithstanding he
could not be so divorced from his nation, but that he might well know that he
should be hated of many: but he made more account of the external profession of
religion which he knew God did require, than of the favor of men. And if such a
small sparkle of the knowledge of the Law, did so shine in him, what a shame
were it for us, to choke the perfect light of the gospel with unfaithful
silence? If any do object that the sacrifices were even then abrogated, and
that now the time was come, wherein God would be called upon eueriwhere
without difference of place: we may easily answer, That those to whom the
truth of the Gospel was not yet revealed, were retained in the shadows of the
law without any superstition. For whereas it is said, that the law was
abolished by Christ as concerning the ceremonies, it is thus to be
understood: that where Christ shows himself plainly, those rites vanishe
away, which prefigured him when he was absent. Whereas the Lord suffered the
Eunuch to come to Jerusalem, before he sent him a teacher: it is to be thought
that it was done for this cause, because it was profitable that he should yet
be framed by the rudiments of the law, that he might be made more apt afterward
to receive the doctrine of the Gospel. And whereas God sent none of the
Apostles unto him at Jerusalem, the cause lies hid in his secret counsel:
unless peradventure it were done, that he might make more account of the
Gospel as of some treasure found suddenly, and offered unto him contrary to
hope: or because it was better that Christ should be set before him, after that
being separated and withdrawn from the external pomp of ceremonies and the
beholding of the temple, he sought the way of salvation quietly at such time
as he was at rest.

28 He read Isaias. The reading of the Prophet shows that the Eunuch did not
worship a God unadvisedly according to the understanding of his own head, whom
he had feigned to himself, but whom he knew by the doctrine of the law. And
surely this is the right way to worship God, not to snatch at bare and vain
rites, but to adioyne the word thereunto: otherwise there shall be nothing but
that which comes by chance and is confused. And certainly the form of
worshipping prescribed in the law, differs nothing from the inuentio^s of
men, save only because God gives light there by his word. Therefore those which
are Gods scholars, do worship him aright only, that is, those who are taught
in his school. But he seems to loose his labor when he reads without
profit. For he confesses that he cannot understand the Prophets meaning,
unless he be helped by some other teacher. I answer, as he read the prophet
with a desire to learn, so he hoped for some fruit, and he found it indeed.
Therefore why does he deny that he can understand the place which he had in
hand? For because he manifestly confesses his ignorance in darker places.
There be many things in Isaias which need no long exposition: as when he
preaches of the goodness and power of God, partly that he may inuit men unto
faith, partly that he may exhort and teach them to lead a godly life. Therefore
no man shall be so rude an idiote, which shall not profit somewhat by reading
that book, and yet notwithstanding he shall peradventure scarce understand
every tenth verse. Such was the Eunuchs reading. For seeing that according to
his capacity he gathered those things which served to edification, he had
some certain profit by his studies. Nevertheless though he were ignorant of
many things, yet was he not wearied, so that he did cast away the book. Thus
must we also read the scriptures: we must greedily and with a prompt mind
receive those things which are plain and wherein God opens his mind: as
for those things which are yet hid from us, we must pass them over, until we
see greater light. And if we be not wearied with reading, it shall at length
come to pass that the scripture shall be made more familiar by continual use.

31 How should I. Most excellent modesty of the Eunuch, who does not only
permit Philip, who was one of the common sort to question with him, but does
also willingly confess his ignorance. And surely we must never hope that he
will ever show himself apt to be taught, who is puffed up with the confidence
of his own wit. Hereby it comes to pass that the reading of the scriptures
does profit so few at this day, because we can scarce find one amongst an
hundredth, which submits himself willingly to learn. For whiles all men
almost are ashamed to be ignorant of that whereof they are ignorant: every man
had rather proudly nourish his ignorance, than seem to be scholar to other
men. Yea a great many take upon them hautilie to teach other men.
Nevertheless let us remember that the Eunuch did so confess his ignorance,
that yet notwithstanding he was one of Gods scholars when he read the
scripture. This is the true reverence of the scripture, when as we acknowledge
that there is that wisdom laid up there, which surpasses all our senses: and
yet notwithstanding we do not loath it, but reading diligently we depend upon
the revelation of the Spirit, and desire to have an interpreter given us.

He prayed Philip that he would come up. This is another token of modesty,
that he seeks an interpreter and teacher. He might have rejected Philip,
according to the pride of rich men: for it was a certain secret vpbraiding
of ignorance, when Philip said, understand thou what thou read? But rich
men think that they have great injury done the^, if any man speak homely to
them. And therefore they break out by and by into these speeches, What is that
to thee? or, What have thou to do with me? But the Eunuch submits himself
humbly to Philip, that by him he may be taught. Thus must we be minded, if we
desire to have God to be our teacher, whose Spirit rests upon the humble
and meek. Isa. 66.2.
And if any man mistrusting himself, submit himself to be taught, the angels
shall rather come down from heaven, than the Lord will suffer us to labor in
vain. Though (as did the Eunuch) we must use all helps, which the Lord
offers unto us, for the understanding of the scriptures. Frantike men require
inspirations and revelations from heaven, and in the mean season they contemn
the minister of GOD, by whose hand they ought to be governed. Othersome which
trust too much to their own wit, will vouchsafe to hear no man, and they will
read no commentaries. But God will not have us to despise those helps which he
offers unto us, and he suffers not those to escape scotfree, which despise
the same. And here we must remember, that the scripture is not only given us,
but that interpreters and teachers, are also added to be helps to us. For this
cause the Lord sent rather Philip than an Angel to the Eunuch. For to what
end served this circuit, that God calls Philip by the voice of the Angel,
and sends not the Angel himself forthwith, save only because he would
accustom us to hear men? This is assuredly no small commendation of external
preaching, that the voice of God sounds in the mouth of men to our salvation,
when angels hold their peace. Concerning which thing I will speak more upon
the nienth and tenth chapters.

32 Furthermore, the sentence of scripture, which he read, was this: He was
lead as a sheep to be slain, and as a lamb dumb before the shearer, so
opened he not his mouth.

33 In his humility, his judgment is exalted. Who shall declare his
generation? because his life is taken from the earth.

34 And the Eunuch answering Philip, said: I pray thee, of whom speaks the
Prophet this? Of himself, or of some other?

35 And Philip opening his mouth, and beginning at this scripture, preached
Jesus to him.

32 The sentence of scripture. It is properly a text or period. Let us know
that he light not upon this place by chance, but that it came to pass by the
wonderful providence of God, that Philip should have a proposition or
principle, from which the whole sum of Christianity might be set. Therefore
first he has matter of full instruction brought to his hand by the secret
direction of the Spirit: secondly, the form is plainly applied to the
ministry of man. This is an excellent prophecy of Christ, and above all
others to be remembered: because Isaias says plainly there, that such should
be the manner of redeeming the church, that the son of God do by his death
purchase life for men: that he offer himself in sacrifice to purge men's sins:
that he be punished with the hand of God, and that he go down even unto the
very hell, that he may exalt us unto heaven, having delivered us from
destruction. In sum, this place teaches plainly how men are reconciled to
God, how they obtain righteousness, how they come to the kingdom of God,
being delivered from the tyranny of Satan, and loosed from the yoke of sin:
to be brief, whence they must fet all parts of their salvation.
Notwithstanding I will only expound those things which Luke here cites, and
there be in deed two members: in the former he teaches that Christ to the
end he may redeem the church, must needs be so broken that he appear like to
a man which is cast down and past hope. Secondly he affirms that his death
shall give life, and that there shall a singular triumph issue out of great
despair. Whereas he compares Christ to a lamb, which suffers it self to
be led to be slain: and to a sheep which offers herself meekely to be
shorn: his meaning is, that the sacrifice of Christ shall be voluntary. And
surely this was the way to appease Gods wrath, in that he showed himself
obedient. He spoke in deed before Pilate: but not to save his life, John.
18.34.36.
but rather that he might willingly offer himself to die, as he was
appointed by the Father, and so might bring that punishment upon himself, which
was prepared for us. Therefore the prophet teaches both things, that Christ
must needs have suffered, that he might purchase life for us: and that he was
to suffer death willingly, that he might blot out the stubbornness of men by
his obedience. And hence must we gather an exhortation unto godliness, as Peter
does, but that doctrine of faith which I have already touched, is former in
order.

33 In his humility, his judgment. The Eunuche had either the Greek volume,
or else Luke did set down the reading which was then used, as he uses to do.
The prophet says that Christ was exalted out of sorrow and judgment, by
which words he signifies a wonderful victory, which immediately ensued his
casting down. For if he had been oppressed with death, there could nothing
have been hoped for at his hands.

Therefore to the end the Prophet may establish our faith in Christ, after
that he had described him to be stricken with the hand of God, and to be subject
to be slain, he puts upon him a new person now to wit, that he comes up
out of the depth of death as a conqueror, and our of the very hell, being the
author of eternal life. I know in deed that this place is diversely expounded:
some there be which understand by this, that he was carried from the prison
to the cross: other some there be, who think that to be taken away, does
signify as much, as to be brought to naught. And indeed the signification of
the Hebrew word Lacham, is doubtful, as is also the signification of the
Greek word Airesthai. But he which shall thoroughly weigh the Text, shall
agree with me in that which I have said: that he passes now from that
doleful and unseemly sight which he had set before our eyes, unto the new
beginning of unlooked for glory. Therefore the Greek interpretation differs
not much from the words of the prophet, in the sum of the matter. For Christ's
judgment was exalted in his humility, or casting down: because at such time
as he might seem to be cast down and oppressed, the father maintained his
cause. After this sort judgment shall be taken in this place (as in many
other) for right. But it signifies condemnation in the Hebrew text. For the
Prophet says, that after that Christ shall be brought into great straites,
and shall be like unto a condemned and lost man, he shall be lifted up by the hand
of the Father. Therefore the meaning of the words is, that Christ must first
have suffered death, before the Father should exalt him unto the glory of his
kingdom. Which doctrine must be translated unto the whole body of the church:
because all the godly ought wonderfully to be lifted up with the hand of God,
that they be not swallowed up of death. But when God appears to be the
revenger of his, he does not only restore them to life, but also gets to
them excellent triumphs of many deaths: as Christ did triumph most gloriously
upon the cross, whereof the apostle makes mention in the second chapter to the
Collossians.

His generation. After that the prophet has set forth the victorious death of
Christ, he adds now, that his victory shall not last only for a small
time, but shall go beyond all number of years. For the exclamation of the
prophet imports as much, as if he should deny that the perpetuity of Christ's
kingdom can be expressed by the tongue of men. But interpreters have wrested
this place miserably. Whereas the old writers have endeavored hereby to prove
the eternal generation of the word of God against Arrius, it is too far
dissenting from the prophets mind Chrysostom his exposition is never a whit
truer, who refers it unto the humane generation. Neither do they understand
the prophet his meaning, which suppose that he inueigheth against the men of
that age. Othersome think better, who take it to be spoken of the Church,
save only that they are deceived in the word generation, which they think
does signify a posterity or issue. But the word dor which the prophet uses,
signifies amongst the Hebrews an age, or the continuance of man's life.
Therefore undoubtedly this is the prophets meaning, that Christ his life shall
endure for ever, when as he shall be once delivered by his fathers grace from
death: although this life which is without end, appertains unto the whole
body of the church: because Christ rose, not that he may live for himself, but
for us. Therefore he extolleth now in the members, the fruit and effect of that
victory which he placed in the head. Wherefore every one of the faithful may
conceive sure hope of eternal life out of this place: secondly the perpetuity
of the church is rather avouched in the person of Christ.

Because his life is taken from the earth. This is to look too, to be a very
absurd reason, that Christ does reign with such renown in heaven and earth,
because he was cut off. For who can believe that death is the cause of life?
But this was done by the wonderful counsel of God, that hell should be a
ladder, whereby Christ should ascend into heaven: that reproach should be unto
him a passage into life: that the joyful brightness of salvation should appear
out of the horror and darkness of the cross: that blessed immortality should
flow from the deep pit of death. Because he humbled himself, therefore the
Father exalted him, Phil. 2.10.
that every knee may bow before him, etc. Now must we bethink our selves what
fellowship we have with Christ, that it may not be troublesome to any to go
the same way.

34 The Eunuch said to Philip. Here it appears what an earnest desire the
Eunuch had to learn. He wandereth in diverse prophesies of Esaias as through
doubtful boughts, and yet he is not weary of reading. And whiles that he
arrogateth nothing to himself, he gets far more contrary to his hope even
at a sudden, than he could get during his whole life by taking great pains,
if he had brought all his quickness of wit. So the Lord will be unto us a
master though we be but small, if acknowledging our ignorance, we be not
loath to submit our selves to learn. And as the seed covered with earth, lies
hid for a time so the Lord will illuminate us by his Spirit, and will cause
that reading which being barren and void of fruit, causes nothing but
wearisomnesse, to have plain light of understanding. The Lord does never keep
the eyes of his so shut, but that so soon as they are once entered, the way of
salvation appears unto the^ in the scripture: but that they profit ever now
and then a little by reading: yet does he suffer them to stick fast
oftentimes, and permits their course to be hindered, by some bar which is
laid in the way, both that he may try patience of faith in them, and also that
he may teach them humility by putting them in mind of their ignorance, that he
may make them more attentive after that they have shaken off drowsines, that
he may make them more fervent in prayer, that he may prick them forward to
love the truth more dearly, that he may set forth the excellency of his
heavenly wisdom, which is otherwise not so esteemed as it ought. But howsoever
the faithful do not attain unto the mark of perfect knowledge, yet they shall
always perceive that their labor is not in vain, so that they stop not the
way before themselves with proud loathsomeness. Let this going forward suffice
us until the time of full revelation do come, that even a small taste of
knowledge does drip into us the fear of God and faith.

35 Philip opening his mouth. To open the mouth, is taken in scripture, for to
begin a long speech concerning some grave and weighty matter. Therefore Luke
his meaning is, that Philip began to entreat of Christ, as it were with full
mouth. He says that he began with this prophecy, because there is no one
which depainteth out Christ more lively: and it was then brought to his hand.
Therefore after that Philip had showed by the prophets words, after what sort
Christ should come, and what was to be hoped for at his hands, he conferred the
thing it self afterward, that the Eunuch might know that that Christ which was
promised, was alredie revealed and given: and that he might understand his
power. Where we translate it, that he preached Christ. Luke says, that he
preached the Gospel. The sense is, that he taught that of Christ which he
uttered in his gospel himself, and commanded to be taught. Whereby we gather,
that when Christ is known, we have the sum of the Gospel.

36 And as they went on the way, they came to a water. And the Eunuch said:
Lo here is water, what lets me to be baptized?

37 And Philip said: If thou beleeuest with all thy heart, thou may. He
answering said: I believe that Jesus Christ is the son of God.

38 Then he commanded the chariot to be stayed, and they went both down into
the water, to wit, Philip and the Eunuch, and he baptized him.

39 And when they were come up out of the water, the Spirit of the Lord caught
away Philip, and the Eunuch saw him no more. Therefore he went on in his way
rejoicing.

40 But Philip was found at Azotus: and going on his journey, he preached the
gospel to all cities, until he came to Cesaria.

36 What lets me? The Eunuch his baptism ensues now, whence we gather, how
greatly he profited in a small time, seeing he offers himself willingly to
give Christ his name. For it must needs be that faith was after a sort ripe
in his heart, seeing that he brake out into external profession with such
desire. I like not that which Chrysostom notes, that he was kept back with
modesty from requiring baptism plainly: for that interrogation has greater
vehemency than if he should simply have said to Philip, I will have thee to
baptize me. But we see that Christ was preached to him in such sort, that he
knew that baptism was a sign of new life in him, and that therefore he would
not neglect the same, because it was added to the word, and such an addition
as was inseparable. Therefore as he embraced that willingly, which he hard
concerning Christ, so now he breaks out with a godly zeal into the
external confession of faith, neither does he think it sufficient for him to
believe inwardly before God, unless he testify before men that he is a
christian. There might many things have come into his mind, which might have
kept him back from being baptized, least that he should lay himself open to the
hatred and rebukes both of the queen, and also of the whole nation. But he
denies that any of these things does hinder him from desiring to be numbered
amongst the disciples of Christ. If being instructed but a few hours he came
to this point, how filthy is the sluggishnes of those men, who suppress the
faith which they have conceived, having been taught five, ten, or twenty
years.

If thou beleeuest with all thy heart. Whereas the Eunuch is not admitted to
Baptism, until he have made confession of his faith: we must fet a general
rule hence. That those ought to be received into the church, who were
estraunged from the same before, until they have testified that they believe
in Christ. For baptism is as it were an appertenance of faith: and therefore
it is later in order. Secondly, if it be given without faith, whose seal it
is, it is both a wicked and also too gross a profaning. But frantike fellows
do both unskillfully and also wickedly impugn baptizing of infants under
color hereof, why was it meet that faith should go before baptism in the
Eunuch? To wit, because seeing that Christ marketh those alone which are of
the household of the church with this note and mark, they must be ingraffed unto
the church, who are to be baptized. And as it is certain that those who are
grown up, are ingraffed by faith, so I say that the children of the godly are
born the children of the church, and that they are accounted members of Christ
from the womb, because God adopteth us upon this condition, that he may be also
the Father of our seed. Therefore though faith be requisite in those which are
grown up, yet this is untruly translated unto infants, whose estate is far
unlike. But certain great men have abused this place, when as they would prove,
that faith has no confirmation by baptism: for they reasoned thus: the Eunuch
is commanded to bring perfect faith unto baptism: therefore there could nothing
be added. But the scripture takes the whole heart oftentimes for a sincere and
unfeigned heart, whose opposite is a double heart. So that there is no cause
why we should imagine that they believe perfectly, who believe with the whole
heart seeing that there may be a weak and faint faith in him, who shall
notwithstanding have a sound mind, and a mind free from all hyporcisie. Thus
must we take that which David says, that he loves the Lord with all his
heart. Philip had in deed baptized the Samaritans before, and yet he knew
that they were yet far from the mark. Therefore the faith of the whole heart, is
that which having living roots in the heart, does yet notwithstanding desire
to increase daily.

I believe that Jesus Christ. As Baptism is grounded in Christ and as the
truth and force thereof is contained there: so the Eunuch sets Christ alone
before his eyes. The Eunuch knew before that there was one God, who had made
the covenant with Abraham, who gave the Law by the hand of Moses, which
separated one people from the other nations, who promised Christ, through whom
he would be merciful to the world: now he confesses that Jesus Christ is
that redeemer of the world and the son of god: under which title he
comprehends briefly, al those things which the scripture attributes to
Christ. This is the perfect faith, whereof Philip spoke of late, which
receives Christ, both as he was promised in times past, and also showed at
length, and that with the earnest affection of the heart, as Paul will not have
this faith to be feigned. Whosoever has not this when he is grown up, in
vain does he boast of the baptism of his infancy: for to this end does
Christ admit infants by baptism, that so soon as the capacity of their age
shall suffer, they may addict themselves to be his disciples, and that being
baptized with the holy ghost, they may comprehend with the understanding of
faith, his power, which baptism does prefigure.

38 They went down into the water. Here we see the rite used among the men of
old time in baptism: for they put all the body into the water: now the use is
this, that the minister does only sprinkle the body or the head. But we ought
not to stand so much about such a small difference of a ceremony, that we
should therefore divide the church, or trouble the same with brawles. We ought
rather to fight even an hundred times to death for the ceremony it self of
baptism, in as much as it was delivered us by Christ, than that we should
suffer the same to be taken from us. But forasmuch as we have as well a
testimony of our washing, as of newness of life, in the sign of water,
forasmuch as Christ represents unto us his blood in the water as in a
glass, that we may fet our cleanenesse thence: forasmuch as he teaches that
we are fashioned again by his Spirit, that being dead to sin, we may live
to righteousness: it is certain that we want nothing which makes to the
substance of baptism. Wherefore the church did grant liberty to her self
since the beginning, to change the rites somewhat, excepting this substance.
For some dipped them thrice, some but once: wherefore there is no cause why we
should be so strait laced in matters which are of no such weight: so that
that external pomp do no whit pollute the simple institution of Christ.

39 When they were come up. To the end Luke may at length conclude his speech
concerning the Eunuch, he says that Philip was caught away out of his sight:
and that was of no small weight to confirm him, forasmuch as he saw, that that
man was sent unto him by God, like to an Angel, and that he vanished away
before he could offer him any reward for his pains: whence he might gather
that it was no gainefull insinuation, seeing that he was vanished away before
he had one half penny given him. Whereas Philip had no reward at the
Eunuchs hand, let the servants of Christ learn hereby to serve him
freely, or rather let the^ so serve men for nothing, that they hope for a
reward from heaven. The Lord grants leave in deed to the ministers of the
Gospel to receive a reward at their hands whom they teach: but he forbids
the^ therewithal to be hyrelings, which labor for lucres sake. 1. Cor. 9.9.
Ioh. 10.12.23.
For this must be the mark whereat they must shoot, to gain the men
themselves to God.

Rejoicing. Faith and the knowledge of God, bring forth this fruit always of
themselves. For what truer matter of joy can be invented, than when the Lord
does not only set open unto us the treasures of his mercy, but powers out his
heart into us (that I may so speak,) and gives us himself in his son, that
we may want nothing to perfect felicity? The heavens begin to look clear, and
the earth begins to be quiet then: the conscience being then delivered from
the doleful and horrible feeling of Gods wrath, being loosed from the tyranny
of Satan, escaping out of the darkness of death, beholds the light of life.
Therefore it is a solemn thing amongst the prophets, to exhort us to be
joyful and to triumph, so often as they are about to speak of the kingdom of
Christ. But because those men whose minds are possessed with the vain joys
of the world cannot lift up themselves unto this spiritual joy, let us learn
to despise the world, and all vain delights thereof, that Christ may make us
merry in deed.

40 He was found at Azotus. It is well known out of the book of Joshua cha.
11. Joshua. 11.22
that Azotus was one of the cities out of which the sons of Enack could not
be expelled. It is distant from Ascalon almost 200. furlongs: the Hebrews call
it Asdod. Thither was Philip carried, there began he to take his journey on
foot, after the manner of men, sowing the seed of the Gospel, wheresoever he
became. This is surely rare and wonderful stoutnesse, that he spreads the
name of godliness in his journey. And whereas Luke says expressly, that he
preached in all cities, until he came to Cesarea, and does not declare that he
returned to Samaria, we may thereby conjecture, that he stayed at Cesarea for a
time: and yet I leave this indifferent.

CHAP. IX.
1 AND Saul yet breathing out threatenings and slaughter, against the disciples
of the Lord, coming unto the highest priest,

2 Required epistles of him to Damascus unto the Synagogues, that if he should
find any of this sect whether they were men or women, he might carry them
bound to Jerusalem.

3 And as he was in the way, it happened that he drew near to Damascus: and
suddenly there shined a light about him from heaven,

4 And falling flat to the ground, he heard a voice, saying to him, Saul, Saul,
why persecutest thou me?

5 And he said: Who art thou, Lord? And the Lord said I am Jesus, whom thou
persecutest. It is hard for thee to kick against pricks.

1 And Saul. Luke sets down in this place a noble history, and a history
full well worthy to be remembered, concerning the conversion of Paul, after what
sort the Lord did not only bring him under, and make him subject to his
commandment, when he raged like an untamed beast, but also how he made him
another and a new man. But because Luke sets down all things in order, as
in a famous work of God, it shall be more convenient to follow his text, that all
that may come in order whatsoever is worth the noting. When as he says, that
he breathed out threatenings and slaughter as yet, his meaning is. that after
that his hands were once imbrued with innocent blood, he proceeded in like
cruelty, and was always a furious and blooddie enemy to the church, after
that he had once made that entrance, whereof mention is made in the death of
Steeuen. For which cause it was the more incredible that he could be so
suddenly tamed. And whereas such a cruel wolf was not only turned into a
sheep, but did also put on the nature of a sheephearde: the wonderful hand of
God did show it self therein manifestly.

2 And Luke describes therwithal, that he was furnished with weapons and power
to do hurt, when as he says, that he had obtained letters of the highest
priest, that he might bring all those bound to Jerusalem, whom he should find
professing the name of Christ. There is mention made of women, that it may the
better appear how desirous he was to shed blood, who had no respect of sex,
who^ even armed enemies are wont to spare in the heat of war. Therefore he
sets forth before us a fierce and cruel beast, who had not only liberty
given him to rage, but had also his power increased to devour and destroy
godly men, as if a mad man had had a sword put into his hand. Whereas I have
translated it Sect, Luke has Way, which metaphor is common enough in the
scriptures. Therefore Paul his purpose was quite to put out the name of Christ
by destroying all the godly cruelly.

3 As he was in the way. In craving Epistles of the high priest, he ran
headlong against Christ willingly: and now he is enforced to obey whether he
will or no. This is surely the most excellent mercy of god, in that that man is
reclaimed unto salvation contrary to the purpose of his mind, whom so great a
heat carried headlong into destruction. Whereas the Lord suffers him to receive
letters, and to come near to the city: hereby we see how well he knows the
very instants of times to do every thing in due time. He could have prevented
him sooner, if it had seemed good to him so to do, that he might deliver the
godly from fear and carfulness: but he sets out his benefits more
thereby, in that he tyeth the jaws of the greedy wolf, even when he was
ready to enter the sheepfolde. Also we know that men's stubbornness
increases more and more by going forward: wherefore the conversion of Paul was
so much the harder, forasmuch as he was already made more obstinate, by
continuing his fury.

Shined about him. Because it was none easy matter to pull down so great
pride, to break such a lofty courage, to pacify such a blind heat of
wicked zeal, and finally to bridle a most unbridled beast: Christ must needs
have showed some sign of his majesty, whereby Paul might perceive that he had
to do with god himself, and not with any mortal man. Although there were some
respect had of humbling him, because he was unworthy to have Christ to
accustom him by and by to obey, by laying upon his neck the meek and sweet
yoke of his Spirit, and he was scarce capable of so great gentleness, until
his cruelty might be broken. Man's sense cannot comprehend the divine glory of
Christ, as it is, but as God did oftentimes put upon him forms wherein he did
show himself: so Christ did now declare and make manifest his divinity to
Paul, and showed some token of his presence, that he might thereby terrify
Paul. For although the godly be afraid and tremble at the seeing of God, yet
it must needs be that Paul was far more afraid, when as he perceived that
the divine power of Christ was set full against him.

4 And therefore Luke says that he fell to the ground. For what other thing
can befall man, but that he must lie prostrate, and be as it were brought to
nothing, when he is overwhelmed with the present feeling of Gods glory? And
this was the first beginning of the bringing down of Paul, that he might
become apt to hear the voice of Christ, which he had despised so long as he
sat hautily upon his horse.

Saul, Saul. Luke compared the light which shined round about Paul, to
lightning, though I do not doubt but that lightninges did fly in the air.
And this voice which Christ did send out to beat down his pride, may full well
be called a lightning or thunderbolt, because it did not only strike him, and
make him astonished, but did quite kill him, so that he was now as no body with
himself, who did so much please himself before, and did challenge to him
self authority to put the Gospel to flight. Luke puts down his name in
Hebrewe in this place, Saul, Saul, because he repeateth the words of Christ,
who spoke unto him undoubtedly according to the common custom of the country.

5 Who art thou, Lord? We have Paul now somewhat tamed, but he is not yet
Christ's disciple. Pride is corrected in him, and his fury is brought down,
but he is not yet so thoroughly healed, that he obeys Christ: he is only
ready to receive commandments, who was before a blasphemer. Therefore this
is the question of a man that is afraid, and thrown down with amazedness.
For why does he not know by so many signs of Gods presence, that it is God
that speaks? Therefore that voice proceeded from a panting and doubtful
mind: therefore Christ drives him nigher unto repentance. When he adds, I
am Jesus, let us remember, that that voice sounded from heaven, therefore it
ought to have pierced the mind of Paul, when he considered that he had made
war against God hitherto: it ought to have brought him by and by to true
submissio^, when he considered that he should not escape scotfree, if he should
continue rebellious against him, whose hand he could not escape. This place
contains a most profitable doctrine: and the profit thereof is manifold.
For first Christ shows what great account he makes of his Gospel, when
he pronounces that it is his cause, from which he will not be separated.

Therefore he can no more refuse to defend the same, than he can deny himself.
Secondly, the godly may gather great comfort by this, in that they hear that
the son of god is partner with them of the cross, when as they suffer and
labor for the testimony of the Gospel, and that he does as it were put under
his shoulders, that he may bear some part of the burden. For it is not for
nothing that he says, that he suffers in our person, but he will have us to
be assuredly persuaded of this, that he suffers together with us, as if the
enemies of the gospel should wound us through his side. Wherefore Paul says,
that that is wanting in the sufferings of Christ, Col. 1.24.
what persecutions soever the faithful suffer at this day for the defense of
the Gospel. Furthermore this consolation tends not only to that end, to
comfort us, that it may not be troublesome to us to suffer with our head, but
that we may hope that he will revenge our miseries, who cries out of heaven,
that, All that which we suffer, is common to him as well as to us. Lastly, we
gather hereby what horrible judgment is prepared for the persecutors of the
Church, who like Giants besiege the very heaven, and shake their darts which
shall pearce their own head by and by. Yea by troubling the heavens they
provoke the thu^derbolt of Gods wrath against themselves. Also we are all
taught generally, that no man run against Christ, by hurting his brother
unjustly: and specially that no man resist the truth rashly, and with a blind
madness under color of zeal.

It is hard for thee. This is a prouerbiall sentence, taken from oxen or
horses, which when they are pricked with goads, do themselves no good by
kicking, save only that they double the evil by causing the prick to go
farther into their skins. Christ applies this similitude unto himself very
fitly: because men shall bring upon themselves a double evil, by striving
against him, who must of necessity be subject to his will and pleasure will
they, nill they. Those which submit themselves willingly to Christ, are so far
from feeling any pricking at his hands, that they have in him a ready remedy
for all wounds: but all the wicked who endeavor to cast out their poisoned
stinges against him, shall at length perceive that they are Asses, and Oxen
subject to the prick. So that he is unto the godly a foundation whereon they
rest, but unto the reprobate who stumble at him, a stone, which with his
hardness grindeth them to powder. And although we speak here of the enemies
of the gospel, yet this admonition may reach farther: to wit, that we do not
think that we shall get any thing by biting the bridle so often as we have any
thing to do with god: but that being like to gentle horses, we suffer our
selves meekly to be turned about and guided by his hand: and if he spur us
at any time, let us be made more ready to obey by his pricks: least that
befall us which is said in the Psalm: that the jaws of untamed Horses and
Mules are tied and kept in with an hard bit, least they leap upon us, etc.
In this history we have an universal figure of that Grace which the Lord
shows forth daily in calling us all. All men do not set themselves so
violently against the gospel: yet nevertheless both pride and also rebellion
against God are naturally engendered in all men: we are all wicked and cruel
naturally: therefore in that we are turned to god, that comes to pass by the
wonderful and secret power of God contrary to nature. The papists also ascribe
the praise of our turning unto God, to the grace of God, yet only in part:
because they imagine that we work together. But when as the Lord does
mortify our flesh, he subdueth us, and brings us under, as he did Paul:
neither is our will one hair readier to obey, than was Paul's, until such time
as the pride of our heart be beaten down, and he have made us not only
flexible, but also willing to obey and follow. Therefore such is the beginning
of our conversion, that the Lord seeks us of his own accord when we wander
and go astray, though he be not called and sought: that he changes the
stubborn affections of our heart, to the end he may have us to be apt to be
taught. Furthermore, this history is of great importance to confirm Paul
his doctrine. If Paul had always been one of Christ's disciples, wicked and
froward men might extenuate the weight of the testimony, which he gives of
his master. If he should have showed himself to be easy to be entreated, and
gentle at the first, we should see nothing but that which is proper to man: but
when as a deadly enemy to Christ, rebellious against the gospel, puffed up
with the confidence which he reposed in his wisdom, inflamed with hatred of the
true faith, blinded with hypocrisy, wholly set upon the overthrowing of the
truth, is suddenly changed into a new man, after an unwonted manner: and of a
wolf, is not only turned into a sheep, but does also take to himself a
sheepheards nature: it is as if Christ should bring forth with his hand some
Angel sent from heaven. For we do not now see that Saul of Tarsus: but a new
man framed by the Spirit of God: so that he speaks by his mouth now as it
were from heaven.

6 And he trembling and fearing said: Lord, what will thou have me to do? And
the Lord said unto him: Arise, and go into the city, where it shall be told
thee, what thou must do.

7 And the men which accompanied him in his journey, stood amassed, hearing in
deed a voice, and seeing no man.

8 And when Saul was risen from the ground, when his eyes were opened he saw
no man: but they led him by the hand, and brought him to Damascus.

9 And he was three days without sight, neither eating nor drinking.

6 The fruit of that reprehension follows, wherewith we have said it was
requisite that Paul should have been sore shaken, that his hardness might be
broken for now he offers himself as ready to do what soever he should
command him, whom of late he despised. For when he asks what Christ would
have him to do, he grants him authority and power. Even the very reprobate
are also terrified with the threatening of God, so that they are compelled to
reverence him, and to submit themselves unto his will and pleasure: yet
nevertheless they cease not to fret, and to foster stubbornes within. But as
God humbled Paul, so he wrought effectually in his heart. For it came not to
pass by any goodness of nature, that Paul did more willingly submit himself
to God, Exodus 7.13.
than Pharao: but because (being like to an anuil) did with his hardness beat
back the whips of God wherewith he was to be brought under, (even as it had bin
the strokes of a hammer): but the heart af Paul was suddenly made a fleshie
heart of a stony heart, after that it received softnes from the Spirit of God,
which softnes it had not naturally. The same thing do we also try daily in our
selves he reproves us by his word, he threatens, and terrifieth us, he
adds also light correction, and prepares us diverse ways unto subjection:
but al these helps shall never cause any man to bring forth good fruit,
unless the Spirit of God do mollify his heart within.

And the Lord said unto him. After that Paul had put his stiff neck under the
yoke of Christ, he is now governed by his hand. For doubtless the Lord does not
so bring us into the way, that he leaves us either before we begin our course,
or in the midst thereof: but he brings us unto the very mark by little and
little. Luke depainteth out unto us in this place this continual course of
gods governance: for he takes him afterward unto himself to be taught, who^ he
has made apt to be taught, neither does that any whit hinder that he uses
man's ministry in this point: because the authority and power remains
nevertheless in him, howsoever he accomplish his work by man. Though it may
seem an absurd thing, that Christ who is the eternal wisdom of god, does send
a scholar (who was ready to hear, and did gape after instruction) unto
another man, that he might learn. But I answer, that that was don not without
cause. For the Lord meant by this means to prove Paul his modesty, when he
sends him to one of his scholars to be taught: as if he himself would not
vouchsafe as yet to speak unto him familiarly, but sends him to his servants,
whom he did of late both so proudly contemn, and so cruelly persecute. And we
are also taught humility under his person. For if Christ made Paul subject to
the teaching of a common disciple, which of us can grudge to hear any teacher,
so that he be appointed by Christ: that is, he declare himself to be his
minister in deed? Therefore whereas Paul is sent to Ananias, let us know that
that is done to adorn the ministry of the church. This is assuredly no small
honor, whereunto it pleases god to exalt mandkind, when as he choseth our
brethren from amongst us, to be interpreters of his will, when as he causes his
holy oracles to sound in the mouth of man which is naturally given to lying and
vanity. But the unthankfulness of the world bewraieth it self again herein,
that no man can abide to hear when God speaks by the mouth of man. All men
could desire to have hangels come flying unto the^, or that heaven should be
now and then cut asunder, and that the visible glory of god should come thence.
For as much as this preposterous curiosity, springs from pride and wicked
contempt of the word, it sets open a gate to many dotings, and breaks the
bond of mutual consent among the faithful. Therefore the Lord does testify,
that it pleases him that we should be taught by men and confirms the order
set down by himself. And to this purpose serve these titles, He which hears
you, hears me: that he may cause his word to be reverenced as it ought. Luke
10.16.


It shall be told thee. Christ puts Ananias in his place by these words, as
touching the office of teaching: not because he resigneth his authority to
him, but because he shall be a faithful minister, and a sincere preacher of the
gospel. Therefore we must always use this moderation, that we hear God alone in
Christ, and Christ himself alone, yet as he speaks by his ministers: and
these two vices must be avoided, that the ministers be not proud, under color
of such a precious function: or that their base condition impair no whit of
the dignity of heavenly wisdom.

7 And the men. He speaks now briefly of the companions of Paul, that they
were witnesses of the vision. Yet it seems that this narration does not in
all points agree with that of Paul, Acts. 22.9.
which we shall see in the 22. chap. For he will say there, that his
companions were terrified with the light, but they heard no voice. Some there
be, who think that it was a fault, and that through ignorance of the writer,
the negation is placed out of his right place. I think that it is no hard
matter to answer it: because it may be that they heard the sound of the voice,
yet did they not discern, either who it was that spoke, or what was spoken.
They heard not, says he, the voice of him that spoke with me. Surely, this is
the meaning of these words, that he alone knew the speech of Christ. It
follows not thereupon, but that the rest might have heard a dark and
doubtful voice. Whereas Luke says in this place, that there was a voice heard,
and no man seen, his meaning is that the voice proceeded from no man, but that
it was uttered by God. Therefore to the end the miracle may carry the greater
credit, Paul his companions see a light like to lightning, they see Paul lie
prostrate, a voice they hear (though not distinctly) sounding from heaven: and
yet nevertheless Paul alone is taught what he must do.

8 He was raised up from the earth. Luke adds now that he was taken with so
great fear, that he could not rise of himself: and not that only: but he was
also blind for a time, that he might forget his former wit and wiliness. When
as he says, that after that his eyes were opened, he saw not: it seems
that it does not agree with the other words which shall follow by and by, that
his eyes were covered as it were with scales: but the meaning of this place is,
that he was blind indeed, and deprived of his sight for that three days:
because when he opened his eyes, he saw nothing.

9 Whereas he says that he neither eat nor drank for the space of three
days, that is to be counted a part of the miracle. For although the men of the
east country endure hunger better than we, yet we do not read that any
did fast three days, save only those who had want of vittal, or who were
constrained by some greater necessity. Therefore we gather that Paul was
wonderfully afraid, seeing that being as it were dead, he tasted no meat for
three days.

10 And there was a certain disciple at Damascus called Ananias, unto whom the
Lord said in a vision: Ananias. And he said: Here am I Lord.

11 And the Lord said unto him, Arise, and go into the way that is called
Straight: and seek in the house of Judas, one called Saul of Tarsus. For
behold he prays.

12 And he has seen in a vision a man named Ananias entering in, and laying
his hand upon him that he might see.

10 We have said before that this man was rather chosen, than any of the
Apostles, that Paul having laid away the swelling of his arrogancy, might
learn to hear the least, and that he come down from too great loftines,
even unto the lowest degree. And this vision was necessary for Ananias, least
through fear he should withdraw himself from that function which was enjoined
him, to wit, to teach Paul. For though he know that the Lord calls him, yet
he slydeth back, or at least he excuses himself. Therefore it was requisite,
that he should have some certain testimony of his calling, that there should
happy success be promised to his labor, that he might take that in hand
with a joyful and valiant mind, which the Lord commanded. Furthermore, as
Christ animateth and confirms Ananias, by appearing to him in the vision: so
he prepares and makes Paul ready for all things, that he may receive
Ananias reverently, as if he would receive an angel coming from heaven. The
Lord could have sent Paul straightway unto Ananias, and have showed him his
house, but this was more fit for his confirmation: because he knew the better,
that the Lord had a care of him. And also the Lord sets out his grace unto
us, that as he stopped Paul before, so now he reaches him his hand of his
own accord, by his minister. And in the mean season we are also taught by his
example, to be more ready and careful to seek out the lost sheep.

In a vision. This word vision signifies some sight which was set before the
eyes, to testify gods presence. For this is the use of visions, that the
majesty of the word being well proved, it may purchase credit amongst men.
Which kind of confirmation God used oftentimes toward the Prophets: as he
says that he speaks to his servant by a vision or by a dream. He has in
deed suffered Satan to deceive the unbelievers with false imaginations and
visures. But forasmuch as Satan his iuggling casts are of power only in
darkness: God does lighten the minds of his children so, that they assure
themselves that they need not to fear legierdemaine. Therefore Ananias
answers, Here am I, Lord: knowing in deed that it was God.

11 For behold he prays. Luke shows that Paul gave himself to prayer those
three days: and peradventure this was one cause why he fasted, although it be
certain, as I have already said, that he suffered such long hunger,
because he was after a sort deprived of sense, as men which are in a trance
use to be. Christ does assuredly speak of no short prayer in this place, but
he does rather show, that Paul continued in this kind of exercise, until
he should be more quiet in mind. For besides other causes of terror, that
voice might sound in his ears, Saul, Saul why persecutest thou me? And it is
not to be doubted but that the careful looking for of a perfect revelation,
did maruellously trouble his mind: but this was the reason why the Lord
caused him to wait three days, that he might the more kindle in him an earnest
desire to pray.

12 He saw a man named Ananias. It is uncertain whither Luke do yet repete the
words of Christ, or he add this of his own. Those which take it in the
person of Luke, are moved with some show of absurdity, because it is an
unlikely thing, that Christ used these words. Although this may be easily
answered thus: to wit, that Christ confirms Ananias after this sort, There is
no cause why thou should fear, but that he will receive thee willingly,
forasmuch as he already knows thy shape by a vision. I have also told him thy
name, and whatsoever thou shall do with him. Yet may the reader choose whether
he will.

13 And Ananias answered, Lord, I have heard of many of this man: what hurt he
has done to thy servants at Jerusalem:

14 And here he has power from the Priests, to bind all which call upon thy
name.

15 And the Lord said unto him, Go, because he is a chosen instrument to me,
to bear my name before the Gentiles, and Kings, and the children of Israel.

16 For I will show him, how great things he must suffer for my name.

13 Lord, I have heard. In that Ananias obiecteth the danger to the Lord, he
bewraieth his weakness of faith therein. Therefore we see that the saints and
servants of God are afraid of death, which thing keeps them back from doing
their duty, yea it causes them sometimes to stagger. Ananias would gladly go
to some other place: but this is a point of a good man, that he yields not so
much to fear, that he withdraws himself from Christ's obedience. And
therefore this is a sign of rare obedience, that although through fear of
death he were somewhat slack at the first, yet having forgotten himself by
and by, he makes great haste to go whither Christ called him. And yet
notwithstanding he refuses not flatly in these words, to do that which he is
commanded to do: but uses an excuse very modestly: Lord, what means this,
that thou sendest me to the hangman? Therefore we may see a desire to obey,
mixed with fear.

14 He has power to bind. We gather by these words, that the fame of the
persecution which Saul went about, was spread far and wide: for which cause
his conversion was more famous. Nevertheless the Lord suffered the faithful
to be evil entreated, that the benefit of such sudden deliverance might
afterward be the more excellent. We must mark that speech, when he says that
the godly call upon the name of Christ. For whether you understand it, that in
as much as they professed that they were Christ's, they rejoiced therefore in
him, or that they used to fly to him for succor, invocation cannot be without
sure confidence. By both which the divinity of Christ is not only proved, but
also if the second be received, which seems to be more natural, we are
taught by the example of the faithful, to call upon the name of Christ, when
he is preached to us.

15 Go, because he is an elect instrument. The commandment repeted the second
time, and also the promise of success added, takes away all doubtfulnesse.
Therefore sloth shall want an excuse, if it be never redressed, after that
many pricks be used: like as we see that very many, who howsoever the Lord
cry unto them continually, do not only loyter during their whole life, but
do also cherish their slothfulnes, by all means possible. If any man object
that the Lord speaks not at this day in a vision: I answer, that forasmuch
as the Scripture is abundantly confirmed to us, we must hear God thence. A
vessel of election, or as Erasmus translateth it, an Elect instrument is taken
for an excellent minister. The word Instrument does show that me^ can do
nothing, save in as much as God uses their industry at his pleasure. For if we
be instruments, he alone is the author: the force and power to do is in his
power alone. And that which Christ speaks in this place of Paul, appertains
to al me^, both one and other. Therefore how stoutly soever every man labor,
and how carefuly soever he behave himself in his duty, yet there is no cause
why he should challenge to himself any part of praise. Those which dispute
subtillie about the word Vessel, dote through ignorance of the Hebrew tongue.
Luke puts the Genetiue case for the Dative, and that according to the common
custom of the Hebrew tongue. And he meant to express a certain excellency:
as if he should have said, that this man shall be no common minister of
Christ: but shall be endued with singular excellency above others. Nevertheless
we must note that if any thing be excellent, it depends upon the favor of
God: as Paul himself teaches else where: Who is he that separateth thee? to
wit, that thou should excel others. To conclude, Christ pronounces that
Paul was chosen unto great and excellent things. 1. Cor. 4.7.


To bear my name amongst the Gentiles. To him who went about before to
suppress the name of Christ, is the same now committed to be borne. If we
please to take Schenos for a vessel, this should be a continual metaphor:
because a minister of the Gospel serves in steed of a vessel to publish the
name of Christ: but because it signifies rather amongst the Hebrews any
instrument generally, I take these words to carry my name, for to extol the
same unto due honor. For Christ is placed after a sort in his princely
throne, whenas the world is brought under his power by the preaching of the
Gospel.

16 And because. Paul could not do this and have Satan quiet, and the world
to yeald to him willingly, therefore Luke adds, that he shall be also taught
to bear the Cross. For the meaning of the words is, I will accustom him to
suffer troubles, to endure reproaches, and to abide all manner conflictes, that
nothing may terrify him and keep him back from doing his duty. And when
Christ makes himself Paul his teacher in this matter, he teaches, that the
more every man has profited in his school, the more able is he to bear the
Cross. For we strive against it, and refuse it as a thing most contrary,
until he make our minds more gentle. Also this place teaches, that no man
is fit to preach the Gospel, seeing the world is set against it, save
only he which is armed to suffer. Therefore if we will show our selves
faithful ministers of Christ, we must not only crave at his hands the
Spirit of knoweledge and wisdom, but also of constancy and strength, that
we may never be discouraged by laboring and toyling, which is the estate of
the Godly.

17 And Ananias went, and entered into the house, and when he had laid his
hands upon him, he said: Brother Saul, the Lord has sent me, namely Jesus,
who appeared to thee in the way as thou came, that thou may recover thy
sight, and that thou may be filled with the holy Ghost:

18 And forthwith there fell from his eyes, as it had been scales, and he
recovered his sight by and by: and arising he was baptized.

19 And when he had taken meat he was strengthened.

17 Having laid his hands upon. We have said elsewhere that this was a solemn,
and as it were an ordinary thing amongst the Jews, to lay their hands upon
those whom they did commend to God. The Apostles translated that custom taken
from sacrifices, to their use: either when they gave the visible graces of the
Spirit: or when they made any man minister of the Church. To this end does
Ananias lay his hands now upon Paul, partly that he may consecrate him unto
God, partly that he may obtain for him the gifts of the Spirit. And though
there be no mention made of doctrine in this place, yet it shall appear
afterward by Paul's narration, that Ananias was also commanded to teach him,
and by Baptism which was later in order, we gather that he was instructed in
the faith. Let the readers note out of the Chapter next going before, how this
ceremony is effectual to give the Spirit. But seeing Paul received the Spirit
by the hand of Ananias, the papists are more than ridiculous, who will have
the Bishops alone to lay on their hands.

18 There fell from his eyes as it had been scales. The blindness of Paul, as
we have said before, did not proceed from fear alone, or from amasednesse:
but by this means was he admonished of his former blindness, that he might
quite abandon that boldness and vain confidence wherewith he was puffed up.
Acts. 22.3.
He boasts that he was taught at the feet of Gamaliel: and undoubtedly he
thought very well of his great witness, which was notwithstanding mere
blindness. Therefore he is deprived of the sight of his body three days,
that he may begin to see with his mind: for those must become fools,
whosoever they be, which seem to themselves wise, that they may attain to
true wisdom. For seeing that Christ is the sun of righteousness, in seeing
without him, we see not: it is he also which opens the eyes of the mind.
Both things were showed to Paul, and to us are they showed in his person: for
he has his eyes covered with scales: that condemning all his knowledge of
ignorance, he may learn that he has need of new light, which he has
hitherto wanted: and he is taught that he must fet the true light from none
other, save only from Christ, and that it is given by no other means, save
only through his goodness. Furthermore whereas being pyned with three days
hunger, he makes no haste to receive meat until he be baptized, thereby
appears the earnest desire he had to learn: because he refreshed not his
body with meat, until his soul had received strength.

And Saul was with the disciples which were at Damascus, certain days.

20 And by and by he preached Christ, that he was the son of God.

21 And they were all amassed which heard, and said: Is not this he, which at
Jerusalem made hauoke of those who called upon this name, and he came hither
to that end, that he might carry them bound unto the Priests?

22 And Saul waxed more strong, and confounded the Jews which dwelt at
Damascus, proving that this was Christ.

23 And when many days were past, the Jews took counsel together to put him
to death:

24 And their laying in wait was known to Saul. And they kept the gates day
and night, that they might slay him:

25 And the disciples having taken him by night, put him down through a wall,
and let him down in a basket.

20 Luke declares now how fruitful Paul his conversion was: to wit, that he
came abroad by and by: and did not only profess that he was a disciple of
Christ, but did also set himself against the fury and hatred of the enemies,
by defending the Gospel stoutly. Therefore he who of late ran headlong against
Christ with furious force, does now not only submit himself meekely unto his
will and pleasure, but like a stout standard bearer fights even unto the
utmost danger to maintain his glory. Certain it is, that he was not so
quickly framed by Ananias his industry: but that so soon as he had learned
the first priciples by man's mouth, he was extolled by God unto higher things
afterward. He comprehends the sum of his preaching briefly, when he
says, That Christ was the son of God. In the same sense he says shortly
after, That he was Christ. And understand thus much, that when Paul entreated
out of the Law and the Prophets of the true office of the Messiah, he taught
also that al whatsoever was promised of, and was to be hoped for at the hands
of the Messiah, was revealed and given in Christ. For the words signify thus
much, when he says that he preached that Christ is the son of God. That was
undoubtedly a principle amongst the Jews, that there should a redeemer come
from God, who should restore all things to an happy estate. Paul teaches
that Jesus of Nazareth is he: which he cannot do, unless he shake off those
gross errors, which he had conceived of the earthly kingdom of the Messiah.
Certain it is that Paul declared how Christ was promised in the Law, and to
what end: but because all tended to this end, that he might prove that the
son of Mary, was he of whom the Law and the Prophets bare witness, therefore
Luke is content with this one word only.

21 They were all amassed. This is added, that we may know that the power of
God was acknowledged. For seeing that the zeal of Paul against the Gospel was
openly known, they saw no other cause of such a sudden change, but the hand
of God. And therefore this is also one fruit of the miracle, that they all
wonder at him being made a new man so suddenly, so that his doctrine does the
more move their minds. Whereas they say that he raged horribly with great
cruelty, and that he came of late to Damascus, that he might proceed in his
purpose: these circumstances serve to augment the miracle. We must also note
the phrase, those which call upon this name: which witnesses that the godly
did so profess the name of Christ, that they placed all their hope of
salvation in him: according to that, These men put their trust in chariots, and
others in horses, but we will call upon the name of the Lord. Finally
whatsoever the scripture commands concerning calling upon the name of God,
it agrees to the person of Christ.

22 And Saul waxed stronger. Luke does not only in this place commend the
bold zeal of Paul in confessing the faith of Christ: but also he tells us
that he used strong reasons to convince the Jews: He waxed strong, says he,
that is, he gat the victory in disputation, his confession did carry with it
great force and efficacy, because being furnished with testimonies of
Scripture, and such other helps of the holy Ghost, he did as it were tread all
his adversaries under his feet. For the word confounded which Luke uses, does
signify, That, for as much as Paul did urge them out of measure, they were so
stricken that they could not tell where they were. The manner of the
confounding is expressed, because Paul proved that Jesus was Christ. For the
sense is this, that even when the Jews were most desirous to resist, they were
overcome and confounded. So that Paul tried by experience, that that was most
true which he himself affirms, that the Scripture is profitable to convince.
Also he performed that which he required elsewhere, of a Bishop and teacher:
for he was armed with the word of God to maintain the truth. And Luke
sets down two things: that Paul so gate the victory in disputing, 2. Tim.
3.16. Titus. 1.7.
that he overthrew the Jews: and yet their stubbernesse was not broken and
tamed, that they yielded to the truth: because their consciences rage
nevertheless inwardly, and being thrown down from their false opinion, they
do not submit themselves to Christ. Whence had Paul this victory, save only
because the Scripture was his sword? Therefore so often as Heretics stand up
to resist the true faith, so often as wicked men endeavor to overthrow all
godliness, so often as the ungodly do obstinately resist, let us remember
that we must fet armor hence. Because the papists find no weapons in
Scripture, yea because they see that it makes quite against them, they fly
unto this miserable fortress, That they must not dispute with heretics, And
that there can no certain thing be set down out of Scripture. But if Satan
himself be vanquished with the sword of the word, why shall it not be able
to put heretics to flight? not that they will submit themselves, or make an
end of murmuring: but because they shall lie overcome in themselves. And if so
be it we covet to escape this trouble, let us raise no tumults against God,
but let us with a quiet and meek spirit receive that peace which the Scripture
offers us.

23 When many days were fulfilled. He says that many days were expired: that
we may know that Paul had some space of time granted him wherein he might do
good. For although the Jews did resist him even from the first day, yet the
Lord did not suffer the course which he had begun well, to be broken off so
soon, so he does with his wonderful counsel hinder the purposes of the
enemies, stay their endeavors, restrain their malice and madness, whiles that
he furthereth the Gospel: and also we see what the hatred of the truth does.
For when the wicked see that they are unable to resist, they are carried
headlong unto bloody fury. They would gladly contemn the word of God, if
they could: but because they are enforced whether they will or no, to feel
the force thereof, they run headlong like furious beasts with blind
violence. The unadvised and rash heat of zeal will always almost break out
into such cruelty unless men suffer themselves to be ruled by the word of
God. This is assuredly horrible blindness. For why are they so mad, save
only because their wounded conscience does vex them? But God does by this
means punish their hypocrisy: who do therefore hate sound religion, because
being friends of darkness, they fly the light. Furthermore we see how
sweetly these preposterous zealous fellows grant themselves liberty to do
whatsoever them lusts, when Satan has once pricked them forward to persecute
the truth. For they fear not to take counsel under color of zeal, to put a
man to death, which they know is mere wickedness: as at this day the Papists
think that they may do whatsoever they will, so they can quench the doctrine
of the Gospel: they rage not only with sword: but they go about by laying in
wait, by treachery, and by most execrable means to destroy us. We must first
beware that that do not befall us, that we entangle not our selves in the
defense of evil causes: secondly that we handle those causes well, which we
know are good. But it is to be thought that they laid wait for Paul privily:
that done, when they could do no good this way, it is likely that they came to
the governor of the city, and that then the gates were watched, that they
might by one means or other catch him. For Paul says, that Aretas the kings
governor commands that which Luke attributes in this place to the Jews.

25 The disciples having taken him by night. There is a question moved here,
whether it were lawful for the disciples to save Paul thus or no? and also
whether it were lawful for Paul to escape danger by this means or no? For the
Laws say that the walls of cities are holy, and that the gates are holy.
Therefore he ought rather to have suffered death than to have suffered a
public order to be broken for his sake. I answer that we must consider why
it is decreed by the Laws that the walls should not be violated: to wit,
that the cities may not be laid open to murders and robberies, and that the
citizens may be free from treason. that reason cease when the question is
concerning the delivery of an innocent man. Therefore it was no less lawful
for the faithful to let down Paul in a basket, than it shall be lawful for any
private person to leap over a wall, that he may avoid the sudden invasion of
the enemy. Cicero does handle this later member, and he sets down very
well, that although the Law forbid a stranger to come near the wall, yet does
not he offend, who shall go up upon the wall to save the City, because the
laws must always be inclined to equity. Therefore Paul is not to be blamed,
because he escaped by stealth, seeing he might do that without raising any
tumult amongst the people. Nevertheless we see how the Lord uses to humble
those that be his, seeing that Paul is enforced to steal his life from the
watchmen of the City, if he will save himself. 2 Cor. 11.32
Therefore he reckons this example amongst his infirmities. He was acquainted
betime with the cross with this first exercise.

26 And when Saul was at Jerusalem, he assaied to join himself to the
Disciples, and they were all afraid of him, not believing that he was a
disciple.

27 But when Barnabas had taken him, he brought him to the Apostles: and he
told them, how that he had seen the Lord in the way, and that he had spoken
to him, and how he had behaved himself boldly at Damascus, in the name of
Jesus.

28 And he was conversant with them at Jerusalem: And when he was imboldened in
the name of the Lord Jesus,

29 He spoke, and disputed with the Grecians. And they went about to kill him.

30 Which when the brethren knew, they brought him to Cesarea, and sent him to
Tharsus.

31 Then the Churches throughout al Judea, and Galilee and Samaria had peace:
and they were edified, and walked in the fear of the Lord, and were filled
with the consolation of the holy Spirit.

26 When Saul was. These were yet hard entrances for Paul who was as yet but a
fresh water soldier: in that when he had hardly escaped the hands of the
enemies, the disciples would not receive him. For he might have seemed to have
been so tossed too and fro as it were in mockage, that he could have no resting
place: all his own nation was set against him for Christ's cause: the
Christians refuse him: might he not have been quite discouraged and out of
hope, as one expelled out of men's company? First, what remains, but that he
fall away from the Church, seeing he is not received? But when he remembers the
life which he had led aforetime, he maruelleth not that they are afraid of
him. Therefore he does patiently suffer the brethren to refuse his company,
seeing they had just cause of fear. This was true conversion, that whereas he
raged horribly before: he does now valiantly suffer the storms of
persecutions: and in the mean season, when as he cannot be admitted into the
company of the godly, he waits with a quiet mind, until God reconcile them
unto him. We must diligently note what he desires: to wit, that he may be
numbered amongst the disciples of Christ: this can he not obtain, here is no
ambition: but he was to be instructed by this means, to make more account even
of the lowest place amongst the disciples of Christ, than of all masterships in
corrupt and revolted Synagogues. And from this submission was he exalted unto
the highest degree of honor, that he might be the principal doctor of the
church, even unto the end of the world. But no man is fit to be a teacher in
the Church, save only he who willingly submits himself, that he may be a
fellow disciple with other men.

27 When Barnabas had taken him. Whereas the disciples fled so fast from Paul,
that was peradventure a point of too great fearefulnes, and yet he speaks of
none of the common sort, but of the Apostles themselves. But he does either
extenuate or lighten their fault, because they suspected him for just causes,
whom they had found and tried to be such a deadly enemy, and it was to be
feared least they should rashly endanger themselves, if they should have showed
themselves to be so easy to entreat. Therefore I think that they are not to
be blamed for that fear which they conceived for just cause, or that they
deserve to be even accused for the same. For if they had been called to give
an account of their faith, they would have provoked not Paul only, but also
all the furies of hell, without fear. Whence we gather that every fear is not
to be condemned, but such as causes us to turn aside from our duty. The
narration which Luke adds may be referred as well unto the person of Barnabas
as of Paul: yet I think rather that Paul declares to the Apostles what had
befallen him: and yet the speech may be well applied to Barnabas, especially
when as mention is made of Paul his boldness.

28 Luke says afterward that Paul went in and out with the disciples: which
speech signifies amongst the Hebrews familiarity: as the inhabitants of
Cities are said to go in and out at the gates of the city. Therefore after
that Paul was commended by the testimony of Barnabas, he began to be counted
one of the flock, that he might be thoroughly known to the church. Luke says
again, that he dealt boldly in the name of the Lord: by which words he
commends his stoutnes and courage in professing the Gospel. For he durst
never have whispered amidst so many lets, unless he had been endowed with
rare constancy. Nevertheless all men are taught what they ought to do: to
wit, every man according to the measure of his faith. For though all be not
Paul's, yet the faith of Christ ought to engender in our minds so great
boldness, that we be not altogether dumb, when we have need to speak. I
take the name of the Lord in this place, for the profession of the Gospel: in
this sense, that Paul defended Christ's cause manfully.

29 He disputed with the Grecians. Erasmus notes well in this place, that
those are here called Grecians, not which came of Grecians, but rather those
Jews, who were scattered throughout diverse parts of the world. Those men were
wont to come together to Jerusalem to worship. And it is to be thought that
Paul disputed rather with strangers and aliants, than with those who dwelt at
Jerusalem, because this latter sort would never have abid him, neither had it
been wisely done to come in their sight. Therefore being excluded from those
who knew him before, he tried whether there were any hope to do good amongst
men whom he knew not: so that he did most stoutly whatsoever concerned the duty
of a valiant soldiar.

They would have slain him. Behold again fury in steed of zeal: and it
cannot otherwise be, but that hypocrisy and superstition will be cruel and
fierce. The godly must be incensed with an holy wrath, when they see the pure
truth of God corrupt with false and wicked opinions: yet so that they moderate
their zeal, that they set down nothing until they have thoroughly weighed the
cause: and secondly that they assaie to bring those into the way who wander out
of the same. Lastly that if they see their stubbernesse to be past hope, they
themselves take not the sword in hand, because they must know that they have
no authority granted them of the Lord to punish or revenge. But hypocrites
are always ready to shed blood before they know the matter. So that
superstition is bloody through blind and headlong fury. But Paul who of late
ran up and down to vex the godly, can abide no where now. And yet this
estate was far better for him, than if he should have reigned in peace and
quietness, driving the godly every where out of their places.

30 In that he went to Tarsus, he did it undoubtedly to this end, that he
might carry the doctrine of the Gospel thither: because he hoped that he
should have some favor, and authority in his country, where he was famous:
yet was he brought thither by the brethren, that they might deliver him from
the lying in wait.

31 Then the Churches. Luke his meaning is that the enemies of the Gospel were
greatly provoked by Paul his presense. For why was there such peace made
suddenly by his departure, save only because the very sight of him did provoke
the fury of the enemies? And yet this is no reproach to him, as if he had been
as it were some trumpet in war: but Luke does rather commend him for this,
because he made the wicked run mad, only with the smell of him when he
was near them. For Christ meant so to triumph in him, that he might be no
less a trouble than an ornament to his Church. Therefore we are taught by
this example that those are not by and by to be condemned, who inflame the
madness of the wicked more than others. Which admonition is not a little
profitable. For as we are too dainty and too much besotted with the love of
our own rest, so we be also sometimes angry with the best and most excellent
servants of Christ, if we think that through their vehemency the wicked are
pricked forward to do hurt. And by this means we do injury to the Spirit
of God, whose force and speech kindles all that flame. And whereas Luke says
that the Churches had peace, let us know that it was not continual, but
because the Lord granted his servant some short breathing. For thus does he
bear with our infirmity, when he appeaseth or mittigateth the winds and
storms of persecutions, least if they should hold on still, they should urge
us out of measure. And this blessing is not to be despised, neither is it any
common blessing, when as the Churches have peace. But Luke adds other things
which are of far more value: to wit, that the Churches were edified, they
walked in the fear of God, and they were filled with the consolation of the
Spirit. For as we are wont to riot and exceed in time of peace, the Churches
are more happy for the most part, amidst the tumults of war, than if they
should enjoy what rest they would desire. But and if holy conversation, and
the consolation of the Spirit, whereby their state does flourish, be taken
away: they loose not only their felicity, but they come to naught. Therefore
let us learn not to abuse external peace in banqueting and idleness: but the
more rest we have given us from our enemies, to encourage our selves to go
forward in godliness, whiles we may. And if at any time the Lord let lose the
bridle to the wicked to trouble us, let the inward consolation of the spirit
be sufficient for us. Finally as well in peace as in war let us always
joyfully go forward toward him who has a reward for us. Edification may be
taken either for increase, to wit, whiles the Churches are augmented with the
number of the faithful, or for their going forward who are already in the
flock, to wit, whiles they have new gifts given them, and have greater
confirmation of godliness. In the first signification it shall be referred
unto the persons: in the second unto the gifts of the Spirit. I embrace both
willingly: that there were some ever now and then gathered unto the Church,
who were strangers before, and those who were of the household of the Church,
did increase in godliness and other virtues. Furthermore the metaphore of a
building is very convenient, because the Church is the temple and house of
God, 1. Tim. 3.15. 1. Cor. 3.16.19.
and every one of the faithful is also a temple. The two things which
follow, that They walked in the fear of God, and that they were filled with
the consolation of the Spirit, are parts of that edification. Therefore
though the Churches had peace, yet they were not drunken with delights, and
earthly joy, but trusting to Gods help, they were more emboldned to glorify
God.

32 And it happened that whiles Peter walked through al, he came also unto the
saints which dwelt at Lydda.

33 And he found there a man named Aeneas, who had laid in his bed eight
years, who had the palsy.

34 And Peter says unto him: Aeneas, Jesus Christ make thee whole: Arise, and
make thy bed. And forthwith he arose:

35 And all those which dwelt at Lydda, and Assaron, saw him, and were turned
unto the Lord.

32 Luke sets down how the Church was increased by miracles. And he
recites two miracles: that a man who had been bedred eight years having the
palsy, was suddenly healed: and that a certain woman was raised from death.
First he says, that, As Peter walked throughout all, he came to Lydda. And
by All understand not Churches, but the faithful, because it is in Greek of
the Masculine gender, though that sk^lleth not much for the sense. And it was
meet that the Apostles who had no certain place of abode, should wander
hither and thither as occasion was offered, wherefore whiles they are all
occupied in diverse parts, Peter took upon him this charge Whereby the
foolishness of the Papists is refuted, who gather Peter his primacie, by the
authority which he had to visit. As if the rest of the Apostles did live
idly at Jerusalem like private men, when Peter did visit the Churches.
Again, admit we grant that Peter was the chief Apostle, which thing the
Scripture shows oftentimes, does it thereupon follow that he was the head of
the world? but would to God the Bishop of Rome, who will be counted Peter his
successor, would travel as he did to animate the brethren, and would every
where prove in deed that he is the Apostle of Christ. Now he which out of his
throne does with more than tyrannous Lordship oppress all the Churches,
pretends that Peter did visit the Churches with great pains.

Which dwelt at Lydda. Lydda which was afterward called Diospolis, was situate
not far from the mediterranean sea, being a renowned city as well for
antiquity as also for many gifts. Ioppa was nigh to this City, which had a
famous haven, though very full of rocks. The City it self stood upon an high
cliffe, whence they might see to Jerusalem. At this day there is nothing to be
seen there but the ruinous walls of the old City, save only that the haven
remains, which they call most commonly Iaphet. It should seem that Luke
names Assaron as some town or city. Hierom reads it Saron, and thinks
that thereby is meant the whole plain lying between Cesaria and Ioppa. But
because Ierom shows no reason, why he should change the reading which is
commonly used, I admit that willingly which Luke his text shows me, to wit,
that it was a city hard by. But I do not contend about this matter: as I do
not ambitiously gather those things which may serve for a vain brag: because
it shall be sufficient for the godly readers to know those things which make to
Luke his meaning.

34 Jesus Christ make thee whole. It is certain that the Apostles would never
have attempted the doing of miracles, unless they had been first certified of
the will of God, whereupon the effect did depend. For they had no such power
of the Spirit given them that they could heal whatsoever sick persons they
would: but as Christ himself used a measure in his miracles: so he would have
his Apostles to work no more, than he knew were profitable. Therefore Peter
did not rashly break out into these words: because he might have set himself
to be laughed at, unless he had already known the will of God. It may be that he
prayed apart. The Spirit who was the author of all miracles, and which wrought
by the hand of Peter, did even then direct his tongue, and did move his heart
by a secreat inspiration. And in these words Peter shows plainly that he is
only the minister of the miracle, and that it proceeds from the power of
Christ: that he may by this means extol the name of Christ alone.

Make thy bed. These circumstances do amplify the glory of the miracle, in
that he does not only recover strength to rise, but is also able to make his
own bed, who could move no member before. To the same end tends the
continuance of the disease: for a palsy of eight years continuance is not
easily cured. In like sort is he said to have laid in his bed, that we may
know that all his members were lame: for it was a little bed wherein they were
wont to rest at noone. Whereas Eneas was so ready to make trial of his
members, he thereby declared the obedience of his faith. For although he
perceived the strength which was given him, yet he was most of all moved with
the efficacy of the words, to rise.

35 And all those. His meaning is that the miracle was published abroad, and
was known throughout the whole city. For when the scripture says, All, it
does not comprehend every one how many so ever it notes: but it puts All
for the more part, or for many, or for the common sort of men. Therefore the
sense is, that, whereas there was but a small number of Godly men there, a
great part of the people became members of the Church. And in this clause is
expressed the fruit of the miracle, because they embraced Christ and his
Gospel. Wherefore those men corrupt miracles, whosoever they be which look
only upon men, and do not turn their eyes toward this end, that being
instructed concerning the power and grace of Christ, they may stick only to
him. Therefore that token of Christ's divine power which he showed, was the
beginning of turning to him.

36 And there was a certain disciple at Ioppa, called Thabita, which if you
interpret it, is called Dorcas. This woman was full of good works and alms
which she did.

37 And it happened in those days, that she was sick and died. And when they
had washed her, they laid her in an upper parlour.

38 And for as much as Lydda was near to Ioppa, the disciples who had heard
that Peter was there, sent two men to him requesting him that he would come to
them.

36 There follows a more famous token of Christ's power, by how much it is
more hard to restore life to a dead body, than to restore health to a man that
is sick. But Luke does first commend the person of Tabita on whom the miracle
was showed, and that with a double title: to wit, that she was Christ's
disciple, and that she approved her faith with good works and alms. He has
oftentimes already put this word Disciple for a Christian man: and least we
should think that that name was proper to men only, he attributes the same
to a woman. And this title teaches us, that Christianity cannot be without
doctrine: and that that form of learning is prescribed, that the same Christ
may be master to al. This is the chiefest praise, this is the beginning of holy
life, this is the root of all virtues, to have learned of the son of God,
the way to live, and the true life. The fruits of good works proceed afterward
from faith. By good works, I mean the duties of love, wherewith our
neighbors are helped: and Luke places the chief kind in Alms. The
commendation of liberality is great, because as the holy Ghost does witness,
it contains in it self the sum of a godly and perfect life. Now we see
what titles Thabita has. For religion toward God or faith goes first,
secondly that she exercised her self in helping the brethren, and specially in
releeuing the poverty of the poor. For by us it is come to pass, that all
that help wherewith the poor and those which are in mysery are helped, is
called Eleemosyna. Thabita is rather a Syrian word than an Hebrew, which Luke
did turn into Greek, that we might know that it was not like to the virtues of
the holy women, and that she was debased in such a simple name. For Dorcas
signifies a goat: but the holiness of her life did easily wipe away the blotte
of a name not very seemly.

37 It happened that she was sick. He says in plain words that she was sick,
that he may the more plainly express her death which followed. To the same
end he says that the corpse was washed, and laid in an upper chamber. Therefore
these circumstances serve to make the miracle to be believed. Whereas they
carry her not straight way to the grave, but lay her in the upper part of the
house, that they may keep her there, we may thereby gather that they had some
hope of recovering her life. It is likely that the rite of washing, whereof
Luke makes mention, was most ancient. And I do not doubt but that it came
from the holy fathers by continual course of times, as if it had bin delivered
from hand to hand, that in death it self some visible image of the
resurrection might comfort the minds of the godly, and lift them up unto some
good hope: to wit, seeing the manifestation of eternal life was not so evident,
yea seeing that Christ the pledge and substance of eternal life, was not as yet
revealed, it was requisite that both the obscurity of doctrine, and also the
absense of Christ should be supplied by such helps. Therefore they washed the
bodies of the dead, that they might once stand before the judgment seat of
God being clean. Finally there was the same reason for washing the dead,
which was for the living: the daily washing put them in mind of this, that no
man can please God, save he who should be purged from his filthynes. So in the
rite of burying, God would have some sign extant, whereby men might be
admonished, that they went polluted out of this life, by reason of that
filthiness which they had gathered in the world. Washing did no more help those
which were dead, than burial, but it was used to teach the living. For because
death has some show of destruction, least it should extinguish the faith of
the resurrection, it was requisite that contrary shows should be set against
it, that they might represent life in death. The Gentiles also took to
themselves this Ceremony. For which cause Ennius says, A good woman did wash
and anoint Tarquinius his corpse. But their imitation was but apish in this
thing as in all other Ceremonies. And Christians also have taken to themselves
this example unadvisedly: as if the observation of a figure used under the Law
ought to continue always. For at the beginning of the Gospel, although the
necessity were abolished, yet the use was lawful, until such time as it
might grow out of use in tract of time. But the munkes do at this day no less
imitate Iudaisme, then did the Gentiles in times past, without choice and
judgment. For they wash corpses that they may bury Christ in shadows, which
being buried with him in his grave, ought never to have been used any more.

38 The disciples which had heard. The washing of the corpse shows that the
disciples knew not what would come to pass. For by this means they make the
corpse ready to be buried. Yet this is some token of hope, that they lay her in
an upper Chamber, and send to Peter. Furthermore they murmur not against God,
neither do they cry out that it is an unmeet thing: but they humbly crave
Gods help: not that they will make Thabita immortal, but their only desire is
to have her life prolonged for a time, that she may yet profit the Church.

39 And Peter arose and came with them, whom when he was come, they brought
into the upper chamber, and all the wydowes stood about her weeping, and
showing the coats and garments, which Dorcas made, when she was with them.

40 And when they were all put out, Peter kneeled down and prayed: and turning
himself toward the coarse, he said: Thabita arise. And she opened her eyes,
and when she saw Peter she sat up.

41 And he reached out his hand and lift her up, and when he had called the
saints and wydowes, he restored her alive.

42 That was noised through all Ioppa, and many believed in the Lord.

43 And it happened that he stayed many days at Ioppa with a certain man,
named Simon a tanner.

39 And Peter arose. It is doubtful whether the messangers declared to Peter
the matter and cause why they fet him: yet it is more like to be true, that
they requested him absolutely, that he would come to work a miracle. But there
arises another question, Whether he knew Gods purpose or no. First, if he
should mistrust the success, he should go with them unadvisedly. I answer,
Although he did not yet know, what the Lord would do, yet can he not be
blamed for yielding to the request of the brethren. Also there were other
reasons why he should come: to wit, to mitigate their sorrow: to strengthen
them with godly exhortations, least they should faint, being discouraged with
the death of one woman: to establish the Church which was as yet tender and but
as it were an infant. Lastly this one thing ought to have been sufficient for
him, because in refusing he should have been thought proudly to despise his
brethren, notwithstanding we must know this also, that so often as the Lord
determined to work some miracle by his Apostles, he did always direct them by
the secreat motion of the Spirit. I do not doubt but that although Peter were
not yet certain of the life of Thabita, yet did he undoubtedly perceive that
God was his guide and conducter in that journey: so that he addressed himself
to go not unadvisedly, though being uncertain of the event.

All the widows. Luke expresses in this place, the causes, for which Thabita
was raised from death: to wit, because God pitied the poor, and did at their
desire restore the woman to life. There were also other ends: for seeing she
lives two lives, those virtues which Luke commended before, are adorned in her
person: but the chief end is, that the glory of Christ may be set forth.
For God could have kept her alive longer, neither does he change his purpose,
as being moved with repentance, when he does restore her to life again, but
because many of the disciples were weak and nouices, who had need of
confirmation, God declares by the second life of Thabita, that his Son is
author of life. Therefore, God did respect the poor and widows in such sort,
that by releeuing their poverty he established in their minds the faith of
his Gospel. For in this miracle he gave ample matter of profiting.

40 When they were all put forth. When as he takes a time to pray, he seems
as yet to doubt, what will be the end. When he healed Aeneas he brake out into
these words without making any stop, Aeneas, Jesus Christ make thee whole.
But as the operation of the Spirit is not always alike and the same, it may
be that though he knew the power of God, yet he went forward unto the miracle
by degrees. Yet it seems to be an absurd thing, that he puts all the
Saints out of the chamber, for whom it had been better to have seen it with
their eyes, but because the Lord had not as yet revealed the time when, and
the manner how he would show forth his power, he desires to be alone, that
he might the more fitly pray. Also it might be that he knew some other reason
which moved him to do this, which we know not. It is recorded in the sacred
history that Eliseus did the same: 2. King. 14.32.
for he being alone, and not so much as the mother of the child with him, does
stretch himself thrice upon the dead corpse. For the Spirit of God has his
vehement motions, which if any man will square out according to the common use
of men, or measure by the sense of the flesh, he shall do wickedly and unjustly.
We must this think: when as Peter, as it were douting, seeks a by place, he
preuenteth superstition, least any man should ascribe to his power the work of
God, whereof he was only a minister. For he which withdrew himself from
company, and did pray so instantly, did plainly confess that the matter was
not in his own hand. Therefore when Peter waits to know what pleases the
Lord, he confessed that he alone was the author of the work. Kneeling in time
of prayer is a token of humility, which has a double profit: that all our
members may be applied unto the worship of God: and that the external exercise
of the body may help the weakness of the mind. But we must take heed so
often as we kneel down, that the inward submission of the heart be
answerable to the ceremony, that it be not vain and false.

Turning toward the corpse. This seems also to be contrary to reason, that
he speaks unto a corpse without feeling. But this speaking unto the dead
corpse, was one point of the vehemence, whereunto the Spirit of God enforced
Peter. And if any man desire a reason, this form of speech does more lively
express the power of God in raising the dead, than if it should be said in
the third person, Let this body receive life again and live. Therefore when
as Ezechiel does shadow the deliverance of the people under a figure of the
resurrection: O dead bones (says he) hear the word of the Lord. And Christ
says, The time shall come when the dead shall hear the voice of the son of
God. Ezec. 37.4. John 5.28.
For this was in deed the voice of Christ, which was uttered by the mouth of
Peter, and gave breath to the body of Thabita. The circumstances following,
serve to co^firm the certainty of the miracle.

41 Luke repeateth again in the end that she was showed openly to the
disciples. Whence we gather, that she was raised again, rather for other men's
sake, than for her own. Brainsicke fellows, who dream that the soul of man
is only a blast, which vanishes away until the day of the resurrection,
snatch at this place, to prove their doting withal. To what end was it (say
they) to call back the soul of Thabita into the prison of the body, where it
should suffer such misery if it were received into blessed rest? As if it were
not lawful for God to have respect of his glory, as well in death as in life:
and as if this were not the true felicity of the godly to live and die to him:
yea as if Christ were not to us a vantage, as well by living as dying, when we
dedicate our selves to him. Therefore there shall no inconvenience follow, if
the Lord had greater respect to his own glory, Phil. 1.21.
than to Thabita: although as the commodity of the faithful is always annexed
to the glory of God, this turned to her greater good, that she revived, that
she might be a more excellent instrument of Gods goodness and power.

42 And many believed. Now appear manifold fruits of the miracle. For God
comforted the power, a godly matron was restored to the Church, in whose death
it suffered great loss, and many are called unto the faith. For although Peter
were a minister of so great power, yet he keeps not the men in himself: but
does rather direct them unto Christ.

43 When as he says that Peter dwelt with a tanner, we may hereby gather, of
what manner men the Church of Ioppa did consist. For if the chiefetaines of the
City had been converted to Christ, some one of them would have lodged Peter.
For it had been too cruel a thing to suffer an Apostle of Christ to be so
despised. Therefore the Lord did gather together there as every where, a
Church, of the common sort of men, that he might throw down the pride of the
flesh: and also thereby appears Peter his courtesy, in that he vouchsafes to
lodge with a man of that calling. Although it seems that he was rather a
merchant of some good estimation, than one of the basest sort of workmen, for
Luke will say afterward, that there were there some which ministered unto Peter:
whereby it appears that he was well and honestly used.

CHAP. X.
1 AND there was a certain man of Cesarea named Cornelius, a captain of the
band which was called the Italian band:

2 A devout man and one that feared God with his whole household, and one which
gave alms to all the people, and which prayed to God continually.

3 He saw plainly in a vision about the ninth hour of the day, an angel of God
coming in unto him, and saying to him, Cornelius,

4 And beholding and being afraid, he said: What is it Lord? Then he said to
him, Thy prayers and thy alms are come up into remembrance before God.

5 And now send men to Ioppa, and fet Simon, which is called Peter:

6 He lodges with Simon a Tanner, whose house lies to the Sea, he shall tell
thee what thou must do.

1 Luke passes over now unto a worthy history: to wit, that God vouchsafed
to advance a stranger, and one uncircumcised unto singular honor above all
the Jews: because he does both send his angel unto him, and for his sake
brings Peter to Cesarea, that he may instruct him in the Gospel. But first of
all Luke shows what manner person this Cornelius was, for whose cause an angel
descended from heaven, and God spoke to Peter in a vision. He was a captain of
the Italian band. A band did consist upon a thousand footmen, and he which was
chief captain, was called a Tribune or Marshal. Again, every hundredth had a
captain. A legion had for the most part five bands. That band was called the
Italian band, because the Romans did choose soldiers oftentimes from amongst
those which dwelt in the provinces, but they had the strength of the army out
of Italy. Therefore Cornelius was an Italian borne. But he lived at Cesarea
with his hundred, to guard the city. For the Romans were wont so to
distribute their places of aboade: that every city of renown might have a
garrison to stay sudden vprores. A rare example that a soldier was so devout
toward God, so upright and courteous toward men. For at that time the Italians,
when as they were carried into the provinces to live in warfare, ran to and
fro like hungry wolves to get some pray: they had for the most part no more
religion than beasts: they had as great care of innocence as cutthrotes. For
which cause the virtues of Cornelius deserve the greater commendation, in that
leading a souldiars life which was at that time most corrupt: he served God
holily, and lived amongst men without doing any hurt or injury. And this is
no small amplification of his praise, in that casting away superstition wherein
he was borne and brought up, he embraced the pure worship of God. For we know
what account the Italians made of themselves, and how proudly they despised
others. And the Jews were at that time in such contempt, that for their sakes
pure religion was counted infamous, and almost execrable. Seeing that none of
these things could hinder Cornelius, but that forsaking his Idols, he did
embrace the true worship of the true God alone: it must needs be that he was
endued with rare and singular sincerity. Moreover he could find scarce any
thing amongst the Jews, wherewith he could be allured unto the study of
godliness: because there was then scarce one amongst a thousand which had
even some small smattering of the law. And undoubtedly Cornelius had light
upon some good worshipper of God, who being sound from corrupt opinions, did
expound unto him the law faithfully, without mixing any leaven therewith. But
because Luke gives him many titles of commendation, we must note them al.

2 He says that he was a godly man, and one that feared God: secondly, that
like a good householder he had a care to instruct his family: he prayseth him
afterward for the offices of love, because he was beneficial toward all the
people: and lastly, that he prayed God continually. The sum is this, that
Cornelius was a man of singular virtues, wherein the integrity of the godly
consists, so that his life was framed in all points according to the rule
which God prescribes unto us. And because the law is contained in two tables:
Luke commends in the former place Cornelius his godliness: secondly he
descends unto the second part, that he exercised the offices of love toward
men. This is very profitable to be marked, because we have a way to live well
described in his person.

Wherefore in orderyng the life well, let faith and religion be the
foundation, which being taken away, all other virtues are nothing else but
smokes. Luke reckons up the fear of God and prayer, as fruits and
testimonies of godliness and of the worship of God, and that for good causes.
For religion cannot be separated from the fear of God and the reverence of
him: neither can any man be counted godly, save he who acknowledging God to be
his father and Lord, does addict himself wholly to him. And let us know, that
voluntary fear is commended in this place, when those men submit themselves
to God willingly and from their heart, who duly consider with themselves what
is due to him.

Moreover, because a great part of the world does with feigned trifles corrupt
and deprave the worship of God, Luke adds for good causes that Cornelius
prayed continually: whereby he does signify, that he proved not his godliness
only with external ceremonies, but that he worshipped God spiritually, when as
he exercised himself in prayer. We must also note the continuance of his
prayer: whence we gather, that he did not pray only coldlie, after the common
custom, but that he was earnestly bent to prayer, as the continual benefits
of God do exhort us and prick us forward thereunto, and the force of faith
ought there to show it self. Wherefore let every one of us exhort himself to
persevere in prayer, by the example of Cornelius.

With all his house. We must not lightly pass over this commendation, that
Cornelius had a church in his house. And surely a true worshipper of God, will
not suffer so much as in him lies, God to be banished from his house. For how
unmeet a thing is it, for him to maintain his own right stoutly, that his
wife, children, servants, and maids, may obey him: and not to regard that
God is disobeied. It shall sometimes fall out so, that a godly man cannot have
even his wife to be of his mind: yet he which rules others, must endeavor by
all means to have God obeyed: and there is nothing more meet, then that we
should consecrate all ours to God, as our selves. Therefore if a godly man
have children, which are unlike him, or a wife of evil conditions: or lewd and
wicked servants: let him not wink, ne yet suffer his house to be polluted
through his slothfulness. The diligence of Cornelius is not so much commended
as the blessing of God: whereby it came to pass that he had his house
obedient unto him in godliness. And we must not omit the circumstaunce, that
he instructed his family in the fear of God, setting light by the fear of
danger, which did hang over his head therefore. For the Jewish religion was in
great contempt: and no citizen of Rome might freely receive any strange
religion as they called it. Wherefore although the sincere profession of the
gospel be evil spoken of in the world: yet is it too corrupt freghtfulnesse,
if that unjust hatred hinder any man, from offering his family to God for a
sacrifice, by godly instruction.

Giving alms. There is also the figure Synecdoche in this member. For as it
was said even now that the worship of God was proved by prayers: so now when
Luke speaks of love he makes choice of one kind: whereby he shows that
Cornelius was a liberal and bountiful man. For our godliness ought so to
appear to men, that we declare that we fear God, by using bountifulness and
justice. The word alms is translated unto those external good works
wherewith we help the poor, forasmuch as miserecordia or mercy, is the inward
affection of the heart properly. For from this fountain springs true and well
ordered bountifulness, if the troubles and sorrows of our brethren do move
us to compassion: if considering the unity which is amongst us, Isa. 58.7.
we foster and cherishe them as we would cherish our own flesh, and study to
help them as we would help our own members. Hypocrites are in deed sometimes
liberal, or at least bountiful: but howsoever they waste all, yet no relief
which they shall bestow upon the poor, shall be whorthie to be called by the
name of alms. For we must hold that of Paul, He which has no love is nothing
though he give all his goods to the poor. 1. Cor. 13.3.
Let us therefore learn by this word, that God does then allow our
liberality, if we relieve the poverty of the poor being moved with
compassion, and if as it were with open bowels we bestow that which the
liberality of God does give. Whereas Luke says, that he gave alms to all the
people it signifies as much, as every where to the poor. For there were not a
few rich men, to who^ to have given had been an absurd thing. But whereas he
bestowed so liberally upon the Jews, he declared, how he agreed with the^ in
religion: in which respect Luke says shortly after that he was allowed of all
the Jews. And if so be it he was such an excellent mir^or of godliness and
holiness even when he had but a small smattering of faith, although he were let
so many ways, ought not we to be ashamed who will be accounted most christian
doctors, and are yet so cold in the exercises of godliness. If a small sparkle of
faith prevailed so much in him, what ought the full brightness of knowledge to
work in us? but howsoever we boast of Christ with full mouth, yet how far are
we for the most part from the example of the holy man, so that there appears
scarce a small shadow of those virtues wherewith he was replete. For how loose
are we in prayer? how slow and sluggish to do the duties of mercy? Yea many
are not only let with filthiness and covetousness, from giving liberally
so much of that which is their own as they ought: but they are so inflamed
with a desire to have, they are become so beastly through cruelty, that they
are not afraid to rob the poor of their substance, and to eat their very
flesh.

3 He saw in a vision. Luke puts Vision for a kind of oracle coming from
god, that we may know that Cornelius was brought unto the faith of Christ after
an heavenly manner. And because men are oftentimes deceived with iuggling, Luke
sets down the time to avoid all suspicion, when he mentions the ninth
hour. And at that time they were wont to divide the day into twelve hours:
from the rising of the Sun until the going down thereof. Whereupon it
follows that it was fair day light when the Angel appeared, that the vision
might be more evident. Although there were always seals added unto visions,
that they might free the servants of God from fear of illusions: because when
he appeared in dreams, yet were there such marks of certainty imprinted in
their minds as would not suffer them to doubt.

4 And he beheld, and was afraid. Luke expresses his attentiveness in plain
words, that we may know that it was no vain imagination, which came upon the
man as he was sleeping or doing some other thing. The fear wherewith he was
taken, proceeded from the perceiving of the majesty of God. For so sone as men
conceive the presence of God, they must needs be afraid and cast down with
fear. And whereas his word does no whit terrify us, that must be imputed to
our sluggishnes, because we do not know nor perceive that it is god which
speaks. But the godly to whom God reuealeth himself in his word, do tremble
when they hear it, Isa. 66.2.5.
as Isaias says. Furthermore, the sight of God is unto them terrible, not that
they may always lie confounded, and be swallowed up of fear, but only that
they may humbly address them selves to reverence him.

What is it Lord? It appears plainly by this answer, that Cornelius his
mind was touched with religion, that he knew that he had to deal with god.
Therefore the common translation has it evil, Who art thou Lord? And it is
likely that that which is there read, was put in in steed of this, for as much
as in the Greek text there is no doubtfulnesse, whereby the interpreter might
be deceived, and all the coppies agree together in this reading, Ti esti. And
assuredly when Cornelius perceives that it is God, he submits himself to
obey: as the answer is nothing but a commandment.

Thy prayers and alms. Because God seems to be after a sort deaf, unless
he answer our petitions by and by, hence comes that speech that our prayers
come unto him, and that he is mindful thereof. Furthermore, the angel
assigns this as the cause why God vouchsafes to show to Cornelius the light
of his Gospel: because he has heard his prayers, and accepted his alms.
Whence we gather that virtues and good works do not only please God, but that
they are also adourned with this excellent reward, that he heapeth upon us
and enricheth us with greater gifts for their sakes: according to that, Mat.
13.12. and 21.25.
To him that has shall be given. And again, Well done good and faithful
servant: thou have been faithful in a few things, I will set thee over many
things. For God does after this sort extol his by a continual course of his
gifts as it were by certain steps, until he bring them to the top. But the
Papists abuse this place two ways: for because God respected the prayers and
alms of Cornelius, so that he endued him with the faith of the Gospel, they
wrest that unto the preparations which they have invented, as if a man did get
faith by his own industry and power, and did prevent the grace of God by the
merits of works. Secondly, they gather generally, that good works are
meritorious in such sort, that the graces of GOD are increased in every man as
he has deserved. In the former they are too childishly deceived, whiles that
they feign that the works of Cornelius were acceptable to God, before he was
illuminate by faith. And we need not to fet a proof far to refute their
ignorance: for he could obtain nothing by prayer, unless faith went before,
which only opens the gate for us to pray: and Augustine weighs that well
and wisely, who derideth Pelagius, because he said, that faith was obtained by
prayers, before it was in man in any measure: Who (says he) will seek a
Phisitio^, save he who is already healed in some part? And it is the health of
faith which teaches us to knock. Furthermore, the fear of God and godliness
do plainly prove that he was regenerate by the Spirit. Eze. 32.40. Esa. 11.2.
For Ezechiel gives this praise to God alone, that he frames the hearts of
men to fear him. And Esaias says, that the Spirit of the fear of God rests
in Christ, that we may know that he can be found no where save only in his
members. Therefore it is too great folly to feign a man in the person of
Cornelius, who having nature for his guide can attain unto eternal life, or
endeavor to come thither. Therefore they reason blockishly, that we are able to
prevent the grace of God with the merits of works. As touching the second
error, when as they imagine that every one of us is increased with greater
graces as he has deserved, it may easily be refuted. First, we deny that we
have any good works, which God has not freely given us: secondly, we say that
the right use of gifts comes from him also, and that this is his second
grace that we use his former gifts well. Thirdly, we deny that we deserve
any thing by our works, which are always lame and corrupt. Good works do in
deed purchase for us the increase of grace, but not by their own desert. For
they cannot be acceptable to God without pardon, which they obtain by the
benefit of faith. Wherefore it is faith alone which makes them acceptable.
Thus did Cornelius obtain more perfect knowledge of Christ by his prayers and
alms: but in that he had god to be favorable and merciful to his prayers and
alms, that did depend upon faith. Furthermore if good works be esteemed by
faith, it is of mercy and not of merit that God does allow them. For because
faith finds no worthy thing in us, whereby we can please God, it borrows
that of Christ which we want. And this is to peruers, that though the Papists
have this word merit, ever now and than in their mouths, and cease not to
puff up fools with a vain confidence, yet they bring nothing, whereby the
studies of me^ may be moved to do well. For they leave their consciences
always in a doubt: and command men to doubt whether their works please God
or no. Must not men's minds needs faint when they are possessed with such fear?
But as for us, though we take merit from works, yet when as we teach that there
is a reward laid up for them, we prick me^ forward with an excellent and sharp
prick, to desire to live well. For we address our selves then joyfully to
serve God, when we are persuaded that we loose not our labor. And whereas
there appears at this day no more plentiful abundance of the gifts of the
Spirit, but that the more part does rather wither away, we must thank our
unthankfulness for that. For as God did crown Cornelius his prayers and alms,
and holiness with the most precious pearl of his Gospel: so there is just
cause why he should suffer us to starve, being brought unto hungry poverty,
when as he seeeth us abuse the treasure of his gospel wickedly and ungodly.
Yet here may a question be asked, Whether faith require the knowledge of
Christ, or it be content with the simple persuasion of the mercy of god? For
Cornelius seems to have known nothing at all concerning Christ. But it may be
proved by sound proofs, that faith cannot be separated from Christ. For if
we lay hold upon the bare majesty of God, we are rather confounded with his
glory, then that we feel any taste of his goodness. Therefore Christ must
come between, that the mind of man may conceive that God is merciful. And it
is not without cause that he is called the image of the invisible God: because
the father offers himself to be beholden in his face alone. Moreover, seeing
that he is the way, the truth, and the life, whether soever thou go without
him, thou shall be inwrapped on every side in errors, and death shall meet
you on every side. We may easily answer conce^ning Cornelius. All spiritual
gifts are offered unto us in Christ. And especially whence comes
regeneration, save only because when we are ingraffed into the death of Christ,
Col. 1.15. John, 14, 6. Romans 6.5.6.
our old man is crucified? And if Cornelius were made partaker of the Spirit
of Christ, there is no cause why we should think that he was altogether void of
his faith: nether had he so embraced the worship of the true god (who^ the
Jews alone did worship) but that he had also hard somewhat of the promised
mediator: though the knowledge of him were obscure, and inta^gled, yet was it
some. Whosoever came at that time into Judea, he was enforced to hear somewhat
of the Messiah: yea there was some fame of him spread through countries which
were far of. Wherefore Cornelius must be put in the catalogue of the old
fathers, who hoped for salvation of the redeemer before he was revealed. And
it is properly said of Augustine, that Peter grounded his faith: whereas it
had now before a firm foundation: although Augustine thinks as we do in
the thing it self, who affirms plainly that Cornelius could not pray
unless he had faith: in his book of the predestination of Saints and other
places.

5 Now send to Ioppae. God dealt most favorably with Cornelius in that he does
not command him to go himself, but to send messengers unto Peter, that he may
stay quietly at home, and that Peter may endure the toil of the journey for
his sake. But let us not wonder that Cornelius was so courteously handled,
seeing that God thrusts the ministers of his word daily upon the unwilling:
so that he appears of his accord to those which do not seek him as he says
by Isaias. Isa. 63.1.
But why does not the Angel rather teach him? For this seems an
inconvenient thing that he resigneth his office to a mortal man: for the
oracle should have had greater authority, Acts. 9.10.
then when the gospel is preached to him by a mortal man. As when Christ
appeared to Paul by a vision, he set notwithstanding Ananias to teach him,
that he might by such an example establish the ministry of the preaching of
the gospel, which he committed to his church: so now the Angel gives place to
Peter, that he may execute the office committed unto him by Christ. Therefore
whosoever will be the disciple of Christ, and be illuminate by the heavenly
light of the heavenly wisdom, let him not grudge to use attentiveness and
docilitie toward the external voice of men, which Christ uses as an
instrument, and whereunto he will have our faith annexed. And we see how sore
God has punished their furious pride, who contemning preaching, have looked
for revelations from heaven. For sithence God will be heard in men, the
ministers to whom he has given his word cannot be contemned without contempt
and reproach of him. Nevertheless, I confess that the spirits must be proved,
that we hear not without choice, whosoever do pretend that they are the
ministers of Christ. 1. Ioh. 4.1. Romans 10.17
But because faith comes by hearing, no man shall attain thereunto, which
shall refuse and despise the word when it is preached.

7 And after that the Angel which spoke to Cornelius was departed, he called
two of his servants, and a godly soldier, of those which did wait on him:

8 And when he had told them all things, he sent them to Ioppe,

9 On the morrow, as they iourneied, and drew nigh to the city, Peter went up
into the highest part of the house to pray, about the sixth hour.

10 And he was fasting. Therefore he would eat. And in the mean season while
they made ready, there fell upon him an excess of mind:

11 He saw heaven open, and a vessel coming down upon him like to a great
sheet, knit at the four corners, and let down to the earth.

12 Wherein were all four footed beasts of the earth, and wild beasts, and
creeping things, and birds of heaven.

13 And there came a voice to him: Arise Peter, kill and eat.

14 And Peter said, Not so Lord: because I have never eaten any common or
unclean thing.

15 And the voice said to him again. Make not thou those things common which
God has made clean.

16 And this was done thrice, and the vessel was taken up again into heaven.

7 And after that the Angel. Luke declares here how ready Cornelius was to
obey: when as he makes no tariance, but does that with all diligence, which
he was commanded to do. And this was the cause that he was so forward,
because he believed the promise: as want of faith is the cause why we are so
slow to follow God. Angels come not flying to us from heaven, that they may
appoint us certain men: but that voice of Christ sounds in all men's ears.
Seek, and ye shall find, knock, Mat. 7.7.
and it shall be opened unto you. How is it that of an hundredth scarce one or two
will stir one foot, that some creep so little that they profit but a little,
but because we do not in deed believe the promise? Therefore let us learn
that we must not drive off from day to day, but every man must hasten thither
whither he is called, so soon as he hears the voice of God.

Two of his servants. Cornelius had this reward for being so diligent in
teaching his family, that he had faithful and honest servants who were
willing to do him service: and also such as that he might commit any thing to
them. On the other side, the Lord does oftentimes punish masters with just
punishments, who have no regard to instruct their families. For they find
those justly stubborn and unfaithful, whom they would not frame unto
godliness and the fear of God, and also they are afraid of their treachery.

A godly soldier. Forasmuch as this soldier was much conuersaunt with
Cornelius, he had also taught him to fear God, as well as his household
servants. It is meet that we call to mind here, that which I touched before,
That there is no kind of life which excuses us, but that we must worship god
purely. For a souldiars life was at that time most corrupt, for they were
fallen unto filthy licentiousness, from the ancient discipline, and yet the
Spirit of God bears record in this place of the godliness of souldiars.
Wherefore there is no cause why they should require a calling that is free
from worshipping God, under color of warfare, who would by one means or
other be free from all righteousness. If they deny that they can serve God,
because they be souldiars: they shall have these two souldiars meet judges and
witnesses against them at the last day, who shall condemn them. And in the mean
season those brainsick fellows are condemned, who cry that it is unlawful for
Christians to carry weapons. For these men were warriors and yet godly: and
when they embrace Christ, they forsake not their former kind of life, they
cast not away their armor as hurtful, ne yet forsake their calling.

8 Whereas Cornelius expounds the whole matter to the soldier and his
servants, it tends to this end, that he may the more encourage them to give
ear to the commandment, which they see is rather a commandment of God tha^
of man: and he is not afraid to make known unto them so great a matter, whom
he had instructed well before.

10 On the morrow as they iourneied. As Luke declared that Cornelius was
admonished by an oracle to send for Peter: so now he sets down another
vision, whereby Peter is commanded to come to him. Whereby it appears that
all this matter was governed by the wonderful counsel of God, who does both
make Cornelius apt to be taught, ye he kindles in him a study and desire to
learn, and on the otherside, makes Peter willing to take in hand to teach
him. But we must note the circumstances whereby he makes the history more
evident.

Peter went up upon the house, that he may pray alone by him self. For a
quiet and lone place, is a great help to prayer, which thing Christ him self
did not omit, that the mind being free from all things which might call it
away, might be the more earnest and bent toward God. And the Jews had another
manner of houses and buildings, then we use. For they had walks upon the tops
of their houses. The sixth hour was then noone. And it is not to be douted, but
that he gate himself to prayer the^ according to his custom. For because we
are drawn away with diverse businesses, and there is no end of turmoyling,
unless we bridle our selves: it is good to have certain hours appointed for
prayer, not because we are tied to hours, but least we be unmindful of
prayer, which ought to be preferred before all cares and business. Finally, we
must think the same thing of time, which we think of place: to wit, that they
are certain remedies whereby our infirmities is helped. Which if the Apostles
counted fit for them, how much more must the sluggishe and slow, use the same?

10 Excess of mind. Because our minds are wholly as it were set upon the
earth, to the end Peter might the better comprehend the oracle, it was meet
that his mind should be as it were moved from his place and carried up: and
by this means was he prepared to receive the oracle, when as he is carried up
above the world after an unwonted manner.

11 The opening of heaven signifies in my judgment another thing in this
place then in the seventh chapter. For it is said there, that heaven was
opened to Steeuen, that he did behold the glory of Christ: in this place Peter
saw our heaven which we see divided, so that a sheet came thence.

12 If any man ask, how he could see a great multitude of living creatures
at once: the question is easily answered. For Luke says, All manner, because
there were there diverse kinds mixed one with another. Therefore he begins
not at the first kind, that he may prosecute the number unto the last. Again,
we must not measure this seeing according to the manner of men: because the
trance gave Peter other eyes. But before we go any farther, we must know
the end of the vision. Some dispute more subtillie about the same, then the
place requires, in my judgment. Therefore I think, that it is generally
showed to Peter, that the difference which God had made in times past, is now
taken away. And as he had put difference between living creatures: so having
chosen to himself one people, he counted all nations unclean and profane.

Now the difference between living creatures being taken away, he teaches
by the consequent, that there is no such disagreeme^t among men any longer, as
there was in times past, and that there is no difference between the Jew and
Grecian. Hereby Peter is admonished, that he do not abhor the Gentiles as
being unclean. Undoubtedly God meant to encorage Peter, to come to Cornelius
without fear. But he had separated one people to himself from the rest, Deuteronomy.
32.9.
as says Moses in his soung, when as the most highest did distribute the
nations, he put his coarde in Jacob, etc. Therefore he called it his
inheritance and peculiar people, according to this order, it had not been
lawful for Peter to bring the covenant of salvation unto the Gentiles: Mat.
15.27.
for that was to take the childrens bread, and to cast it to dogs, unless
peradventure they would be circumcised and embrace the Jewish religion. Mat.
10.5.
For it was lawful to receive such as did yield themselves. Wherefore when as
the Apostles were sent before to preach the gospel, they were forbidden to turn
in unto the Gentiles. And forasmuch as the preaching of the Gospel is a most
holy and weighty matter, Peter ought not to have attempted any thing therein
with a doubting and wavering mind, Therefore to the end he may be assured of
his calling, God shows manifestly as in a picture, that the legal difference
between the clean and unclean is abolished: Ephe. 2.14. Ephe. 3.9.
whence he may gather that the wall which was heretofore between the Jews and
the Gentiles, is now pulled down. And Paul says, that it is a mystery hid
from the beginning of the world, that the Gentiles are made partakers of the
same salvation with the people of god, and ingraffed into one body.

Therefore Peter durst never have opened the gate of heaven unto the Gentiles,
unless God himself, had made a plain way and entrance for all men, by taking
away the wall of separation, I said even now, that there was no time wherein it
was lawful to admit the Gentiles unto the worship of God, so they were
circumcised: but so long as they continued in uncircumcision they were
strangers with God. But now GOD made the covenant of life common to all the
whole world, which he had shut up in one nation, as in a treasure whence we
gather, that this vision is not a little profitable for us. For when as it
teaches that the difference between the Jews and Gentiles continued only for
a season: it is as much as if god should pronounce from heaven, that he received
all people of the world into favor, that he may be god over all. Finally we
have an evident proclamation from heaven, which puts us in hope of eternal
life. But some man will object, that Peter was taught before concerning this
m^tter. Mat. 16.15.
For he and the rest were commanded to preach the gospel throughout the whole
world. Therefore he was either ignorant of his calling, or else this vision was
superfluous. I answer, that, there was such and so great difficulty in the
novelty it self, that they could not acquaint themselves therewith by and by.
They knew both the prophesies of the prophets, and the late commandment of
Christ concerning the calling of the Gentiles by the gospel: but when they com
to the push, they douted nevertheless, being stricken with strangenes of the
thing. Wherefore it is no marvel, if the Lord confirm Peter with a new sign,
concerning which thing we must also say somewhat as yet in the next chapter.

13 A voice from heaven. The voice came from heaven as did the sheet, that
Peter might know that both came from God, neither had the sight done him any
good, unless God had with this voice made clean those things which were
before unclean. Whereas some pick an allegory out of the word kill, as if God
did signify that men are sacrificed to him by the spiritual sword of the
Gospel, I do not prosecute that: but plainness pleases me better, that God
does take away by this voice, the law concerning the choice of beasts, that he
may also teach that he rejects no people. For if by the former word be meant
sacrificing, Romans 15.16
what shall eat signify.

14 Not so Lord. This is the voice of him which does as well refuse, as also
object to god his own commandment. For he is afraid for good causes to touch
that which he knew was forbidden him in the law of God. Therefore he obiecteth
to god the law which he himself made, Leui. 11.21. etc.
least he should break the same unadvisedly. There was a certain show of
repugnancy between the law and the vision. Therefore Peter is not hasty, but
desires first to have his dout dissolved, before he depart from observing the
law. Yet it is a strange matter, why Peter resisted more in meats, tha^ did
Abraham in killing his son: for Abraham had more things to object. I dare not
here say that that befell Peter, which is too common among me^, Genesis 22.9.10.
to stand more about outward and small matters, than about the chief points of
the law: I rather make that answer which is out of dout, that Abraha^s mind
was so persuaded, and that he was furnished with such power of the Spirit, that
he overcame with lofty and heroical fortitude al those things which might
have hindered him: but the sprite of god wrought slenderly in Peter. Whereby
we are taught, that every small or light thing does cause us to doubt,
unless the Lord do furnish us with counsel, and constancy to overcome all
fear. Yet Peter deals very godlilie and very religiously, in that being in
dout amidst diverse cogitations, he dare do nothing, until it better appear
what he ought to follow. Common, signifies in this place profane. For because
the Lord (as we have said) had chosen the Jews to be a peculiar people, he had
prescribed unto the^ this rite and manner of living, that it might distinguish
them from the profane gentiles. Therefore whatsoever the gentiles did use,
contrary to the rule of the law, that did they call common: because there was
nothing pure or holy, but that which God had appointed for the use of his
people.

15 Which God has made clean. He speaks of meats: but this sentence must be
extended unto all parts of the life. It is word for word: That which God
has made clean, do not thou make profane: but the sense is, It is not for us
to allow or condemn any thing, but as we stand and fall by the judgment of
god alone, so is he judge of all things. As touching meats, after the
abrogating of the Law, Romans 14.4.
god pronounces that they are all pure and clean. If on the other side there
start up a mortal man, making a new difference, forbidding certain, he takes
unto himself the authority and power of God by sacrilegious boldness. Of
this stamp were the old Heretics, Montanus, Priscillianus, the Donatistes,
the Tatianes, and all the Eucratites. Afterward, the Pope, to the end he
might bind all those sects in a bundle, made a law concerning meats, and
there is no cause why the Patrons of this impiety should babble, that they
do not imagine any uncleanness in meats, but that men are forbidden to eat
flesh upon certain days, to tame the flesh. For seeing they eat such meats
as are most fit both for delicacie and also for riot, why do they abstain
from eating bacon, as from some great offense, save only because they imagine
that that is unclean and polluted which is forbidden by the law of their
idol? With like pride does the tyranny of the Pope rage in all parts of
life: for there is nothing wherein he lays not snares to entangle the
miserable consciences of men. But let us trust to the heavenly oracle, and
freely despise all his inhibitions. We must always ask the mouth of the
Lord, that we may thereby be assured what we may lawfully do: forasmuch as
it was not lawful even for Peter to make that profane, which was lawful by the
word of God.

Furthermore, this is a place of great importance to beat down the
frowardness of men, which they use too much in perverse judgments. There is
no man almost which does not grant liberty to himself to judge of other
men's doings. Now as we are churlish and malicious, we lean more toward the
worse part: so that we take from God that which is his. This voice alone ought
to suffice to correct such boldness, That it is not lawful for us to make
this or that unclean: but that this power belongs to God alone. And also in
these words is given us to understand, that the Jews were not therefore the
holy people of the Lord, because they excelled through their own worthiness,
but only by reason of Gods adoption. Now after that GOD had received the
Gentiles into the society of the Couenaunte, they have all equal right.

16 This was done thrice. The repetition of the vision served for the
confirmation of Peter, least any doubt should remain in his mind. Whence we
gather, how deeply the observing of the law was rooted in his mind. And I
know no reason why God left him in a dumpe, until by the event which followed
he might learn the cause of the vision, save only because being astonished, he
did not desire to know what this thing meant. Although it was all in good time,
that the messengers of Cornelius should come shortly after to interpret it.
The vessel was at length taken up again into heaven, that Peter might be
certified that this message came from heaven.

17 And as Peter doubted in himself, what vision this should be, which he
had seen: behold, two men sent from Cornelius, enquiring for Simons house,
stood at the door.

18 And when they had called, they asked whether Simon surnamed Peter did lodge
there.

19 And as Peter thought upon the vision, the Spirit said to him, behold three
men seek thee.

20 Arise, go down, and go with them doubting nothing, because I have sent
them.

21 And when Peter was come down unto the men which were sent from Cornelius
unto him, he said: Behold, I am he whom ye seek. What is the cause wherefore
ye come hither?

22 They said to him: Cornelius the captain, a just man, and one that fears
God, having testimony of all the nation of the Jews, was warned by an oracle
by an holy angel, that he should call thee into his house, and should hear of
thee words.

23 Furthermore when he had called them in, he lodged them.

17 Peter was taught not only by the vision, but also by the word of God: and
yet in seeing, he saw not, until the Spirit is unto him an interpreter: a most
excellent mirror of our slacknes. Although we be yet far unlike to Peter: for we
are so far from understanding by and by what God will, or to what end he
speaks to us, that many interpretations are scarce sufficient for us. But we
must also note that which Luke adds: that Peter did think earnestly upon the
vision: to wit, after that he was come to himself again after his
amazedness: for this was a token of godly reverence, that he did not
carelessly suffer the vision to escape him. Therefore the Lord opened to him when
he did knock. Mat. 7.7.
And we are justly plagued for our sluggishnesse, in that we profit no better
in the word of the Lord, seeing we are so cold, and have so small desire to
enquire.

20 Go, doubting nothing. The scripture uses this word often, when it will
express of what sort the obedience of faith ought to be. So Paul in the
fourth chapt. to the Romans, Romans 4.19. Romans 14.23
when as he commends the faith of Abraham, says: That he douted not when as
the Lord promised him seed, being now aged, and past hope of children. And in
the fourteenth entreating of meats, he condemns douting consciences. And it
is properly to reason on both sides (as they say): when as we are carried hither
and thither by course: by gathering contrary reasons. But we must not follow God
with a doubfull and wavering, but with a quiet and constant mind. In sum, the
Lord will have us to attribute so much to him, that when we hear him, we
dispute no longer what we have need to do: but that we set down for a
certainty, that that must be done which he commands. And surely it is meet
that his will should show us the way, when all clouds are driven away, and
that it should subdue all our senses unto it, unto willing obedience, all
reasoning being broken of. Which is also better gathered by the next text. For
the reason is added, why it is not lawful for Peter to suspend his judgment
in an uncertain matter: because God is the author of the business, because
it is as much as if it should be said, that we ought to be content with the
beck of God alone, that we may obey his commandment. And hereby are we
also admonished that men's consciences shall by no other means be quiet, that
they safely do that which they do, then when being taught by the word of God,
they determine that they do nothing without his commaundemen^ and conduct.

21 Behold I am he whom ye seek. Luke declares now how ready Peter was to
obey, secondly that he understood at length by the messengers, to what end the
vision was showed unto him. For he hears that he is called by Cornelius, a
man that is a Gentile, whom he would have counted profane, and unworthy of his
company, unless his iugdement had been correct with this voice, That which
God calls pure, judge not thou to be common. This is to be wise in deed, when
as abandoning all vain confidence, and correcting our stubbornness, the
authority of God does so pull us unto it, and does so possess our minds, that
we count nothing right, but that which it prescribes.

22 Cornelius a just man. Cornelius his servants commend their master not
ambitiously, or to the end they may flatter him: but that Peter may the less
abhor his company. And for this cause they say that he was approved of the
Jews, that Peter may know that he was not estranged from true and sincere
godliness. For even these which were superstitious, though they served Idols,
did boast that they were worshippers of God. But Cornelius could not have the
Jews who retained the worship of the true God alone, to be witnesses of his
godliness, unless he had professed that he worshipped the God of Abraham with
them. Furthermore, as this was a rare example, so it ought to have moved Peter
not a little. Although they lean most of all to this argument, that they may
persuade him that which they go about, that all this matter is governed by the
commandment of God: as if they should say, That he is not so much called by a
mortal man, as by God, who had so commanded by his angel.

23 And Peter also being overcome with the authority of God, deliberateth no
longer, but lodges the men, that he may go with them forthwith. So we must
meekly submit our selves to God: and there remains nothing after that we know
his will, but that we run speedily thither wither he calls us. There is no
difficulty in the rest.

The day following Peter went forth with them, and certain of the brethren
that were of Ioppe accompanied him.

24 And the next day they entered into Cesarea. And Cornelius waited for them,
having called his kinsfolks and friends together.

25 And when Peter entered in, Cornelius meeting him, and falling down at his
feet, worshipped him.

26 But Peter lifted him up, saying: Arise, I am also a man.

27 And when he had talked with him, he entered in: and he found many assembled
together,

28 And he said to them: You know that it is wickedness for a man that is a
Jew to ioyn himself to a man that is a stranger: or to enter in unto him: but
god has showed to me, that no man must be called common or unclean.

29 For this cause I came without gainsaying, when I was called. Therefore I
demand, for what cause ye have called me.

The day following he went forth. It should seem that they arrived a little
before night: because they were not as yet entered the city at noone: and the
vision which was showed thrice asked no small time. Therefore when they had
taken their rest all night, they address themselves to return. Again, this
was a point of courtesy in that some of the faithful do accompany Peter, who
were sent as it is to be thought, by the whole church, to bring him even to
Cesarea. These men journey with Peter for good will and honors sake: but the
Lord brings them, that they may be witnesses of his grace. So that they are
bountifully rewarded for their thankfulness, when as for confirmation of their
faith, they see the kingdom of Christ spread abroad even unto the Gentiles.

24 Cornelius waited for them. Luke does not only commend the godly affection
of Cornelius in this point, that he waited earnestly for Peter's coming, but
because he would have his friends and kinsfolks to be co^panio^s with him in
the faith. This was a thing not without great danger, to call together a
company of men, that they might embrace a new kind of religion. And there
wanted not reasons, under color whereof he might have flattered himself. For
he was not commanded to call others to accompany him, but rather they were
passed over, and he him self was chosen to be made partaker of so great
goodness: but he considered with himself, how much he was indebted both to
the glory of God, and also to the salvation of his brethren: he knew that it
was an unjust thing, and a point of discourtesie to provide for himself alone,
and not to regard others: he counted it a point of filthy carelessness, to
hide the treasure of the Gospel under the ground. Therefore he did that which
the Lord requires of all his by Isaias and Micheas, that every one exhort his
brother (taking him as it were by the hand) unto the faith. Therefore Cornelius
has taught us by his example, that when God reuealeth him self unto us, we
must not choke the light of this knowledge with sloth or fear: but we must
rather endeavor that our faith may shine before others to give light, and to
show the way to them. For the inheritance of the kingdom of heaven is not
such, that even the least portion can be taken from us, if many be made
partakers thereof, but if others be made coheires with us, it shall rather
increase our glory. Furthermore, we must mark how far he is from vain glory.
For he calls them that he may have the^ to be his school fellows, being
himself ready to learn. This is the true study of godliness, when as
together with zeal there appears such plainness, that we are not ashamed
to depend upon the mouth of God. For many are pricked forward with ambition, to
employ themselves in teaching the ignorant, and foolish babbling discovers
their folly, when as they hudle out words more earnestly, and they would have
none heard but themselves. But this alone ought to be the drift of all men, to
bring themselves and all the whole world under god, that when men are subdued
unto true humility, he alone may have the prehemine^ce. Let not him which
excels in the faculty and grace of teaching, refuse to teach his brethren,
so that he be free from boasting and proud desire to excel: let him to who^
it was not granted to be a teacher, keep himself within his bounds: let
neither of them desire mastership: as James teaches the^: but let one so
edify another, that neither the learned, neither the unlearned be ashamed to
be brought into order. Notwithstanding it is demanded, what kinsfolks he could
have in Judea, seeing that he was an aliaunt, and was come thither only by
reason of war, which continued but for a short time? As I affirm nothing,
so I embrace this as most probable, That he had some in his garrison which
were his kinsmen. For neighbors and those which were of acquaintance, were wont
to serve under one captain. And we need not doubt of this but that Cornelius
his kinsmen were desirous to be under him, forasmuch as he was a centurion. He
calls familiar friends Anagcaious, as those are called of the Latins,
Necessarii, which are nearer together.

25 Falling down at his feet, he worshipped. Here is the word prosecunesen,
which signifies to testify honor or worship, either by bowing the knee, or
ducking down the head, or by any other gesture. Now the question is whether
Peter refuses this worship for modesties sake only, or he disaloweth it as a
thing altogether unlawful? It appears that Cornelius his fact displeased
Peter, by the reason which is by and by added: Arise, for even I am a man. For
we may gather that there was some divine thing in that worship, because he did
ascribe unto mortal man the honor which is due to God alone. But we must not
think that Cornelius did count Peter in steed of God. For if he translated Gods
honor unto mortal man, where is that godliness and religion, with the title
whereof he was of late adourned? Therefore I think that he meant nothing less
then to spoil God of his lawful worship, that he might give it to man, but
forasmuch as he meant to give singular honor unto the prophet and Apostle of
Christ, he fell into an immoderate token of reverence, and so he offended in
excess. For it can scarce be expressed in words, how prone men are to fall
to superstition, when as that honor is given to the ministers of Christ, which
has any small show of divine worship. For we fall easily unawares into that,
whereof we thought full little. There were less danger in a king or in the
chief chieftanes of this world. For he which falls down before a king,
keeps himself within the bounds of earthly and civil honor: but the case
stands otherwise in the ministers of Christ. For as their office is
spiritual, so if any man fall down at their feet, to worship them, this
honor has in it some spiritual thing. For we must put a difference between
civil worship which men use among themselves in respect of civil order, and
that under which is contained religion, or which respects directlye the
honor of God: as also between laws which are made for temporal regiment, or
which bind the conscience. For certain foolish men are deceived too far,
who think that kneeling is in this place condemned simply and of it self. But
this is that which I said: Cornelius does not here salute his Proconsull or
the Emperor after any civil sort: but being stricken with wondering when he
saw Peter, he honors him, as he would have honored God, if he had been
present. So that he gives man more then is meet, having as it were forgotten
himself. He thought nothing less (as I have already said) then to rob GOD
of any part of his honor, that he might give that to man which he took from
him: but when as the worship which is given to man has somewhat which is as
it were linked with the honor of God, men fall into a fault contrary to their
hope and opinion, so that they extol man above his degree and give him the
worship which is due to God. The Papists omitting that destinction, snatch
only at one member, for they handle religious worship only: to the end they
may ascribe some part thereof with some honest color unto creatures, they cut
it into latriam, duliam, and hyperduliam. They give latriam to God alone: as if
they should say that the adoration of worship is due to him alone, they make
duliam common to the dead and their bones, to images and pictures. They assign
their hyper duliam to the virgin Marie, and to the cross whereon Christ
hanged. That I may omit to say that they babble through childish ignorance, how
many of them do understand that rotten distinction? neither do I speak
only of the common sort, but of the chiefetaines. Therefore all their
worshipings must needs be infected and corrupt with wicked superstition, seeing
they unadvisedly match creatures with God. But Luke says not in this place,
that Cornelius gave to Peter latriam or the honor due to God: he uses only
the general word worshipped, and he adds notwithstanding, that he was
reproved, because he did wickedly extol man higher than became him. Surely if
that new opinion concerning the adoration which is called dulica had any place,
Peter ought to have admonished Cornelius, that he should not go beyond duliam.
But because no worship whereunto religion is annexed and the respect of Gods
honor, does leave to God his honor untouched, what name soever it have:
therefore Peter is content with this one only reason, that he is a man.
Moreover I would gladly know of the Papists, whether they think that John was
so blockish, that he would take the honor due to God which they call
latriam, and give it to the Angel? Surely there was nothing else that caused
him to worship the Angel save only too much and preposterous reverence, and
that in honor of God whose glory shined in the Angel: notwithstanding his fact
is condemned. Therefore to the end we may give God that which is his own, let
the spiritual worship under which is comprehended religion, remain whole and
sound to him.

28 Ye know, that it is not lawful. This seems to be no friendly preface,
and such as may rather harden then win their hearts, when as they hear that
they are accounted so unclean, that with their familiarity and conference they
pollute the saints: which must needs be a great reproach for them. But it was
needful for Peter thus to speak, least they should suspect that he had an
evil conscience, because contrary to the custom delivered by the fathers, he
came. But when as he affirms that he was sent of God, all such suspicion is
taken away and purged. Moreover he mitigateth very well by these words, the
offense which did stick in their minds, by reason of an old grudge which was
between the Jews and the Gentiles, so that he could by no means have entered
his speech better. For he pronounces that those are now clean who were
before unclean, so that they have mutual fellowship now with the saints.
Furthermore where as he said that it was wickedness for the Jews to go in
unto the Gentiles, we must know that this came not so much from the law, as
from the observation of the fathers God had forbidden in deed that they should
not entangle themselves with marriages or covenants: Deuteronomy. 7.3.
they were never forbidden to eat with them, or to use the common businesses
of life But least that familiarity might intise them unto that which was
forbidden, they observed the custom delivered by the fathers, so that they did
not company together. It is to no end to dispute here, whether that tradition
did bind men's consciences: for Peter does not teach what is lawful according
to God, but what was commonly used.

No man. He makes the sum and end of the vision more plain, when he
refers that unto men which was spoken of meats. And whereas he says that
no man is unclean, it may not be understood of all particular persons, for it
is certain that al unbelievers are polluted with uncleanness of conscience,
so that they pollute those things which are otherwise pure, when as they do but
touch them. Paul also says that their children remain unclean, until they be
cleansed by faith. Finally if faith alone do purge and purify the hearts of
men, unbelief does make the same profane. But Peter compares the Jews and
the Gentiles together in this place: and because the wall of separation was
pulled down, and the covenant of life is now common to them both alike, he
says that those are not to be counted aliants, who are made partakers of Gods
adoption.

29 We must also note that which he adds that he came without gainesaying.
For this is the holy silence of faith, when as without murmuring against God,
we receive that meekely, which he commands abandoning all contrary reasons,
which intrude themselves.

30 Then says Cornelius, Four days ago until this hour, I was fasting,
and about the ninth hour I prayed at my house: and behold a man stood before
me in a shining garment.

31 Who said: Cornelius, thy prayer is heard, and thy alms is come into
remembrance before God.

32 Therefore send men to Ioppa, and fetch Simon: whose surname is Peter, this
man lodges in the house of Simon the tanner: when he shall be present, he shall
speak to thee.

33 Therefore after that hour I sent unto thee, and thou have done well that
thou art come. Therefore all we are now present before God, to hear all things
which are appointed for thee of God.

Because this answer of Cornelius contains only the bare repetition of the
history, I shall not need to stand long about that. The sum is, that he called
Peter at the commandment of God.

30 I was fasting. Many greek books have emen, I sat. The old interpreter
omitteth the word Fasting: which I think was done through error or
negligence, because it is expressed in all the Greek books. Furthermore he
makes express mention of fasting, partly that we may know that he prayed not
coldly, or ouerfields at that time: secondly, that the vision may be the less
suspected. For doubtless the brain of a man that is fasting (where there is
moderate sobriety) does not easily admit any strong imaginations wherein
appear images and strange forms, whereby men are disceiued. Therefore
Cornelius his meaning is that he was earnestly bent to pray, at such time as
the Angel appeared to him, and that his mind was free from all such lets which
use to make men subject to fantasies, and imaginations. And to the same end
tends the circumstance of time, tha^ this was done when it was now fair day
light, three hours before the going down of the sun.

A man stood in shining garment. He calls him a man, who he knew was an
Angel of God, but it is a common thing for the name of the visible form
wherein God or his Angels appear, to be translated unto him or them. So Moses
does sometimes call them Angels, and sometimes men, which appeared to Abraham in
shape of men. The shining garment was a token of heavenly glory, and as it were
a sign of the divine majesty which appeared in the Angel. The Euangilistes
declare that there was such brightness in Christ's garment, when he showed his
glory to the three disciples in the mount. The same thing do they witness of
the Angels which were sent to testify Christ's resurrection. For as the Lord
bears with our infirmity, thus far that he commands his Angels to
descend under form of our flesh, so he casts out upon them certain beams
of his glory, that the commandments which he has committed to them, may be
the more reverenced and believed. Here arises a question, whether that were a
true and natural body, and whether that were a garment in deed, or Cornelius
did only see such a shape and show. And though this be not so necessary to be
known, and we can scarce affirm any thing for a truth: yet it seems to me
more probable as touching conjecture, that God to whom it belongs to create
all things, gave to the Angel a true body, and did cloth the same with a most
gorgeous garment. But so soon as the Angel had ended his imbassage, I think
he was restored to his own nature, the body and garment being brought to
naught: and that he suffered no humane thing, so long as he was in the shape
of man.

33 Therefore we are all now present. To the end Peter may be more ready and
willing to teach, Cornelius affirms that himself and the rest will be apt to
be taught, and ready to obey God: for this serves not a little to move the
teacher to take pains with the hearers: when as he hops assuredly that they
shall profit thereby. These words before God may have a double meaning, they
may either be an oath, or Cornelius may thereby simply profess, that that
company was gathered together at his house, as in the sight of God, that they
may hear man's voice in like sort, as if it proceeded out of Gods own mouth.
Whethersoeuer you choose, there shall be always one end. For to the end
Cornelius may the more procure the credit of his synceritie, he testifies
that he has God before his eyes, whom no man may mock by dissimulation. And
assuredly so often as the word of God is set before us, we must thus think
with our selves, that we have not to deal with a mortal man, but that God is
present and does call us. For from this respect of God arises the majesty of
Gods word, and reverence in hearing the same. Notwithstanding he seems to
promise unadvisedly for others in a matter so weighty, for who can be a fit
borrow for another man's faith? But because every man had promised obedience for
himself, he does for good causes hope that they were so affectioned: and
undoubtedly we may think that they had promised that they would be obedient
to his sayings so soon as the matter was showed them, and that even then every
one confirmed by himself that which one had spoken in the name of all.

To hear all things. This only is true faith when we embrace not the one
half of the word of God alone, but addict our selves wholly unto it: and yet
notwithstanding there be few examples in the world of this full and universal
faith. For the more part does not submit themselves to the doctrine of God, as
if they had made a covenant with God, save only so far forth as it pleases
them: if any thing displease them they either carelessly contemn or mislike the
same. But Cornelius does wisely distinguish between God and man: for he makes
God the author of the doctrine, and leaves nothing for man besides the
ministry and embassage. Thou shall says he, have attentive scholars, and
those which will be obedient in all things, which God has commanded thee:
that he alone may be principal, and thou only his minister: that he alone
may speak, but out of thy mouth. Which thing God prescribes to all his
servants in the person of Ezechiel. Take says he, the word out of my mouth,
Ezec. 33.7.
and thou shall show unto them from me.

34 And Peter opening his month said: Of a truth I find that God is no
accepter of persons:

35 But in every nation he that fears him, and does righteousness, is accepted
of him.

36 Concerning the thing which God sent to the children of Israel, preaching
peace by Jesus Christ (he is Lord of all.)

37 Ye know how the word was spread throughout all Judea, beginning at Galilee
after the Baptism which John preached:

38 How that God has anointed Jesus of Nazareth with the holy Ghost, and with
power, who went doing good, and healing all those which were holden by the
Diuil: because God was with him.

34 Opening his mouth. We have already said that the Scripture uses this
phrase, when it does signify that there was any grave or weighty oration or
speech made. In the fifth of Matthew it is said that Jesus opened his mouth,
Math. 5.1.
when he would preach to his disciples, and entreat of most weighty matters:
as if a man should say in Latin, He began to speak, having first well
bethought himself what he would speak.

In truth I find. Catalamuanesthai is to apprehend, or to gather by reasons,
signs and conjectures. Cornelius was a Gentile borne: yet God hears his
prayers, he vouchsafes to show him the light of the Gospel, he appointed and
sends an Angel to him particularly: thereby does Peter know, that without
respect of persons those do please God, which live godlily and innocently. For
before (being wholly possessed with this prejudice, that the Jews alone were
beloved of God, as they alone were chosen out of all people) he did not think
that the grace of god could come unto others. He was not so gross, that he
thought that godliness and innocence of life were condemned, because they were
in a man that was a Gentile: but seeing he did simply snatch at that, that all
those were estraunged from the kingdom of God and were profane which were
uncircumcised, he entangled himself unawares in that so filthy an error,
that God did despise his pure worship and an holy life, where there was no
circumcision, because uncircumcision made al virtues unsavory to the Jews. By
which example we are taught, how greatly we ought to beware of preiudices,
which make us oftentimes judge amiss. Furthermore we must note what the word
person does signify: because many are thereby deceived, whiles that they
expound it generally, that one man is not preferred before another. So
Pelagius denied in times past that some are chosen and some are proved of God:
because God did not accept persons. But by this word we must understand the
external state or appearance as they call it: and whatsoever is about man
himself, which does either bring him in favor, or cause him to be hated:
riches, nobility, multitude of servants, honor do make a man to be in great
favor: poverty, baseness of lineage, and such like things make him to be
despised. In this respect, the Lord does oftentimes forbid the accepting of
persons: because men cannot judge aright, so often as external respects do lead
them away from the matter. In this place it is referred unto the nation: and
the meaning is: that uncircumcision is no let, but that God may allow
righteousness in a man that is a Gentile. But it shall seem by this means that
God did respect persons for a time. For when as he did choose the Jews to be
his people, passing over the Gentiles, did he not respect persons? I answer
that the cause of this difference, ought not to be sought in the persons of
men: but it does wholly depend upon the hidden counsel of God. For in that he
rather adopted Abraham, that with him he might make his covenant, then the
Egyptians, he did not this being moved with any external respect, but all the
whole cause remained in his wonderful counsel. Therefore God was never tied
to persons. Notwithstanding the doubt is not as yet dissolved: because it
cannot be denied, but that circumcision did please God, so that he counted him
one of his people, who had that token of sanctification. But we may easily
answer this also, That circumcision followed after the grace of god, forasmuch
as it was a seal thereof. Whereupon it follows that it was no cause
thereof. Nevertheless it was unto the Jews a pledge of free adoption in such
sort, that uncircumcision did not hinder God, but that he might admit what
Gentiles he would, unto the society of the same salvation. But the coming of
Christ had this new and especial thing, that after that the wall of separation
was pulled down, God did embrace the whole world generally. And this do the
words in every nation import. For so long as Abraham's seed was the holy
inheritance of God, Ephesians. 2.14.
the Gentiles might seem to be quite banished from his kingdom. But when
Christ was given to be a light of the Gentiles, the covenant of eternal life,
began to be common to all alike.

35 He which fears God and does righteousness. In these two members is
comprehended the integrity of all the whole life. For the fear of God is
nothing else but godliness and religion: and righteousness, is that equity
which men use among themselves, taking heed least they hurt any man, and
studying to do good to all men. As the law of God consists upon these two
parts (which is the rule of good life): so no man shall prove himself to God,
but he which shall refer and direct all his actions to this end, neither shall
there be any sound thing in all offices, unless the whole life be grounded in
the fear of God. But it seems that this place does attribute the cause of
salvation unto the merits of works. For if works purchase favor for us with
god, they do also win life for us, which is placed in the love of God toward
us. Some do also catch at the word righteousness, that they may prove that we
are not justified freely by faith, but by works. But this latter thing is too
frivolous. For I have already showed, that it is not taken for the perfect and
whole observing of the law, but is restrained unto the second table, and the
offices of love: therefore it is not the universal righteousness, whereby a man
is judged just before God: but that honesty and innocence which respects men,
when as that is given to every man which is his. Therefore the question
remains as yet, whether works win the favor of God for us? Which that we may
answer, we must first note, that there is a double respect of God in loving
men. For seeing we be borne the children of wrath, god shall be so far from
finding any thing in us, which is worthy of his love, that al our whole nature
causes him rather to hate us, in which respect Paul says that al me^ are
enemies to him, Ephesians. 2.3. Romans 5.6.8.
until they be reconciled by Christ. Therefore the first accepting of God,
whereby he receives us into favor, is altogether free: for there can as yet no
respect of works be had, seeing all things are corrupt and wicked, and taste of
their beginning. Now whom God has adopted to be his children, them does he
also regenerate by his Spirit, and reform in them his image: whence rises
that second respect. For God does not find man bare and naked then, and void
of all grace: but he knows his own work in him, yea himself. Therefore God
accepts the faithful, because they live godlily and justly. And we do not
deny, that God accepts the good works of the saints: but this is another
question, Whether man prevent the grace of God with his merits or no, and
insinuate himself into his love: or whether he be beloved at the beginning
freely and without respect of works, forasmuch as he is worthy of nothing else
but of hatred. Furthermore forasmuch as man left to his own nature, can bring
nothing but matter of hatred, he must needs confess that he is freely
beloved: whereupon it follows that God is to himself the cause that he loves
us: and that he is provoked with his own mercy, and not with our merits.
Secondly, we must note, that although the faithful please God after
regeneration with goods works, and their respect of works, yet that is not done
with the merit of works. For the cleannes of works is never so exact, that they
can please God without pardon: yea forasmuch as they have always some
corruption mixed with them, they are worthy to be refused. Therefore the
worthiness of the works, does not cause them to be had in estimation but faith,
which borrows that of Christ which is wanting in works.

36 Concerning the matter. Because the greek text is abrupt, some think that
the Accusative case is put in steed of the Nominative: and that the sense is
this, This is the word which God has sent unto the children of Israel.
Othersome refer it unto the word ye know, which follows afterward: and they
think that there was another word added, to make the sentence more pleasant.
For Luke puts logon in the former place: and afterward rema. But forasmuch
as it is common and familiar amongst the grecians, to understand the
prepositions: this sense which I have set down seems to me more agreeable,
though, if the harshnes of the speech can be any better mittigated, I will
willingly yield. Therefore I take this member to be a preface, which
appertains unto this worthy work of God, which he showed amongst the
children of Israel, preaching peace by Christ: that done there is added a
narration: at length in the conclusion of his speech, Peter shows to what end
Christ was sent into the world. Furthermore he begins with this
commemoration not without cause, That God sent his word unto the children of
Israel. And Speech is put for Thing in the Hebrew phrase. The eternal covenant
which God had made with that people, was at that time famous. There was nothing
more commonly known amongst the Jews, than that there was a redeemer promised
in times past to the fathers, who should restore things which were decayed,
unto a flourishing and blessed estate. This did those also know, who were
familiarly conversant with the Jews. Therefore to the end Peter may purchase
greater credit, he says that he will speak of no new or unknown thing, but of
the restoring of the, Church which did depend upon the eternal covenant of
God, and which was now manifestly showed: and almost in every man's mouth.

Preaching peace. Peter teaches here what manner rumor and thing that was
which was spread abroad: to wit, such as that it did make peace. I take peace
in this place for the reco^ciling of men and God, which notwithstanding has in
it the perfect salvation of the church. For as horrible confusion, and as it
were a huge lump, do follow after that god is once estranged from us: so, so
soon as his fatherly favor does once appear, he gathers his church
together, and true felicity arises. Therefore this is Peter his meaning, that
god showed himself merciful to his people in Christ, and that he received into
favor Abraham his children again, (whom he seemed to have cast away for a time)
that he might establish among them a flourishing estate. And as he makes God
the author of this peace, so he places Christ in the mids, as the pledge
thereof, that it may be certain and holy. He coupleth peace and preaching
expressly together, because this is one way whereby the fruit of the
reconciliation purchased by Christ comes unto us. Ephesians. 2.17.
In like sort after that Paul has taught that Christ is our peace, he adds
immediately, that he came to preach peace unto those who were nigh at hand and
far off.

37 Ye know how the word. This sermon of Peter consists upon two members
principally: for in the former he recites an history: secondly he discendeth
unto the fruit of the history. For seeing that the coming of Christ into the
world, his death and resurrection, are the matter of our salvation, Christ
cannot otherwise be set before us to salvation, than if we first know that he
has put on our flesh, that he was in such sort conversant amongst men, that
he proved himself by certain testimonies to be the son of God: that he was at
length nailed upon the cross, and raised up from the dead by the power of
God. Again least the knowledge of the history be unprofitable and cold, we
must also show the end, why he came down from his heavenly glory into the
world, why he suffered such a death so reproachful amongst men, and accursed
by the mouth of God. The cause of his resurrection must be showed, whence the
effect and fruit of all these things is gathered: to wit, that Christ was
humbled, that he might restore us unto perfect blessedness, who were quite
lost: Isai. 53.4.
and also that he put on brotherly love together with our flesh: that by
taking upon him our infirmities, he unburdened us thereof: that he made
satisfaction for our sins by the sacrifice of his death that he might
purchase the fathers favor for us: that when as he had gotten the victory of
death, he purchased for us eternal life: that he set heaven open for us by
his entrance into the same: that all the power of the Spirit was powered out
upon him, that he might enrich us with his abundance. This order of teaching
does Peter observe, when he begins with the history of the gospel: and
afterward shows, what we have by Christ his descending into the earth, by his
death and resurrection. First he says, that Jesus of Nazareth came abroad
after John his Baptism. For because John was appointed to this end, by the
counsel of God, that he might lift up the minds of the people to wait for
Christ, it was not meet that this point should be omitted. He was counted an
excellent Prophet of God: therefore his authority was of great importance to
make Christ to be believed, especially amongst the ignorant and those which
were but nouices. We must note the phrase, that John preached Baptism. For
Luke comprehends in deed, under the word Baptism, all the whole ministry
of John: nevertheless he shows that it was no dumb sign, and void of
doctrine. And assuredly this is the chiefest thing in all sacraments, that the
word of God may appear engraven there, and that the clear voice may sound.
For which cause that wicked profanation which is seen in papistrie is so much
the more to be detested, because burying, preaching, they do only chamre the
sacraments with magical enchantment.

38 Jesus of Nazareth. He calls him a Nazarite here, not because he was borne
there, but because he came thence to execute his office. Again because he was
surnamed thus commonly. He says that he was anointed with the Spirit and
power by hypallage. For the power wherein Christ exceeded proceeded from the
Spirit alone. Therefore when as the heavenly father anointed his son, he
furnished him with the power of his Spirit. Peter says immediately after, that
this power appeared in miracles: although he expresses one kind only in
plain words, that Christ testified, that he was endewed with power of the holy
Ghost, that he might do good in the world. For it was not meet that the
fearful power of God should be showed forth in him: but such as might allure
the world with the sweet taste of goodness and grace to love him and to
desire him. The metaphore of Anointing is usual so often as mention is made
of the gifts of the holy ghost: it is now applied unto the person of Christ:
because by this means he was consecrated a king and Priest by his father. And
we know that in time of the Law oil was a solemn token of consecration. The
Going of Christ is taken for the course of his calling: as if he should say
that he fulfilled his function until the time appointed before. The similitude
is taken from travelers which go forward in their journey, until they come
unto the appointed place. Although he shows therewithal that he walked
through Judea in three years, so that no corner was without his good deeds.

Those which were holden of Diuils. This also was a more manifest token of Gods
power in Christ, that he did not only heal men of common diseases, but did
also cure desperate evils. All diseases are in deed light punishments
wherewith God does punish us: but when as he deals more gently with us
according to his fatherly kindness, he is said to strike us with his hand
then: but in more grievous scourges he uses Satan as the minister of his
wrath, and as it were an hangman. And we must diligently mark this
distinction: for it were an absurd thing to say that he is tormented of the
devil who is sick of an Ague or of some other common kind of disease: but
the alienating of the mind, furious madness, and other as it were monstrous
griefs, are fitly and properly attributed to Satan. And in this respect the
scripture uses to call men who are so taken and carried headlong with such
madness that they have no hold of themselves, so that they seem to be turned
almost into beasts, men possessed of devils.

Because God was with him. Peter notes briefly to what end those powers did
tend which were showed by the hand of Christ: to wit, that he might purchase
credit among men, who did behold God as it were present: and this was the true
use of miracles, as we have said alredie else where, and as we shall see
again hereafter when we come to it. For we must stay our selves upon this
principle, that we diminish the majesty of God, unless we embrace and
reverence those whom he marketh with the mark of his servants. Therefore
forasmuch as powers did plainly prove that Christ descended from heaven, his
dignity is placed without the lot of man's judgment.

39 And we are witnesses of all things which he did in the country of the
Jews, and at Ierusalam: whom they slew hanging him on a tree.

40 Him God raised the third day, and showed him openly,

41 Not unto all the people, but to the witnesses appointed before of God for
this purpose: namely to us who did eat and drink with him, after that he was
risen from the dead:

42 And he commanded us that we should preach to the people, and should
testify that he is appointed judge of the quick and dead.

43 To this man do all the Prophets bear witness, that whosoever believes in
him, may through his name receive remission of sins.

39 And we be witnesses. That he may make his words to be believed, he says
that he and his fellows in office saw with their eyes all those things which
they spoke concerning Christ. Shortly after he takes the word witness in
another sense: when he says, that they were appointed witnesses by God, and
that they are brought forth as it were by God, that they might by their
preaching bring men unto the faith of Christ. So Paul in the fifteenth of the
first to the Corinthians says: we, says he should be found false
witnesses, unless Christ were risen from the dead. And we have already
heard by the mouth of Christ, ye shall be my witnesses in Judea, Samaria and
at Jerusalem. And now Peter calls himself only an historical witness,
because he beheld the things which were done. And here he touches his death
briefly, because it was openly known: he stands longer upon his
resurrection, which was more doubtful, and the knowledge whereof was more
available unto faith.

41 If any man demand here, Why God did not show his son openly to al men
after his resurrection: I answer, Although there could no reason be showed,
yet ought the counsel of God alone to suffice sober and modest men, that they
may assure themselves without al doubt that that is best which God has thought
meet. And yet assuredly God used this moderation to a good end. For the
certainty of the resurrection was proved by many and firm testimonies, and
this was profitable to exercise the faith of the godly, to believe the Gospel
rather than their eyes. As touching the wicked and professed enemies of Christ,
seeing that being so often convict they would never yield to God, they were
unworthy to have Christ to admit them to behold the glory of his resurrection.
Though even they were sufficiently convict with the report of the soldiars,
whom they had hired to keep the sepulcher: that I may omit other reasons
which we may fet out of the Harmony. Therefore let us assure our selves of
this, that the holy Apostles were chosen by the holy decree of God, that by
their testimony the truth of Christ his resurrection might stand. Whosoever
is not content with this approbation, let him take away and overthrow if he
can, that inviolable decree of God, which Peter commends to us in this place.
And as for us if we covet to have God the sure author of our faith, let us
learn to be content with the witnesses, whom in due time he has brought
forth as it were by his hand, being ordained by him before the world was made.

Who did eat. And here it appears what great regard Christ had of our
rudeness and ignorance, who did abase himself so far for our sake, that
when he was now endewed with heavenly glory, he did yet notwithstanding eat
and drink as a mortal man. Wherefore there is no cause why we should
complain that the resurrection of Christ is obscure and doubtful. For he
suffered his disciples to be slow and hard of belief for this cause, that
being better confirmed, they might take from us all occasion of doubting. Yea
rather we must endeavor our selves that our unworthiness and unthankfulness
do not darken so great kindness of the son of God toward us. But when as
the scripture says that Christ did eat, curious men move a question, what
became of that meat? But the answer is easy: that like as it was created of
nothing, so was it easily brought to nothing by the divine power of Christ.
That meat which is taken for the sustenance of the body, is concoct and
afterward digested: but we know that Christ took this meat to feed our
faith, and in this use was it spent. And those men are deceived who think that
Christ did only seem to eat. For what good could such a visure or vain
show have done. For when as we say that Christ was not enforced with any
necessity of his own to eat, but that he meant only to provide for those
that were his, all occasion is cut off from the frivolous inventions of men.

42 And he commanded us. He begins in this place to entreat of the
kingdom of Christ, when he says, that Christ did rise again for this cause
that he may once judge the world. For by the same right are the government
of heaven and earth, and the perpetual government of the Church due to him: he
says that he shall be judge of quick and dead, because when as the dead
shall rise again, others also who shall then remain alive, 1. Cor. 15.51 52.
1. Thessa. 4.17.
shall be changed in a moment as Paul teaches in the fifteenth Chapter of
the first Epistle to the Corinthians, and in the first to the Thessalonians and
the fowerth Chapter: In the word Testify there is great weight: because as men
are naturally inclyned unto unbelief, the simple preaching of the Gospel
should not be so effectual, unless the Lord should establish it with strong
protestations. And chiefly every one of us does feel in himself too much,
what a hard matter it is, both to lift up our minds to hope for the coming of
Christ, which are entangled in earthly snares, and also continually to keep
them fixed in this meditation, seeing they cease not with their lightness to be
carried hither and thither continually.

43 To him bear all the Prophets. Luke touches and gathers the sum of the
sermon briefly as we have said: therefore is he so short in noting the fruit of
the history. Let us know that the words uttered by Peter are not recited in
this place: but that it is only declared of what things he entreated. And we
must consider three things, That it is the proper office of Christ, to
reconcile men to God, when their sins are done away: that we have remission of
sins by faith: that this doctrine is not new or of late invented, but that
it had all the Prophets of God since the beginning of the world to bear
witness of it. As touching the first, if God be pleased and pacified, by not
imputing our sins, it appears hereby, that he hates and is displeased with
all mankind, until such time as they begin to please him by free pardon.
Therefore we are all condemned of sin, which makes us subject to the wrath
of God, and binds us with the guiltiness of eternal death, and because we
are destitute of righteousness in our selves, we are taught to fly unto the
mercy of God, as unto our only fortress. When as he says that the faithful
receive remission of sins, there is understood a hidden contrariety
between them and God. For God must needs offer it of his own accord that the
faithful may receive it. When as he says that it is given by the name of
Christ, his meaning is, that we retune into Gods favor by the benefit of
Christ alone, because he has once reconciled him to us by his death: or as
they say commonly, that we obtain forgiveness of sins by Christ his
mediation and coming between, and by none other means. Satan could never
blot out of the minds of men the feeling of their giltinesse, but that they
were always careful to crave pardon at Gods hands: but forasmuch as there was
but one way and means to obtain pardon: miserable men, being deluded with the
iuglings of Satan, did invent to themselves wonderful Labarinths, in whose
crooks and turns they wearied themselves in vain. This first error did first
lead them away from the right way, because they assayed to deserve pardon,
which is offered freely, and is received by faith alone. Afterward there were
innumerable kinds of satisfactions invented whereby they appeased God. The
beginning thereof flowed in deed from the word of God, but forasmuch as when
God gave unto the fathers the sacrifices and rites of oblations, he shadowed
Christ, blind and profane men, setting Christ aside, and following a vain
shadow, did corrupt all that which was Gods in sacrifices and satisfactions.
Wherefore what sacrifices soever the Gentiles did use since the beginning of
the world, and those which the Turks and Jews use at this day, may be set
against Christ as things altogether contrary. The Papists are never a whit
better, save only that they sprinkle their satisfactions with the blood of
Christ: but they deal too disorderedly therein, because being not content with
Christ alone, they gather to themselves on every side a thousand manner of
sacrifices or satisfactions. Therefore whosoever desires to have remission of
sins, let him not turn aside from Christ even the least nails breadth. When
as we hear that we have remission of sins by believing, we must understand
and know the force and nature of faith, as undoubtedly Peter entreated
abundantly of this, after what sort we must believe in Christ: and this is
nothing else, but with the sincere affection of the mind to embrace him, as
he is set before us in the Gospel, so that faith depends upon the
promises. Yet Peter seems to deal amiss, because whereas we have two
principal things by our Savior Christ, he does only make mention of the
one of them, for he speaks nothing of repentance and newness of life, which
ought not to be omitted in the sum of the Gospel. But we may easily answer,
That, the regeneration of the Spirit is comprehended under faith, as it is an
effect thereof. For we believe in Christ for this cause, partly, that he may
restore us into the fathers favor by the free imputation of righteousness:
partly that he may sanctify us by his Spirit. And we know that we are adopted
by God to be his children, upon this condition, that he may govern us by his
Spirit. Therefore it was sufficient for Peter to show, how men who were by
nature estranged from God, do return into favor with him. As touching the
third member we need not reckon up al places of the Prophets, where they set
before us Christ to be the mediator, who by obtaining pardon for our sins,
does reconcile God to us: but this is their common order of teaching, and as it
were their rule, to call back all the godly unto that covenant, which God made
with Abraham, putting the mediator between. Furthermore this point is very
needful to be known, that the grace which was offered at length by Christ,
is the same which the law and the Prophets in times past, delivered unto the
fathers to be hoped for. And surely it was of great force with Cornelius and
such like, who did greatly reverence the Law and Prophets, that they might know
that that was performed and accomplished in very deed in Christ, which was
testified in the oracles of the Prophets. Therefore to the end the ministers,
of the church may agree with the Prophets in their form of teaching, let them
study by preaching to set forth Christ: let them continually testify that we
must seek righteousness at his hands alone, which consists upon free
remission of sins. This is another manner of antiquity, than that which is
showed with great boasting of the Papists, whiles that they thrust in the
rotten inventions of their satisfactions, into the place of Christ's blood.

44 And as Peter yet spoke these words, the Spirit came down upon all which
heard the word:

45 And they of the circumcision which believed were astonished, as many as came
with Peter, because that on the Gentiles also were powered out the gifts of the
holy Ghost.

46 For they heard them speak with tongues, and glorify God; Then Peter
answered:

47 Can any man forbid water, that these should not be baptized who have
received the Spirit as well as we.

48 And he commanded them to be baptized in the name of the Lord. Then
prayed they him to tarry certain days.

44 And as Peter yet spoke. God declares now by a new miracle, that the
doctrine of the Gospel is common as well to the Gentiles as to the Jews. And
this is an excellent seal of the calling of the Gentiles: because the Lord
would never have vouchsafed to bestow upon the Gentiles the graces of his
spirit, unless it had bin to declare that even they were adopted together into
the society of the covenant. These gifts mentioned by Luke, differ in deed
from the grace of regeneration: and yet undoubtedly God did by this means
seal both Peter his doctrine, and also their faith and godliness which heard
him. He says that they were all endowed with the Spirit, like as we saw
before, that they came all encouraged to learn and obey. This visible sign
represents unto us as it were in a table, what an effectual instrument of
gods power the preaching of the Gospel is. For he powered out his Spirit as
Peter spoke to the end he might show, that he sends not teachers to that
end, that they may beat the air with the vain sound of their voice, but that
he may work mightily by their voice, and may quicken the same by the power of
his Spirit, to the salvation of the godly. Thus does Paul put the Galathians
in mind, that they received the holy Ghost by the hearing of faith, and in
another place he says that he is the minister of the Spirit and not of the
letter. The gift of the tongues and other such like things are ceased long ago
in the Church, but the Spirit of understanding and of regeneration is of force
and shall always be of force, which the Lord coupleth with the external
preaching of the Gospel, that he may keep us in reverence of his word, and
may prevent the deadely dotings, wherein brainesicke fellows inwrappe
themselves, whiles that forsaking the word, they invent an erroneous and
wandering Spirit. But it does not nor shall not always so fall out, that all
those which hear the word with their outward ears, do or shall also receive
the Spirit: and the ministers do seldom light upon such hearers as Peter had:
who are willing with one consent to follow God. Yet he brings to pass that
all the elect feel in themselueues the consent of the external word and of
the secret power of the Spirit.

45 The faithful were astonished. He calls them faithful who were as yet
possessed with a wicked error. So the Lord does not by and by wipe away al
clouds of ignorance from his, and yet they do not darken the praise of faith
before God, because he pardons errors and does vouchsafe to favor it as if
it were pure and plain. And yet it is a wonder, that seeing they knew that
Peter was sent of God, they would now be amassed as at some strange and new
thing, because God gives the grace of his Spirit to those, to whom he would
have Christ now preached, but the sudden change is the cause of this, because
whereas God until that day, had separated the Gentiles from his people as
strangers and aliants, he does now favor them both alike, and lifts them up
into the like degree of honor. Although we be also taught by this example,
how hard a matter it is for us to wind out our selves out of our errors
once conceived, especially when they are of any continuance.

46 For they heard them. He expresses what gifts of the Spirit were powered
out upon them, and therewithal he notes the use: to wit, that they had
variety of tongues given them, so that they did glorify God with many
tongues. Also it may be gathered out of this place, that the tongues were given
them not only for necessity, seeing the Gospel was to be preached to
strangers and to men of another language, but also to be an ornament and
worship to the Gospel. But ambition did afterward corrupt this second use,
forasmuch as many did translate that unto pomp and vain glory, which they
had received to set forth the dignity of the heavenly wisdom: as Paul does
sharply reprove this fault in the Corinthians. Therefore no marvel if God
took away that shortly after, which he had given, and did not suffer the same
to be corrupt with longer abuse.

47 Peter answered. Peter reasons from the thing to the sign, for seeing that
Baptism is an addition or appurtenance of the spiritual grace: he which has
received the Spirit, is also apt to receive Baptism: and this is the most
lawful order, that the minister admit those unto the receiving of the vtward
sign, whom God has testified to be his children by the mark and pledge of
his Spirit. So that faith and doctrine are first. And whereas unlearned men
infer thereuppon that infantes are not to be baptized, it is without all
reason. I grant that those who are strangers from the Church must be taught,
before the sign of adoption be given them: but I say that the children of the
faithful, which are borne in the Church, are from their mothers womb of the
household of the kingdom of God. Yea the argument which they use
preposterously against us, do I turn back upon themselves. For seeing that
God has adopted the children of the faithful before they be borne, I conclude
thereupon that they are not to be defrauded of the outward sign. Otherwise men
shall presume to take that from them which GOD has granted them. As touching
the manifest grace of the spirit, there is no absurdity therein, if it follow
after baptism in them. And as this testimony makes nothing for maintenance
of their error, so it does stro^glie refute the error of the Papists, who tie
the grace of the spirit to the signs, and think that the same is fet from
heaven with enchantments, as those witches did think that they did pull down the
moon with their charms. But for as much as Luke says that these had the holy
Ghost given them who were not as yet baptized, he shows that the spirit is
not included in Baptism, Lastly we must note that the Apostles were content
with water alone, when as they did baptize, and would to God this plainness had
bin retained amongst their posterity, and that they had not gathered here
and there diverse trifles, whereof baptism is full in popery. They think that
the worthiness of baptism is adorned with oil, salt, spittle, wax candles,
whereas they are rather filthy pollutions, which corrupt the pure and natural
institution of Christ.

48 And he commanded them to be baptized. It was not of necessity that
baptism should be ministered by Peter's hand, as Paul does likewise testify
that he baptized few at Corinthus, for other ministers might take this charge
upon them. Whereas he says in the name of the Lord, it must not be restrained
unto the form, as we have said in the third chapter: but because Christ is
the proper scope of baptism, therefore are we said to be baptized in his
name, when as Luke says last of all that Peter was requested by Cornelius and
his kinsmen, that he would tarry a few days, he commends in them their
desire to profit. They were indeed endued with the holy ghost, but they were
not so com to the top, but that confirmation was as yet profitable for them.
And according to their example, so often as opportunity to profit offers it
self, we must use it diligently: and let us not swel with pride, which
stops the way before doctrine.

CHAP. XI.
1 ANd the Apostles and brethren which were in Judea, heard that the Gentiles
also had embraced the word of God.

2 And when Peter was gone up to Jerusalem, those which were of the
Circumcision reasoned with him,

3 Saying: Thou wentest in unto men vncircumsised, and have eaten with them.

4 And Peter began, and expounded to them in order saying:

5 I was in the City Ioppa, praying, and being in a trance I saw a vision: to
wit, a certain vessel coming down from heaven, like a great sheet; tied by
the four corners, which came even unto me:

6 Which when I considered earnestly, I saw then four footed beasts of the
earth, and wild beasts, and creeping things, and byrds of the heaven.

7 And I heard a voice saying to me: Arise Peter, slay, and eat.

8 Then I said, Not so Lord: Because there never entered into my mouth, any
common or vncleene thing.

9 And the voice answered me the second time from heaven: Profane not thou
those things which God has made clean.

10 And this was done thrice. And they were all received into heaven again.

11 And behold, the same hour three men stood nigh the house wherein I sat,
being sent unto me from Cesarea.

12 And the Spirit commanded me to go with them, doubting nothing. And they
came with me, and these six brethren. And we entered the man's house.

13 And he told us how he had seen an Angel standing at his house, and
saying to him: Send men to Ioppa, and fetch Simon, whose surname is Peter,

14 Who shall speak to thee words, whereby thou and all thy house shall be
saved.

15 Furthermore when I began to speak, the holy Ghost fell down upon them,
even as upon us at the beginning.

16 And I remembered the word of the Lord, how he had said: John truly
has baptized with water, but you shall be baptized with the holy Ghost.

17 Therefore seeing that God had given them the like gift as unto us, which
believed in the Lord Jesus Christ, who was I that I could let God?

18 When they had heard these things, they held their peace, and glorified
God, saying: then has God also given unto the Gentiles repentance unto life.

1 And the Apostles. Whereas Luke declares that the fame of one house which
was converted, was spread abroad every where amongst the brethren, that did
arise by reason of admiration: for the Jews accounted it as a monster, that
the Gentiles should be gathered unto the^, as if they should have heard that
there had been men made of stones: again the immoderate love of their nation
did hinder them from acknowledging the work of god. For we see that through
this ambition and pride, the Church was troubled: because the equality which
did diminish their dignity was not tolerable. For which cause they did
contend stoutly, to bring the necks of the Gentiles under the yoke. But for as
much as it was foretold by so many prophesies of the prophets, that the church
should be gathered of all people after the coming of the Messiah, and
forasmuch as Christ had given commandment to his Apostles, touching the
preaching of the gospel throughout the whole world, how can it be that the
conversion of a few men should move some, as some strange thing, and should
terrify other some, as if it were some monster? I answer, that whatsoever was
foretold touching the calling of the Gentiles, it was so taken, as if the
gentiles should be made subject to the law of Moses, that they might have a
place in the church. But the manner of the calling, the beginning whereof they
saw then, was not only unknown, but it seemed to be quite contrary to
reason. For they did dream that it was impossible that the Gentiles could be
mixed with the sons of Abraham, and be made one body with them, (the
ceremonies being taken away) but that there should be great injury done to
the covenant of God, for to what end served the law save only to be the myd
wall to note out the disagreement? Secondly because they were acquainted with
that difference during their whole life, the unlooked for newness of the thing
does so pearce them, that they did forget all that which ought to have quieted
their minds: finally they do not straightway comprehend the mystery, which as
Paul teaches, was unknown to the Angels from the creation of the world.

2 They reasoned with him. Obstinacy does for the most part acco^panie error.
This was now a fault having in it too gross ignorance, in that they did not
quietly receive the Gentiles into their bosom, united to them by the same
Spirit of faith. But they do not only leap back, but also contend with
Peter contentiously, and blame him for his fact, which deserved great praise.
They hear that the gentiles have embraced the word of God, what lets them
then, from embracing them, that they may be coupled together under the
government of one God? For what more holy bond can there be, then when al me^
with one consent are coupled and joined to God? And why should not those grow
together into one body, who make the Messiah of God their head? But because
they saw the external form of the law broken, they thought that heaven and
earth did go together. And note, that although Luke said before that the
apostles and brethren had heard this fame, yet he spoke nothing of offense, but
he brings in now as it were a new sect of men, which did contend with Peter.
The brethren says he, heard, and there an end: it follows, When Peter was
come to Jerusalem those which were of the circumcision did contend with him:
who were undoubtedly unlike to the first: again these words peri tomes, do
not simply signify the Jews, but those who were too much addicted to keep
the ceremonies of the law. For there were none of Jerusalem in Christ's flock
at that time, save only those which were circumcised: from whom then could he
distinguish those men? Lastly, it seems to be a thing unlike to be true that
the Apostles, and those which were moderate being of the number of the
faithful, did attempt this cumbate. For though they had been offended, yet
they might have conferred with Peter privately, and have demanded some reason
of his fact. By these reasons am I moved to think that those are said to be of
the circumcision, who did make so great account of circumcision, that they
granted no man a place in the kingdom of god, unless he took upon him the
profession of the law, and being admitted into the church by this holy rite,
did put off uncleanness.

3 Unto men being uncircumcised. This was not forbidden by the law of God, but
it was a tradition which came from the fathers. And yet not withstanding Peter
does not object that they dealt too hardly with him in this point, and that he
was not bound by the necessity of man's law, he omitteth all this defense: and
does only answer, that they came first unto him, and that they were offered
unto him as it were by the hand of God. And here we see the rare modesty of
Peter, because whereas trusting to the goodness of the cause, he might have
justly despiced unskillful men, who did trouble him unjustly: yet does he
mildely excuse himself as it becomes brethren. This was no small trial, in
that he was unworthily accused, because he had obeyed God faithfully: but
because he knew that this law was enjoined the whole church, that every man be
ready to give an account of his doctrine and life, so often as the matter
requires: and he remembered that he was one of the flock, he does not only
suffer himself to be ruled, but submits himself willingly to the
judgment of the church. Doctrine in deed, if it be of God, is placed above
the chance and die of man's judgment, but because the Lord will have prophecy
judged, his servants must not refuse this condition, that they prove themselves
to be such as they will be accounted. But we shall see anon how far the
defense both of doctrine, as also of facts ought to extend. For this present we
must know this, that Peter does willingly answer for himself, when his fact
is reproved. And if the pope of Rome be Peter his successor, why is not he
bound by the same law? Admit we grant that this submission was voluntary:
yet why does not the successor imitate such an example of modesty showed
unto him? Although we need no long circumstance here: for if that be true
which the Popes spue out in their sacrilegious decrees, Peter did
treacherously betray and forsake the privileges of their seat: and so he
betrayed the sea of Rome. For after that they have made the Pope the judge of
all the whole world, affirming that he is not subject to man's judgment: after
that they have lifted him up above the clouds, that being free from giving an
account, his will and pleasure may stand for a reason: they make him
forthwith patron of the Apostolic seat, stoutly to defend the privileges
thereof. Of what great sluggishnesse shall Peter then be condemned, if he did
loose his right given him of God by yielding so cowardly? Why did not he at
least object, that, that he was free from the laws, and exempt from the common
sort? But he uses no such preface, but enters the cause without making any
delay. And let us remember, that there is nothing which hinders us from
contemning that idol safely, seeing that usurping such unbridled tyranny, he
has blotted himself out of the number of the Bishops.

And Peter beginning. Because this narration is all one with that which we had
in the chapter next going before, and because it is repeated almost in the very
same words: if any thing need to be expounded let the Readers repair thither.
The purpose of Peter and all the whole sum of his speech, shall appear by
the conclusion. Yet before I come thither, we must briefly mark that he makes
the preaching of the Gospel the cause of salvation. Thou shall hear (says
he) words wherein thou may have salvation, not because salvation is included
in man's voice: but because God offering his son there, unto eternal life,
does also cause us to enjoy him by faith. This is assuredly wonderful
goodness of God, who makes men ministers of life, who have nothing, but
matter of death in themselves, and which are not only subject to death in
themselves, but are also deadly to others. Nevertheless the filthy
unthankfulness of the world bewrays it self in this point, which loething
true and certain salvation offered unto it, and forsaking it when it lies at
the feet, does imagine diverse and vain saluations, in seeking which, it had
rather gape being hungry, then to be filled with the grace of God which
meets it, and is present.

16 I remembered the word of the Lord. We have sufficiently declared in the
first chapter, that when Christ uttered that sentence, he did not make a
comparison between two baptismes, Acts. 1.5.
but that he intended to declare what difference there was between him and
John. For as we distinguish the sign from his truth, so it is good to
distinguish the minister from the author: least mortal man challenge that
which is proper to God. Man has the sign in his hand, it is Christ alone
which washes and regenerateth. For it skilleth much whether men's minds be
directed in seeking the graces of God: because they shall not receive one drop
without Christ. Therefore there is this general difference between Christ and
all the ministers of the church, because they give the external sign of
water: but he fulfilleth and perfourmeth the effect of the sign by the power
of his Spirit. The Readers were to be admonished of this thing again in this
place: because many do falsely infer that John's baptism and ours are not all
one: whiles that Christ challenging to himself the spirit, does leave
nothing for John save water alone.

But if any man trusting to this testimony, do make Baptism a cold spectacle
and void of all grace of the Spirit, he shall be also greatly deceived.
For the holy Scripture uses to speak two manner of ways of the Sacraments.
For because Christ is not unfaithful in his promises, he does not suffer that
to be vain which he does institute. But when as the scripture does attribute to
baptism strength to wash and regenerate, it ascribes all this to Christ, and
does only teach what he woorketh by his spirit by the hand of man and the
visible sign. Where Christ is thus joined with the minister and the efficacy
of the spirit with the sign, Tit. 3 5.
there is so much attributed to the sacraments as is needful. But that
conjunction must not be so confused, but that men's minds being drawn from
mortal and frail things, and things like to themselves, and from the elements
of the world, they must learn to seek for salvation at Christ's hand, and to
look unto the power of his spirit alone: because he misseth the mark of faith,
whosoever turns aside even but a little from the spirit unto the signs: and
he is a sacrilegious person, who takes even but an inch of Christ's praise,
that he may deck, man therewith. And we must also remember, that Christ did
comprehend under the word spirit, not only the gift of tongues and such like
things, but all the whole grace of our renewing. But because these gifts were an
excellent argument of Christ his power, this sentence may well be applied unto
them: I will make this more plain: seeing that Christ did bestow upon the
Apostles the visible graces of the Spirit, he did plainly declare that the
Spirit was in his hand. So that by this means he did testify, that he is the
alone author of cleanness, righteousness, and of the whole regeneration. And
Peter applies it unto his purpose thus, that for as much as Christ did go
before, carrying with him the force of Baptism, it became him to follow with
the addition, that is, the outward sign of water,

17 Who was I. Now do we see to what end Peter made that narration: to wit,
tha he might declare, that God was the author and governor of all the whole
matter. Therefore the state of the question consists in the authority of
God: whether meat be not of more weight then men's counsels. Peter affirms
that he did nothing but that which was rightly and orderly done, because he
obeyed god: he shows that he preached the doctrine of the gospel, neither
amiss, neither rashly, where Christ bestowed the graces of his Spirit. The
approbatio^ of our doctrine, and also our deeds must be brought to this rule
so often as me^ call us to an account. For whosoever stays himself upon the
commandment of god, he has defense enough: if men be not content, there is no
cause why he should pass for their judgments any more. And Hereby we gather
that the faithful ministers of gods word, may in such sort give an account of
their doctrine, that they may no whit impayr the credit and certainty
thereof: to wit, if they show that it was given the^ by God, but if they shall
deal with unjust men, who will not be enforced with the reverence of God to
yield, let us let them alone with their obstinacy, appealing unto the day of
the Lord. And we must also note, that we do not only resist God by striving
against him, but also by lingering, if we do not that which our calling
requires and which is proper to it. For Peter says, that he cannot deny
baptism and brotherly fellowship to the Gentiles, but that he should be an
enemy to God. But he should have assayed nothing which was manifestly
contrary to the grace of God. That is true in deed, but he which does not
receive those whom god offers, and shuts the gate which god opens, he
hinders the work of God so much as in him lies: as we say at this day, that
those men make war against god, who are set against the baptising of infants:
because they most cruelly exclude those out of the church who^ god has adopted
into the church: and they deprive those of the outward sign whom God
vouchsafes to call his children. Like unto this is that kind of resisting, in
that many dissemblers, who, whiles they be magistrates ought to assist
according to their office, the martyrs of Christ, go about to stop their
mouths and to take from them their liberty. For because they hate the truth,
they would have it suppressed.

18 When they heard these things they were quieted. The end does show that
those were not moved with malice, which did contend with Peter. For this is an
evident sign of godliness, in that being thoroughly instructed touching the
will of God, they cease forthwith to contend. By which example we are taught
that those are not to be despised, who being offended through unadvised zeal,
reprove any thing wrongfully: but that their consciences must be appeased by
the word of god, which are troubled by error, and that their docilitie is
tried at least thus far forth. As touching us, we do hereby in like sort
learn, whereupon our judgment must depend: namely, upon the sole and simple
beck of god. For this honor is due to him, that his will be to us the certain
and principal rule of truth and justice. So often as it is requisite for us to
know the cause of any thing, the Lord does not conceal the same from us: but
to the end he may accustom our faith unto just obedience, he tells us
sometimes simply and plainly that this or that thing pleases him. He which
grants liberty to himself to inquire farther, and takes a delight in his
curiosity, does nothing else but throw himself headlong with devilish
boldness. And Luke does not only declare that these men held their peace, but
that they gave glory also to God. Some are enforced by shame to hold their
peace, who notwithstanding keep in that in their minds, which they dare not
utter. That is rather a dissemblance of modesty, the^ docilitie. But these men
do so thoroughly submit themselves to God, that they are not afraid nor
ashamed to recant by and by.

Then has God. Luke does briefly declare in these words, what the gospel
contains, and to what end it tends: to wit, that God may reconcile men to
himself, being renewed by his Spirit. The word Repentance, alone is
expressed in this place: but when he adds unto life, it appears plainly
that it is not separated from faith. Therefore whosoever will rightly profit,
in the gospel, let him put off the old man and think upon newness of life:
that done let him know for a certainty that he is not called in vain unto
repentance, Ephe. 4.22.
but that there is salvation prepared for him in Christ. So shall it come to
pass that the hope and assurance of salvation shall rest upon the free mercy
of god alone, and that the forgiveness of sins shall notwithstanding be no cause
of sluggish security. This member to give repentance, may be expounded two
manner of ways: either that God granted to the Gentiles place for repentance,
when as he would have his gospel preached to them: or that he circumcised
their hearts by his Spirit, as Moses says: and made them fleshy hearts of
stony hearts, as says Ezechiel. For it is a work proper to God alone, to
fashion, Deuteronomy. 30.6. Eze. 11.9.
and to beget men again, that they may begin to be new creatures: and it
agrees better with this second sense, it is not so much racked, and it agrees
better with the phrase of scripture.

19 Those therefore which were dispersed by reason of the tribulation which
happened about Steeuen, went into Phenicia, and Cyprus, and Antioch, speaking
the word to none, save only to the Jews.

20 And there were certain of them men of Cyprus and Cyrena, who entering into
Antioch, spoke with the Grecians, preaching the Lord Jesus.

21 And the hand of the Lord was with them, Therefore a great number when they
believed were turned unto the Lord.

22 And the tidings of them came unto the ears of the church which was at
Jerusalem, and they sent Barnabas that he might go to Antioch.

23 Who when he was come and had seen the grace of god, he rejoiced, and did
exhort all, that with purpose of heart they would continue cleeuing to the Lord.

24 Because he was a good man, and full of the holy ghost and faith. And there
was a great multitude added unto the Lord.

19 Those which were scattered abroad. Luke returns now unto the former
history and unto that which followed in the same. For he had said before, that
after that Steeuen was slain, the cruelty of the wicked increased, and many
fled hither and thither for fear: so that the Apostles were almost left alone
at Jerusalem. whe^as the church was thus torn in pieces, and fear did cause
those which were fled to keep silence, or else contempt of strangers. He
declares that that event did follow which no man would have hoped for: for as
the seed is sown that it may bring forth fruit: so it came to pass through
their flight and scattering abroad, that the gospel was spread abroad in nations
which were far of, which was included before within the walls of one city
as in a barn. In like sort it came to pass that the name of Christ passing
over mountains and seas, did flow even unto the farthest parts of the world.
And by this means according to the prophecy of Esaias, the consumption did
abound in righteousness. If so many godly me^ had not been expelled out of
Jerusalem, Cyprus had heard nothing, Phenicia had heard nothing of Christ: yea
Italy and Spain which were farther off had heard nothing. But the Lord brought
to pass that of many torn members did arise mo bodies. For how came it to
pass that there were churches gathered at Rome and at Puteolum save only
because a few exiled men, and such as fled away had hrought the Gospel thither
with them? And as God did at that time make the endeavors of Satan frustrate
after a wonderful sort, so we need not doubt but that even at this day he will
make to himself triumphs of the cross and persecution: that the church may
better grow together though it be scattered abroad. Phenicia joins to Syria
and is nigh to Galilee. Antioch is a most famous city of Syria, at which part
it is joined to Cilicia.

Speaking to none. Peradventure they were let not only with fear of
persecution, that they durst not speak to the Gentiles, but also with that
foolish religion, Mar. 16.15.
in that they thought that the childrens bread was thrown to the dogs, whereas
notwithstanding Christ had commanded that the gospel should be preached to all
the world after his resurrection.

20 Luke does at length declare that certain of the^ brought this treasure even
unto the Gentiles. And Luke calls these Grecians not ellenes but ellenistai.
Therefore some say that those came of the Jews; yet did they inhabit Grecia,
which I do not allow. For seeing the Jews whom he mentioned a little before,
were partly of Cyprus, they must needs be reckoned in that number: because the
Jews count Cyprus a part of Grecia. But Luke distinguishes the^ from those,
whom he calls afterward ellenistas. Furthermore, forasmuch as he had said
that the word was preached at the beginning only to the Jews, and he meant
those who being banished out of their own country, did live in Cyprus and
Phenicia, correcting as it were this exception, he says, that some of them did
teach the Grecians. This contrariety does cause me to expound it of the
Gentiles. For Luke his meaning is, that a few did more freely preach the
Gospel, because the calling of the Gentiles was not unknown to the^. But the
constancy of them all deserves no small praise, because being delivered as it
were out of the midst of death, they are not afraid to do their duty toward
God even with danger: whence we gather to what end, and how far forth
christians may fly persecution: to wit, that they may spend the residue of
their life in spreading abroad the glory of God. If any man demand how it came
to pass, that strangers lately coming and such as might have bin suspected
among all the Jews, and hated of them, because they were banished out of
Jerusalem, were so bold: I answer that this came to pass through the
singular motion of God, and that they consulted together suddenly, according to
the occasion offered them. For this deliberation is not of flesh and blood.

21 The hand of the Lord was. Luke proves by the success, that the gospel was
offered unto the Gentiles also by the brethren of Cyprus and Cyrenea not rashly
nor unadvisedly: because their labor was fruitful and profitable. But such
increase should never have followed, unless god had commanded and favored.
Therefore it follows that it pleased god that the Gententiles should be
called. The hand as it is well known, does signify power and strength.
Therefore this is Luke his meaning, that god did testify by his present aid
that the Gentiles were called together with the Jews through his direction, to
be made partakers of the grace of Christ. And this blessing of God, served not
a little to confirm the minds of all men. This place did also teach us, that
what pains soever the ministers of God take in teaching, it shall be all vain
and void, unless God bless their labors from heaven. 1. Cor. 3.
For we may plant and water, as Paul teaches, but the increase comes from
God alone, in whose hand the hearts of men are, that he may bend and frame the
same at his pleasure. Therefore as often as we are to entreat of faith, let us
always remember this speech, that God wrought by his ministers, and that he
made their doctrine effectual by his hand, that is, by the secret inspiration
of the Spirit. Therefore let the minister attempt nothing trusting to his own
wit and industry, but let him commit his labor to the Lord, upon whose grace
the whole success depends: and where doctrine shall work effectually, let
those which shall believe thank god for their faith. Furthermore, we must note
that which Luke says, that many were turned unto god by faith: because he does
very well express the force and nature of faith, that it is not idle and cold,
but such as restores me^ (who were before turned away from god) unto his
government, and binds them unto his righteousness.

22 And the tidinges. If this report had been brought before Peter did excuse
himself, those good men should have been reproved of many whose ministry
notwithstanding god had sealed with the grace of his Spirit: but that
superstition was now wiped away out of their minds, forasmuch as god had by
evident signs declared, that no nation ought to be counted profane. Therefore
they contend no longer, neither do they count it a point of rashness, that
some durst preach Christ unto the gentiles, but by sending help, they testify
that they allow that which they had done: Furthermore, this was the cause why
they sent Barnabas. The Apostles did at that time bear all the burden of the
kingdom of Christ: therefore it was their duty to frame and set in order
churches every where: to keep all the faithful wheresoever dispearsed in the
pure consent of faith: to appoint ministers and pastors wheresoever there was
any number of the faithful. The crafty wiliness of Satan is well known: so
soon as he sees a gate set open for the gospel, he indeuoureth by all means
to corrupt that which is sincere: whereby it came to pass, that diverse
heresies brake out together with Christ's doctrine. Therefore the greater
gifts every Church has, the more careful (...) it to be, least Satan mix or
trouble any thing amongst the ig(...) and those who are not as yet established
in the right faith: be(...) the ^est matter in the world to corrupt corn in
the blade. (...) ^abas was sent to bring them farther forward in the (...) set
things in some certain order, to give the building which was (...) some form,
that there might be a lawful state of the church.

23 When he (...) the grace of God. By these words Luke teaches first, that
the go^pel which they had received, was true: secondly, that Barnabas sou^^t
nothing else but the glory of Christ. For when he says that he saw the grace
of ^od, and that he exhorted them to go forward, hereby we gather, that they
were well taught. And the joy is a testimony of sincere godliness. Ambicion is
evermore envious and malicious: so that we see many seek for praise by
reproving other men, because they are more desirous of their own glory then of
the glory of Christ. But the faithful servants of Christ must rejoice (as did
Barnabas) when they see the gospel increase, by whomsoever God shall make his
name known. And assuredly those which help one another, so that they
acknowledge that all the effect which springs thence is the work of God, will
never envy one another, neither will they seek to carpe one another, but will
with one mouth and mind praise the power of God. Again, this is worth the
noting, that Luke does artribute the faith of the men of Antioch, and
whatsoever was worthy praise there, to the grace of God. He might have
reckoned up all those virtues which might make for the commendation of men: but
he comprehends what excellency soever was in that church under this word
grace. Lastly, we must note Barnabas his exhortation. We have already said
that Barnabas did subscribe to the former doctrine which they had embraced: but
least doctrine fall away, it is most requisite that it be thoroughly imprinted in
the minds of the faithful by continual exhortations. For seeing that we have
to encounter continually with so many and such strong adversaries, and our
minds are so slipperie, unless every man arm himself diligently, it will by
and by fall away, which thing infinite numbers do show to be true, by their
falling away. Whereas he sets down this manner of perseverance, that they
continue with purpose of heart: we are hereby taught that faith has taken
deep root then, when it has a place in the heart. Wherefore it is no
marvel, if scarce one of ten of those who profess faith do stand unto the
end, seeing that very few know what the affection and purpose of heart means.

24 For he was a good man. Barnabas is commended with the commendation of the
holy Ghost: yet we must know that there was respect had not so much of him as
of us. For all those are condemned of ungodliness and malice, who envy other
men's labors, and are grieved when they see the same have good success.

Also we must note the Epithites used in the description of a good man, full
of the holy Ghost, full of faith. For after that he had said that he was an
upright and good man, he shows from what fountain this goodness did flow,
that abandoning the affections of the flesh, he did with all his heart embrace
godliness, having the spirit to be his guide. But why does he separate faith
from the Spirit, whose gift it is? I answer, that it is not named
severally, as if it were a diverse thing, but it is rather set, forth as a
principal token, whereby it might appear that Barnabas was full of the holy
ghost.

There was a great multitude added. Though the number of the godly was alredie
great, yet Luke says, that it increased by Barnabas his coming. Thus does the
building of the church go forward when one does help another with mutual
consent, and one does gently allow that which another has begun.

25 And Barnabas went to Tarsus to seek Saul.

26 And when he had found him he brought him to Antioch. And it happened that
they lived a whole year in the church, and did teach a great multitude, so
that at Antioch the disciples were first called christians.

25 Barnabas his simplicity is commended to us now the second time, that
whereas he might have borne the chiefest swinge at Antioch yet went he into
Cilicia, that he might fet Paull thence, who he knew should be preferred
before him. Therefore we see how, forgetting himself he respects nothing, but
that Christ may be chief, how he sets before his eyes the edifying of the
church alone, how he is content with the prosperous success of the Gospel.
Therefore Barnabas is no whit afraid least Paul do any whit debase him by his
coming, so he glorify Christ.

26 He adds afterward, that such a holy concord was blessed from heaven: for
this was no small honor, that the holy name of christians began there for
all the whole world. Though the Apostles had been long time at Jerusalem, yet
god had not vouchsafed to bestow upon his church which was there, this
excellent title of his son: whether it were because at Antioch much people
was grown together into one body, as well of Jews, as of Gentiles: or
whether it were because the church might be better ordered in time of peace:
or because they were more bold to confess their faith. There were in very
deed christians both at Jerusalem and also in Samaria before that time: and we
know that Jerusalem was the first fountain from which christianity did flow.
And what is it else to be a disciple of Christ, but to be a christian? But when
they began plainly to be called that which they were, the use of the name
served greatly to set forth the glory of Christ, because by this means they
referred all their religion unto Christ alone. This was therefore a most
excellent worship for the city of Antioch, that Christ brought forth his name
thence like a standerd, whereby it might be made known to all the world that
there was some people whose Captain was Christ, and which did glory in his
name. But and if Rome had such a color of pride, who were able to suffer the
proud boastings of the Pope and his adherents? They would then not without
cause thunder out, that Rome is the mother and head of al churches: but it is
well, that seeing they challenge to themselves whatsoever, when they come to the
matter, they are found altogether vain, yea Antioch it self does plainly
prove, that the estate of one place is not continual, Admit we grant the
Romans these plausible titles. We have been sometimes: shall they yet be so
bold as to take one half of that which belongs to Antioch? And is the
dignity of Antioch the greater now, because the Christians had their name
thence? Yea it is rather a manifest mirror of the horrible vengeance of God.
For seeing there is nothing to be seen there but evil favored wastinesse, it
remains that we learn to humble our selves under the mighty hand of God,
and that we know, that unthankful men have not so much liberty granted
them, that they may freely mock God.

27 In those days came prophets from Jerusalem to Antioch.

28 And one of them named Agabus arose, and signified by the Spirit, that there
should be a great famine throughout the whole world, which happened under
Claudius Caesar.

29 And as every one of the disciples was able, they decreed every man to
send succor to the brethren which dwelt in Judea.

30 Which thing they did, sending it unto the Elders by the hands of Barnabas
and Saul.

27 Luke commends in this place the faith of the men of Antioch by the fruit,
because they endeavored to relieve the poverty of that church (from whence
they received the gospel) with their abundance: and that did they unrequested.
Such earnest care for the brethren does sufficiently declare how seriously they
worshipped Christ the head of al. Luke does signify that the fame of that
church was spread abroad: when he faith, that there came excellent men
thither from Jerusalem. But for as much as the word Prophet is taken diverse
ways in the new testament, as we may learn by the former Epistle to the
Corinthians, those are called prophets in this place, who were endued with the
gift of prophesiyng as the four daughters of Philip shall have the same title
given them hereafter. And forasmuch as the foretelling of the famine is
attributed to Agabus alone, we may hereby gather, that this was granted to
every one by a certain measure to know things to come.

28 He signified by the Spirit. Luke does plainly express that the Spirit of
God was the author of this prophecy, that we may know that it was not a
conjecture taken by the stars or some other natural causes: again, that
Agabus did not play the Philosopher after the manner of men: but he uttered that
which God had appointed by the secret inspiration of the Spirit. Barrenness
may indeed be sometimes fortold by the disposition of the stars, but there is
no certainty in such foretellinges, both because of the opposite concourses,
and also especially, because god does govern earthly things at his pleasure,
far otherwise than can be gathered by the stars, that he may lead men away
from the perverse beholding of stars. And although these foretellings have
their degree, yet the prophesies of the Spirit do far exced them. But it
seems that the foretelling of the famine was unlucky, and not to be wished
for: for to what end was it for me^ to be made miserable before their time, by
having the unhappy event fortold? I answer, that there be many causes, for
which it is expedient that men should be warned before in time when the
judgments of God hang over their heads, and punishments due to their sins. I
omit others which are usual in the prophets, because they have a space
granted wherein to repent, that they may prevent gods judgment, who have
provoked his wrath against themselves: because the faithful are instruct in
time, to arm themselves with patience: because the obstinate wickedness of
wicked men is convict: because both good and evil learn that miseries do not
come by chance, but that they are punishments wherewith God does punish the
sins of the world: because those are awaked out of their sleep and
sluggishnesse by this means, who took great delight in their vices. The
profit of this present prophecy appears by the text, because the men of
Antioch were thereby pricked forward to relieve their brethren which were in
misery.

Which happened under Claudius. Suetonius also makes mention of this famine,
who says that there were crustes or shardes thrown at Claudius his head in
the midst of the market, and that he was so sore afraid of stoning, that he
had a singular care afterward during his whole life, to make provision for
victual. And Josephus in his fifteenth book of antiquity, says: that Judea
was sore oppressed with scarcity, by reason of continual drought.

29 But here arises a question, seeing that the misery was common to all, why
ought they rather to have succored one people, then all the rest? I answer,
that for as much as Judea was impouerished with great destructions of wars
and other miseries, the men of Antioch were not without cause more moved with
the miseries of the brethren which were there: secondly, the greater the rage
of the enemies was, the more wretched was the estate of the brethren. Finally,
Paul does sufficiently declare in the Epistle to the Galathians, Gal. 3.
that Judea had certain especial necessities, whereof all other had regard
not without cause. And this thankfulness deserved no small commendations, in
that the men of Antioch thought that they ought to help the needy brethren
from whom they had received the gospel. For there is nothing more just then
that those should reap earthly things who have sown spiritual things. As
every man is too much bent to provide for himself: every man might readily
have excepted and objected: Why shall not I rather provide for my self? But
when they call to mind how greatly they are indebted to the brethren,
omitting that carfulness, they turn them selves to help them. In sum, this
alms had a double end: for the me^ of Antioch did the duty of charity toward
their needy brethren, and they did also testify by this sign, what great
account they made of the Gospel, whiles that they honored the place whence it
came.

As every man was able. We see the men of Antioch observe in this place, that
mean, which Paul prescribes to the Corinthians: whether they did this of
themselves, 2. Cor. 8.6.
or being instructed by him: and it is not to be doubted, but that he
continued like to himself in both places. Therefore we must follow this rule,
that every one, considering how much is granted him, impart the same
courteously with his brethren as one that must give an account: so shall it
come to pass that he which is but poor shall have a liberal mind, and that a
small reward shall be counted a fat and gorgeous sacrifice. By this word
determined, Luke gives us to understand, that their oblation was voluntary.
Which thing ought so to be, as Paul teaches, that we reach out our hand unto
the needy, 2. Cor. 9.7.
not as constrained, but cheerfully. When as he names every one it is all one
as if he should say, That one did not prescribe another a law, neither did they
burden one another with their prejudice, but that every man did bestow his
liberality as seemed good to himself. and we must note the word diaconias,
whereby we are taught that rich me^ have greater abundance given the^ upon that
condition, that they may be the ministers of the poor in the dispensation
committed to the^ by God. Lastly, Luke teaches that the blessing was sent not
to all the whole nation, but only to those that were of the household of faith:
not because we ought never to use any bountifulness or courtesy toward the
unbelievers, seeing love ought to extend it self unto all mankind: but
because those ought to be preferred, whom God has joined and linked to us
more near, and with a more holy band.

30 Sending it unto the Elders. We must note two things in this place, that
the men of Antioch did choose faithful men, and of known honesty to carry
their blessing: secondly, that they sent it unto the Elders, that they might
wisely bestow the same. For if alms be throwe^ into the midst of the common
people, or be set in the midst where every one may take what he will, every
man will by and by take it to himself as if it were some common pray: and so he
that is most bold will defraude the needy, yea through his gredinesse he
will cut the throats of the hungry. Therefore let us mark these places,
which teach that we must not only deal uprightly and faithfully, but that
there is also an order and wisdom required as well in making choice, as in
all our administration. Those are called Elders in whose hands the government
of the church was, among whom the Apostles were chief: the men of Antioche
refer the holy money (which they had appointed for the poor) to their
discretion. If any man object that this was the office of the deaco^s,
forasmuch as the Apostles did deny that they could both serve tables, and
attend upon doctrine, the answer is easy, that the Deacons were appointed
over tables in such sort, that yet notwithstanding they were under the Elders,
neither did they any thing but at their appointment.

CHAP. XII.
1 ABout that time, Herod the king, stretched out his hand to afflict certain
of the Church.

2 And he killed James the brother of John with the sword:

3 And when he saw that this pleased the Jews, he proceeded to take Peter
also, Then were the days of sweet bread.

4 When he had taken him also, he put him in prison, delivering him to four
quaternions of souldiars to be kept, intending after Easter to bring him forth
to the people.

5 Therefore Peter was kept in prison. But continual prayer was made for him
of of the church of God.

1 Here follows new persecution raised by Herod. We see that the church had
some short truce, that it might as it were by a short breathing recover some
courage against the time to come, and that it might then fight afresh. So at
this day there is no cause why the faithful having borne the bruntes of one or
two conflicts should promise themselves rest, or should desire such a calling
as old ouerworn souldiars use to have: let this suffice them if the Lord grant
the^ some time wherein they may recover their strength. This Herod was Agrippa
the greater, the son of Aristobulus, whom his father slew. Josephus does no
where call him Herod, it may be, because he had a brother who was king of
Chalcis, whose name was Herod. This man was incensed to afflict the church not
so much for any love he had to religion, as that by this means he might
flatter the common people, which did otherwise not greatly favor him, or
rather he was moved hereunto with tyrannical cruelty, because he was afraid
of innovation, which tyraunts do always fear, least it trouble the quiet
estate of their dominion. Yet it is likely that he did shed innocent blood,
that according to the common craft of kings he might gratify a furious
people; because Saint Luke will shortly after declare, that Peter the Apostle
was put into prison that he might be a pleasant spectacle.

He killed James. Undoubtedly the cruelty of this mad man was restrained and
brideled by the secret power of God. For assuredly he would never have been
content with one or two murders, and so have abstained from persecuting the
rest, but he would rather have pyled up martyrs upon heaps, unless God had
set his hand against him, and defended his flock. So when we see that the
enemies of godliness being full of fury, do not commit horrible slaughters,
that they may mix and imbrue all things with blood, let us know that we need
not thank their moderation and clemency for this, but because when the Lord
does spare his sheep, he does not suffer them to do so much hurt as they
would. This Herod was not so courteous, that he would stick to win peace or
the peoples favor with the punishent of an hundred men or more.

Wherefore we must think with our selves that he was tied by one that had the
rule over him, that he might not more vehementlye oppress the Church. He
slew James, as, when any sedition is raised, the heads and captains go first
to the pot, that the common riffe raffe may by their punishment be terrified.
Nevertheless the Lord suffered him whom he had furnished with constancy to
be put to death, that by death he might get the victory as a strong and
invincible cha^pion. So that the attempts of Tyrants notwithstanding, God
makes choice of sweet smelling sacrifices to establish the faith of his
gospel. Luke calls this James which was slain the brother of John, that he
may distinguish him from the son of Alpheus. For whereas some make him a
third cousin of Christ's, who was only some one of the disciples, I do not
like of that: because I am by strong reasons persuaded to think that there were
no more. Let him that will, repair to the second to the Galathians. Therefore
I think that the Apostle and the son of Alphe were al one, whom the Jews
threw down headlong from the top of the temple, whose death was so highly
commended for his singular praise of holiness.

3 Seeing that it pleased the Jews. It appears more plainly by this that
Herod was not moved either with any zeal that he had to Moses law, or with
any hatred of the Gospel, thus to persecute the Church, but that he might
provide for his own private affairs. For he proceeds in his cruelty, that
he may win the peoples favor. Therefore we must know that there be
diverse causes, for which the Church is assaulted on every side. Oftentimes
peruers zeal drives the wicked headlong, to fight for their superstitions,
and that they may sacrifice an offering to their idols by sheeding innocent
blood: but the more part is moved with private commodities only. So in times
past, at such time as Nero knew after the burning of the city, that he was
lothed and hated of the people, he sought by this subtle means to get into
favor again, or at least he went about to stay their slanders and
complaints, by putting certain thousands of the godly to death.

In like sort, that Herod may win the peoples favor, who did love him but a
litte, he puts the Christians to death as a price wherewith he might
redeem their favor: and such is our estate at this day: for though all men
run by troops upon the members of Christ, yet few are pooked forward
with superstition: but some sell them selves to Antichriste like profitable
bond slaves: othersome bear with, and commend the outrageous outcries of
Monks and the common people: but we in the mean season, being abiectes must
be glad to bear their mockes: yet there is one comfort which does
excellently keep us on foot, in that we know that our blood is precious in
the sight of Almighty GOD, which the world does shamefullye abuse: yea the
more shamefullie and reprochefullie the wicked do handle us, so much the
less shall Gods goodness forsake us.

4 Adding four quaternions of souldiars. Luke does in this place declare by
circumstances, that Peter was as it were shut up in his grave, so that it might
seem that he was quite past hope. For as they divided the day and night into
four parts by three hours: so Herod divided the watches, that four
souldiars might always keep watch, and that one quaternion might succeed
another every third hour. He shows the cause why he was not forthwith put
to death, because it had been an heinous offense to put him to death in the
Easter holidayes. Therefore Herod does not delay the time as doubtful what to
do: but does only wait for opportunity. Yea he makes choice of a time,
when as his gift may be more plausible, because there came a great multitude
together from all parts unto the holy day.

5 But prayers were made. Luke teaches here that the faithful did not in the
mean season foreslowe their duty, Peter stood in the foreward alone, but all
the rest fought with their prayers together with him, and they aided him so
much as they were able. Hereby we do also gather that they were not
discouraged: for by prayer they testify that they persist so much as they are
able in defense of the cause, for which Peter is in danger of life. This place
teaches, first, how we ought to be affected when we see our brethren
persecuted by the wicked, for the testimony of the gospel. For if we be
slothful, and if we be not inwardly touched with their dangers, we do not
only defraude them of the due duty of love, but also treacherously forsake the
confession of our faith: and assuredly, if the cause be common, yea if they
fight for our saftie and salvation, we do not only forsake them, but even
Christ and our selves: and the present necessity requires, that they be far
more fervent in prayer, then commonly they are, whosoever will be counted
christians. We see some of our brethren (being brought to extreme poverty)
live in exile, others we see imprisoned, many cast into stinking dungeons,
many consumed with fire, yea we see new torments oftentimes invented, whereby
being long tormented, they may feel death. Unless these prouocations sharpen
our desire to pray, we be more then blockish. Therefore so sone as any
persecution arises let us by and by get our selves to prayer.

Also it is a likely thing that the church took greater thought for Peter's
life, because they should have suffered great loss if he had gone. Neither
does Luke say barely, that prayer was made: but he adds also, that it was
earnest and continual. Whereby he gives us to understand that the faithful
prayed not coldly or over fields, but so long as Peter was in the conflict, the
faithful did what they could to help him, and that without wearisomnesse. We
must always understand the name of God, which is here expressed, whenever
mention is made of prayer in the scripture. For this is one of the chiefest and
first principles of faith, that we ought to direct our prayers unto God alone:
as he challenges to himself this peculiar worship, Psalm. 50.15.
Call upon me in the day of tribulation.

6 And when Herod was about to bring him forth, the same night slept Peter
between two souldiars bound with two chains. And the keepers kept the prison
before the door.

7 And behold the Angel of the Lord stood, and a light shined in the
habitation. And he smoote Peter's side, saying: Arise streightway: and his
chains fell from his hands.

8 And the Angel said to him: Gyrde thy self, and bind on thy sandales. And
he did so. Then he says to him: Put thy garment about thee, and follow me.

9 And going out, he followed him, neither understood he that that was true
which was done by the angel, but he thought that he saw a vision.

10 And when they were past the first watch, and the second, they came to the
iron gate, which leads into the City, which opened to them of it own
accord. And when they were come out, they passed through one street, and by
and by the Angel departed from him.

11 Then Peter returning to himself, said: Now of a truth I know, that the
Lord has sent his Angel, and has delivered me out of the hand of Herod, and
from all the waiting of the people of the Jews.

6 When he was about to bring him forth. It seems at the first blush that the
Church prays to small purpose: for the day was now appointed wherein Peter
should be put to death, and he is within one night of death, and yet the
faithful cease not to pray, because they know that when the Lord does
purpose to deliver his, he takes his time oftentimes in the last and farthest
point of necessity, and that he has in his hand diverse ways to deliver.
Secondly we may think that they did not so much pray for Peter's life, as that
the Lord would arm him with invincible fortitude, for the glory of the Gospel:
and that God would set the gospel of his son, open to the reproaches and
slanders of the wicked.

That night he slept. Al these circumstances do more set forth the wonderful
power of God, for who would not have thought that Peter was already swallowed
up of death? for though he drew breath as yet, yet had he no chinch to creep
out at, for as much as he was beset with many deaths. Therefore whereas he
escapes from amidst deaths, whereas he goes safely among the hands of his
hangmen, whereas the chains are molten and are loosed, whereas the iron gate
opens it self to him: hereby it appears that it was a mere divine kind
of deliverance, and it was profitable for Peter to be thus taught by these
signs, that he might with more assurance forthwith declare unto men the grace
of God thus known. Again it appears by this strait keeping, that Herod
meant nothing less than to let Peter go away alive.

7 A light shined. It is to be thought that Peter alone saw this light: and
that the soldiars did either sleep so soundly, or else were so amassed, that
they neither felt nor perceived any thing. And there might be two causes why
god would have the light to shine: either that Peter might have the use
thereof, and that the darkness might be no hindrance to him: or that it might
be to him a sign and token of the heavenly glory. For we read oftentimes,
that the Angels appeared with glistering brightness, even when the Sun did
shine. Assuredly Peter might have gathered by the strange light that God was
present: and also he ought to have made his profit thereof. When as the
Angel smites Peter's side, it appears hereby what a care God has for his,
who watches over them when they sleep, and raises them when they are
drousie. And surely there were nothing more miserable than we, if the
continuance of our prayers alone, did keep God in his watching over us. For
such is the infirmity of our flesh that we faint and quail, and we stand
most of all in need of his help, when our minds being drawn away, do not
seek him. Sleep is a certain image of death, and does chocke and drown all
the senses, what should become of us, if God should then cease to have respect
to us? But forasmuch as when the faithful go to sleep, they commit their
safety to God, it comes to pass by this means, that even their sleep does
call upon God. Whereas he says that immediately after the Angel had said the
word, the chains were losed: we gather by this, that there is power enough in
the commandment of God alone to remove al manner lets, when all ways seem to
be stopped on al sids: so that if he intend to appease the motions and tumults of
war, although the whole world were appointed in armor, their spears and swords
shall forthwith fall out of their hands: on the other side, if he be determined
to punish us and our sins with war, in a moment in the twinkling of an eye,
their minds which were before given to peace, shall wax hot, and they shall lay
hand on their swords. Whereas Luke sets down severally, both the words of
the Angel, and also the course of the matter, it serves for the more
certainty of the history, that it may in every respect appear that Peter was
delivered by God.

9 He knew not that it was true. He did not think that it was a vain or false
visure, as Satan does oftentimes dilude men with iuglings: but true is taken in
this place for that which is done naturally and after the manner of men. For we
must note the contrariety that is between the thing it self and the vision.
Furthermore though he think that it is a vision, yet does he willingly obey:
whereby his obedience is proved: whiles that being content with the
commandment of the angel alone, he does not inquire nor reason what he must
do, but does that which he is commanded to do.

10 When they were past. God was able to have carried Peter away in the turning
of an hand: but he overcomes diverse straits one after another, that the
glory of the miracle might be the greater. So be created the world in six
days, Genes. 1.
not because he had any need of space of time, but that he might the better
stay us in the meditating upon his works: for he applies the manner of doing
unto our capacity, and unto the increase of faith. If Peter had at a sudden ben
carried unto the house where the brethren were assembled, Exodus 20.11
then should one only deliverance have been acknowledged, but now we see as it
were with our eyes that he was delivered more than ten times.

11 Then Peter returning to himself. It is word for word, Being made in
himself, because being before astonished with a strange and incredible thing, he
was as it were without himself. But now at length as it were after a trance,
he knows that he is delivered from death. His words set down by Luke
contain a thanksgiving. For he extolleth with himself the benefit of God
which he had tried, and whereof he had tasted, and he does highly commend it
with himself, until he find some other witnesses. He says that the Angel was
sent of God, according to the common meaning of the godly, who hold that the
Angels are appointed to be ministers, to be careful for, and to take charge of
their safety. For unless he had bin thus persuaded, he would not have spoken
of the Angel. And yet he does not commend the Angel as the author of the grace^
but he ascribes all the whole praise of the work to God alone Neither do the
angels help us to this end, that they may derive unto themselves even the least
jot of gods glory. Whereas he says that he was delivered out of the hand of
Herod, he amplifieth the goodness and benefit of god, by the power of his enemy.
To the same end tends that which he adds of the Jews. For the greater the
number of the enemies was, the more excellent was the grace of God toward his
servant: for it is a great matter that God alone being favorable, the deadly
hatred of all the whole world should come to naught.

12 And considering he came into the house of Mary the mother of John, whose
syrname was Mark, where many were gathered and praying.

13 And when Peter had knocked at the entry door, a maid came out to harken,
named Rhode.

14 And when she knew Peter's voice, she opened not the door for joy: but
running in, she told that Peter stood without.

15 But they said to her, Thou art mad. But she affirmed more vehemently that
is was so. But they said it is his Angel.

16 But Peter continued knocking. When they had opened they saw him, and they
were astonished.

17 But after that he had beckned to them with the hand, that they should hold
their peace, he told them how God had brought him out of prison. And he said:
Tell James and the brethren these things. And he departed thence, and went into
an other place.

18 After that it was day, there was no small ado amongst the soldiars, what
was become of Peter,

19 And when Herod had sought him, and could not find him, so soon as he knew
the matter, he commanded the keepers to be carried away.

12 Into the house of Mary. It appears that she was a matron of rare
godliness, whose house was as it were a certain temple of God, where the
brethren did use to meet together. And Luke says, that there were Many
assembled there, because seeing they could not all meet together in one place
without fear of some tumult, they came together in diverse places of the city
in companies, as they could conveniently. For doubtless there were other
companies gathered together elsewhere: because it is not to be thought that (at
such time as many of the faithful did give themselves to prayer) the Apostles
were not in like sort occupied, and one house could not hold so many. And we
must always mark the circumstance of time, because eue^ in the heat of the
enemies cruelty, the godly were notwithstanding assembled together. For if at
any time this exercise be profitable, then is it most necessary, when hard
conflicts approach.

15 When he did knock at the gate. Whereas they think that the maid is
mad, which tells them that Peter was come: we gather by this, that they did
not hope or look for Peter's deliverance, and yet we will not say that they
prayed without faith: because they looked for some other success, to wit,
that Peter being armed with power from heaven, should be ready whether it
were by life or death to glorify God, that the flock being terrified with the
violent invasion of woolues might not be scattered abroad, that those that were
weak might not faint, that the Lord would put away that whirle wind of
persecution. But in that the Lord grants them more than they hoped for, he
surpasses their desires with his infinite goodness. And now that which was done
seems to them incredible, that they may be the more provoked to praise his
power.

Matthew. 18.10.
It is his Angel. They call him his Angel, who was by God appointed to be his
keeper and the minister of his safety. In which sense Christ says that the
Angels of little ones do always see the face of his father. And what do they
gather hence commonly? That every particular man has a particular Angel, which
takes charge of him: but it is too weak. For the scripture does sometimes
testify that there is one Angel given to a great people, Exodus 14.10. 2.
Kings. 6.17. Dan. 10.5.12. Psalm. 91.11. Psalm. 34.8.
and to one man only a great host. For Elizeus his servant had his eyes
opened so that he saw in the air charriots of fire, which were appointed to
defend the prophet. And in Daniel there is but one Angel of the Persians, and
one of the Grecians named. Neither does the Scripture promise to every man a
certain and peculiar Angel, but rather that the Lord has charged his Angels
to keep all the faithful: also that they pitch their tents about the godly.
Therefore that vain surmise which is common touching the two Angels of every
man, is profane. Let this be sufficient for us, that the whole host of
heaven does watch for the safety of the Church: and that as necessity of time
requires, sometimes one Angel, sometimes more do defend us with their aid.
Assuredly this is inestimable goodness of God, in that he says that the Angels
who are the beams of his brightness, are our ministers.

17 Tell James and the Brethren. By Brethren I understand not every one that was
of the Church, but the Apostles and elders. For though it were requisite that
the miracle should be made known to all, yet will Peter worthily for honors
sake have his fellows in office to be certified thereof. Ecclesiastical
writers after Eusebius, report, that this James was one of the disciples: but
forasmuch as Paul reckons him in the number of the three pillars of the
Church, I do not think that a disciple was advanced to that dignities, and
the Apostles set aside. Wherefore I do rather conjecture that this was James
the son of Alphee, whose holiness was such that it caused the Jews to wonder
at it. And there be two reasons for which Peter would have this joyful message
brought unto the brethren: to wit, that he might rid them of that care which
did vex them: secondly that they might be encouraged with such an example of
Gods goodness to be the more bold. Whereas he passes into another place, I
think it was done for this cause, because forasmuch as the house was well
known and famous, because many of the brethren resorted thither, he might lie
hid elsewhere with less danger. Therefore he sought a place which was not
so much suspected of the enemy, and that, that he might not only save
himself, but also his hostis and others.

18 When it was day. Luke returns now unto Herod and the soldiars: and he
says that there was no small ado amongst them. For they could not suspect
that Peter was taken from them by violence, or that he was escaped by some
subtle shift. Herod examineth the matter afterward as a judge: but when as he
perceived that the soldiars were in no fault, he himself is also enforced to be
a witness of the deliverance wrought by God. Whereas he commands them to be
carried out of his sight, or to be carried to prison, we may thereby gather,
that their faithfulness and diligence were approved and seen: for if there
had been any suspicion of negligence, there was punishment prepared for them:
but the cause why he does not let them go free, was partly rage mixed with
tyrannous cruelty, and partly shamefastness. Though some expound it
otherwise, that he commanded that they should be punished forthwith. And
whether being angry he delivered them to the hangman, or he was content to
punish them with perpetual imprisonment: it is assuredly an excellent example
of blindness, that whereas he ought to perceive the power of God, yea though his
eyes were shut, yet does he not bend, neither does he wax more meek, but
proceeds to resist God of obstinate malice: thus does Satan deprive the
wicked of understanding, that in seeing they see not: and the Lord by smiting
them with this horrible amasednesse does justly revenge himself and his
Church.

And descending from Judea to Caesarea, he stayed there.

20 And Herod was offended with those of Tire and Sidon. But they came unto him
with one consent: and persuading Blastus, the chamberlain to the King, they
required peace, because their country was nourished by the Kings country.

21 And upon a day appointed, Herod arrayed himself in royal apparel, and
sitting upon his throne, he made an oration unto them.

22 And the people cried, it is the voice of God and not of man.

23 And streightway the Angel of the Lord smote him because he gave not the
glory to God: and being eaten of worms, he died.

24 Furthermore the word of God did increase and multiply.

25 And Barnabas and Paul returned from Jerusalem to Antioch, having finished
their office, taking John with them, which was called Mark.

20 A worthy history which does not only show as it were in a glass what end
is prepared for the enemies of the Church, but also how greatly God hates
pride. The scripture says that God resists the proud. God himself did show
a lively image thereof in the person of Herod. 1. Pet. 5.5.
And assuredly men cannot extol themselves higher than becomes them, but
they shall make war with God: who, to the end he may surpass all,
commands all flesh to keep silence. And if God did so sharply punish pride
in a king, whom prosperity did puff up, what shall become of those of the
common sort, who are ridiculously puffed up without cause? Furthermore we must
note the course of the history, that all things go well with Herod after that
he had miserably vexed the church, he enforced the nations round about him
being tamed with hunger, to come to crave pardon upon their knees: as if God
had rewarded him well for his wicked fury. This was no small trial for the
godly, who might have thought thus with themselves, that God cared not for
them: and they were afraid least with Herod's power his tyranny and cruelty
should increase. But the Lord had another purpose, for he set the oppressor of
his Church on high, that he might have the greater fall. Therefore that
shadowish felicity, wherein he delighted too much, was unto him a certain
fatting against the day of slaughter. In like sort when at this day we see the
bloody enemies of the Church carried up upon the wings of fortune into heaven,
Pro. 16.18. and 12.
there is no cause why we should be discoraged, but let us rather call to mind
that saying of Solomon, Pride goes before calamity, and the heart is lifted
up before a fall.

Herod was displeased. Luke uses the compound participle Thumomachon, which
signifies privy grudging or hatred. Therefore Herod did not make open war
against those cities, but such was his displeasure, that he assaied to subdue
them by policy, as it were by vnderminding them by little and little. It is a
rare matter says Demosthenes, for free cities to agree with Monarchs.
Moreover Herod was naturally cruel, bold, of insatiable covetousness: and it
is not to be doubted but that Tyrus and Sidon were as it were certain bars
or railes to stay his fury, as they were welthy cities and unaccustomed to
bear the yoke. Also the remembrance of their old glory might have encouraged
them: forasmuch as pride comes commonly of wealth: it is no marvel if these
two cities were proud: Isai. 23.8. Job. 12.
the one whereof Isaias calls Queen of the seas, whose merchants he said
were kings: and her chapmen Dukes. Also he says elsewhere that Sidon was
become proud by reason of her wealth. And although they had sundry times bin
brought almost to utter ruin; yet the commodiousnes of their situation, did
shortly restore them to their wonted state. Hereby it came to pass that they
could more hardly digest Agrippa of late a base fellow, a man of no estimation,
and one who had bin let out of prison, especially seeing that he behaved
himself so cruelly toward his own subjects, and was troblesome and injurious
to his neighbors.

Forasmuch as their country was nourished. It had not bin good for him to have
assailed the men of Tire and Sidon with open war, therefore he gives
commandment that there should no corn nor victual be carried out of his
realm. By this means did he without any army besiege them by little and
little. For the borders of both cities were strait, and their ground barren,
whereas there was a great people to be fed. Therefore after that they were
tamed with hunger, they humbly crave peace, and that not free, for assuredly
they had some laws given them: and it is to be thought that this Blastus
mentioned by Luke, was not with bare words persuaded but with rewards woone to
entreat the peace. I know not why Erasmus did think it good to translate this
place otherwise than the words import.

21 Upon an appointed day. Luke says that the men of Tyrus and Sidon had peace
granted them, because this was the occasion of the kings oration, without
doubt, that he might make them his underlings hereafter. The same history is
extant in Josephus in his nineteenth book of Antiquities: save only that he
calls him every where Agrippa, whom Luke calls Herod. It is to be thought
that Agrippa was his proper name, and that he was called by none other name so
long as he was a private man: but after that he was advanced to be a king, he
took to himself princely dignity according to the name of his grandfather.
Josephus and Luke agree together wonderfully in the thing it self, and in all
circumstances. First they agree concerning the place. Josephus says that his
garment was imbroidered with gold, on which when the sun beams light, it did
glister again: and that this was the cause which moved the courteours to call
him a God: that he was suddenly wounded: also that there was seen an Owl,
sitting upon a cord over his head, which cord did prognosticate his ruin. And
he is so far from doubting that his sacrilegious pride was punished with this
kind of punishment, that he says that he confessed the same openly amidst his
cruel torments, Behold me whom you call a God, I am enforced to finish my life
most miserably. There is no mention made there of the peace made with those of
Tyrus and Sidon: but that he made and set forth plays in honor of Caesar. But
it may be that the solemnity of the plays was appointed in respect of the
peace concluded: which we know was a solemn thing.

23 Forthwith he smote him. As before the Angel was a minister of gods grace in
the delivery of Peter, so now he takes vengeance upon Herod. And God does
sometimes use the ministry of Angels in heaven in punishing: but sometimes he
makes the devils as hangmen, 1. Sam. 16.14. Job. 1.11. and 2.7. Exo. 12.29
by whose hand he executes his judgments. And this does he as well toward his
faithful servants, as toward the reprobate. Saul was troubled and vexed by
satan, but the same did also befall holy Job. In the Psalm the punishments
wherewith God does chasten the wicked, are attributed to the evil Angels: yet
we see how the Angel which had the government of the safety of the Church,
smites the Egyptians in the first begotten: although the scripture calls the
wicked spirits Gods spirits, because they are obedient to his commandment
though full sore against their will. But where the epithet Evil, is not added as
in this place, we must understand the angel which does willingly obey God, and
yet the shape of the Owl, whereof Josephus makes mention, did rather serve to
figure the devil, than an heavenly Angel. Furthermore, I dare not affirm for a
surety what manner disease that was. The word which Luke uses does signify,
that he was eaten up of worms. Many coniect that it was a lousie disease. This
is certain, that even when he was yet alive he was corrupt with stink and
rottennes, so that he was as it were a living carcass. So that he was not only
vexed with cruel torments, but also made a laughing stock to all men, and of
al men reviled. For God intended to make choice of a kind of punishment,
wherewith he might oppres the cruelty of a proud man with extrem ignominy. If he
had bin ouercom of some great and valiant army, and had bin brought to poverty,
the judgment of god had not bin so marked: and this had bin an honest and
princely chastisement: but forasmuch as he abhors lice and worms, and this
filthiness comes out of his body, Exo. 8.17.24.
which does kill him by eating him up, he is handled according to his deserts.
In like sort Pharao, forasmuch as he did so often exalt himself against God with
untamed pride, he was not orderly assailed by some prince that did border upon
him, but Locusts and caterpillars were gods warriars to make war against him,
for the more proudly a man exalts himself: the more does he deserve to be
cast down of God into the lowest hell with shame and reproach. This is the
reason why he set this feigned God Herod, to be eaten up of worms: which he
was at length enforced to grant, when he said, Behold me whom ye saluted as a
God, I die myserablie. Such a manifest example of horrible vengance in a kings
person, ought to terrify us not a little, from presuming to take to our selves
more than we ought: and that we do not suffer our selves to be made drunk
with the false commendation and flattery of men as with deadly poison.

Because he gave not the glory to God. He is condemned of sacrilege not only
because he suffered himself to be called god, but because forgetting himself,
he took to himself the honor due to God. We do not read that the king of
Babylon was thus extolled: and yet the Prophet vpbraideth to him that he went
about to make himself equal with God. Therefore this sacrilege is a common fault
in all proud men, Isai. 14 13.14.
because by taking to themselves more than they ought, they darken the glory of
God: and so like giants, so much as ever they are able, they endeavor to pluck
God out of his seat. Howsoever they do not usurp the title of God, neither
openly boast with their mouth that they are gods, yet because they take to
themselves that which is proper to God, they desire to be and to be accounted
gods, having brought him under. Furthermore the Prophet points out the
beginning of this evil in one word, when he brings in Nabucadonezer speaking
on this wise, Isai. 14.
I will go up. Wherefore there is but one remedy, if every one keep himself
in that degree wherein he is placed. Let those who are base and castawayes not
desire to climb higher: let kings and those who are above others, remember
that they are mortal, and let them modestly submit their highness to God. And
we must note that it is not enough if men give to God only half the honor
which is due to him, who chalengeth all that wholly which is his own: if they
submit themselves but in part, whom he will have to be thoroughly humbled. Now
forasmuch as the Scripture dispoileth us quite of all praise of wisdom,
virtue, and righteousness, there is no one of us that can take to himself the
least jot of glory, without sacrilegious robbing of God. And it is a wonder,
that seeing the Scripture pronounces that all those make as it were open war
against God, which exalt themselves, and we do all grant, that that cannot be
done without our overthrow: the greatest part of men runs notwithstanding
headlong with furious boldness unto their own destruction. For there is
scarce one of an hundred who being mindful of his condition, does leave to God
his glory undiminished.

24 And the word of God. When the tyrant was once taken out of the way, the
Church was suddenly delivered as it were out of the jaws of the wolf. Psa.
44.23.
Therefore though the faithful be accounted as sheep appointed to be slain,
yet the Church does always ouerliue her enemies: and though the word of God
seem oftentimes to be oppressed with the wicked tyranny of men: yet it gets
up the head again by and by. Romans 8.36.
For Luke determined not only to report what happened after that Herod was dead,
but also by this example to encourage us, that we may be assured, that God will
do that in all ages, which he then did, to the end the gospel may at length
break through all impediments of the enemies, and that the more the church is
minished, it may the more increase through the heavenly blessing.

25 And Barnabas and Paul. The ministry which Luke says Barnabas and Paul
did finish, must be referred unto the alms, whereof mention was made before.
For after that Agabus the Prophet had foretold the famine and barrenness, the
brethren gathered money at Antioch, whereby they might relieve the necessity
of the Church which was at Jerusalem, the carrying of this money was committed
to Barnabas and Paul. Now Luke says that they returned to Antioch, that he may
pass over unto a new history. He adds that they took with them John whose
syrname was Mark, whose mother was honorably commended before, that he might
keep them company, who was afterward as we shall see, a cause of griuous and
dangerous discord between them.

CHAP. XIII.
1 ANd there were in the Church which was at Antioch, certain Prophets and
teachers, Barnabas, and Simeon called Niger, Lucyus of Cyren and Manaim, who
had bin brought up with Herod, and Saul.

2 And as they ministed unto the Lord, and fasted, the holy Ghost said:
Separate to me Banabas and Saul unto the work whereto I have called them.

3 Then after they had fasted, and prayed, and laid the hands upon them, they
let them go.

1 Here follows an history not only worthy to be remembered, but also very
profitable to be known, how Paul was appointed the teacher of the Gentiles,
for his calling was as it were a key, whereby God opened to us the kingdom of
heaven. We know that the covenant of eternal life was properly concluded with
the Jews, Ephe. 2.12
so that we had nothing to do with Gods inheritance, forasmuch as we were
strangers: and the wall of separation was put between, which did distinguish
those of the household from strangers. Therefore it had profited us nothing,
that Christ brought salvation unto the world, unless the disagreement being
taken away, there had bin some entrance made for us into the Church. The
Apostles had already received commandment, Mar. 16.15
touching the preaching of the Gospel throughout the whole world, but they had
kept themselves until this time within the borders of Judea. When Peter was
sent to Cornelius, it was a thing so new and strange, that it was almost
counted a monster: secondly that might seem to be a privilege granted to a
few men extraordinarily: but now forasmuch as God does plainly and openly
appoint Paul and Barnabas to be Apostles of the Gentiles, by this means he
makes them equal with the Jews: that the Gospel may begin to be common as
well to the one as to the other. And now the wall of separation is taken away,
that both those who were far off and those which were nigh hand may be
reconciled to God: and that being gathered under one head, they may grow
together to be one body. Therefore Paul his calling ought to be of no less
weight amongst us, Genes. 22.17.
than if God should cry from heaven in the hearing of all men, That, the
salvation promised in times past to Abraham and to the seed of Abraham, does
no less appertain unto us at this day, than if we had come out of the loins
of Abraham. For this cause is it that Paul labors so much in defense and
auouching of his calling: that the Gentiles may assuredly persuade themselves,
that the doctrine of the gospel was not brought to them by chance, Gala. 15. and
2.8.
neither by man's rashness, but first by the wonderful counsel of God,
secondly by express commandment, whiles that he made that known to men which
he had decreed with himself.

Ephe. 4.11. 1. Cor. 12.28.
There were in the Church. I have declared in the fourth to the Ephesians, and
in the twelfe of the former to the Corinthians, what difference there is (at
least in my judgment) between Doctors and Prophets. It may be that they are
in this place Synonyma, or that they signify both one thing, so that this is
Lukes meaning, that there were many men in that Church endewed with singular
grace of the Spirit, to teach. Surely I cannot see how it can hang together
to understand by Prophets, those which were endewed with the gift of
foretelling things: but I think rather that it signifies excellent
interpreters of scripture. And such had the office to teach and exhort, as Paul
does testify in the fourteenth of the former to the Corinthians. 1. Cor. 14.27.
We must mark Luke his drift: Paul and Barnabas were ministers of the church of
Antioch, God calls them thence now unto another place. Least any man should
think that, that Church was destitute of good and fit ministers, so that God
did provide for other Churches with the loss of it: Luke preuenteth this, and
says, that there was such store there, that though it did help others, yet
did there remain sufficient for the use thereof: whereby appears how
plentifully God had powered out his grace upon the church, whence rivers as it
were might be deducted and carried into diverse places. So even in our time, God
does so enrich certain Churches more than other, that they be seminaries to
spread abroad the doctrine of the Gospel. It must needs be that Manaim who was
brought up with Herod, came of some noble family. And this does Luke recite of
purpose, that he may set forth to us his godliness, who despising worldly pomp,
had coupled himself to the simple and despised flock of Christ. He might in
deed have bin a principal courteour, if he had bin ruled by ambition: but that
he may wholly addict himself to Christ, he refuses not to change those smokes
of honor with reproach and ignominy. For if we consider in what state the church
stood then, he could not give his name to the Gospel, unless he should make
himself subject to common infamy. Therefore the Lord meant to teach us by his
example to despise the world, that those may learn with a valiant and lofty
mind to despise the world, who cannot otherwise be true christians, unless they
cast away those things which are precious to the flesh, as hurtful lets and
hindrances.

2 And they ministered to the Lord. The word which Luke uses does not only
signify to be occupied about holy things, but also some times to bear public
offices. And because the holy rites of the Gentiles did for the most part
consist upon burnt offerings and sacrifices: it is oftentimes taken for to
offer sacrifice: which sense did well like the Papists, that they might prove
that the Apostles did use some sacrifice. But admit it were so: yet do they
foolishly pretend for defense of their Mass that the Teachers of Antioch did
sacrifice. First forasmuch as the word is of the plural number, it follows
that every one of them did say Mass. But letting toies pass, I say we must
consider, what manner of sacrifice Christ commended to his Church. The Papists
feign that the office of Priesthood is enjoined them, to sacrifice Christ, and
by sacrificing him to redeem peace with God. There is so little mention made
hereof in scripture, that the son of god does rather challenge this honor to
himself alone. Wherefore Christ's Church has another Priesthood, to wit, that
every man may offer himself and his to God: and that the public ministers may
sacrifice to God, souls, with the spiritual sword of the Gospel, as Paul
teaches Romans 15.16. Moreover the prayers of all the godly, are the spiritual
calves of the lips, wherewith God is well pleased, when they are offered up
upon the holy Altar; that is in Christ's name, Osee. 14.3. Hebru. 13.15.
in the thirteenth to the Hebrews. Therefore when Luke says that the
Prophets and teachers ministered to God when the Spirit spoke to them: I
understand nothing else but that they were in the public action. He adds
fasting, that we may know that their minds were then free from al impediments,
that nothing might hinder them from giving atte^dance to prophesying. But the
question is whether they keept a common fast, or Luke does only signify that
they were fasting the^ until that time. This is without question that these
circumstances were expressed, that Paul his calling may carry the more credit
amongst us.

Separate to me. God commands that Paul and Barnabas be sent, by the consent
of the Church, thither whither he had appointed them to be sent. Whereby we
gather that there is no lawful election of Pastors, save only wherein God is
chief. For whereas he has commanded that the Church should elect pastors and
Bishops, he has not therefore granted men so much liberty, but that he will
bear the chiefest sway as the chief governor. The ordinary election of
Pastors differs from this appointing of Paul and Barnabas, because it was
requisite that they should be appointed by the heavenly Oracle, to be the
Apostles of the Gentiles: which is not necessary to be done daily in ordaining
Pastors. But they agree in this, that as God did testify that Paul and
Barnabas were already appointed by his decree to preach the gospel: so none may
be called unto the office of teaching save only those whom God has already
chosen to himself after a sort. Furthermore there is no need that the Spirit
should cry to us out of heaven, that he is called of God about whom we are,
because we receive those as it were from hand to hand (as they say) whom God
has furnished with necessary gifts, forasmuch as they are framed and made fit
by his hand. But whereas Luke says in this place, that Paul was appointed by
the voices and consents of the Church: it does seem not to agree with Paul's
own words, Galat. 1.1.
where he does deny that he was called of men or by men. I answer that he was
made an Apostle long before (and that by no voices of men) before such time as
he was sent unto the Gentiles: and he had now already executed the office of an
Apostle many years, when he was called to go to the Gentiles by a new oracle.
Wherefore that he may have God for the author of his apostleship, it is not
without cause that he excludes me^. And he does not now command that he be
ordained by the church, therefore, that his calling may depend upon men: but
God publishes that his decree which was as yet known to a few, and that with
a public commandment, and he commands that it be sealed with the solemn
subscription of the Church. Ephe. 2.14
Therefore this is the meaning of the words. That this is the time, wherein
Paul must preach the Gospel, among the Gentiles, and the wall being pulled
down, he must gather a Church of the Gentiles, who were before strangers from
the kingdom of God. For although god had used him hitherto at Antioch and
elsewhere, this was now added as a peculiar thing, that god did intend to adopt
the Gentiles into the same inheritance of life with the Jews. But and if he
were thus created a teacher of the Church from the beginning, he should not then
have bin called at that time by men. For seeing the Lord does pronounce that he
had called him, what does he leave for the Church, save only that they
subscribe obediently? For men's judgment is not here put in as in a doubtful
matter, neither have their voices and consents any freedom. But we must mark
what I have already said, that Paul and Barnabas are not now only appointed
teachers, but they have an extraordinary office enjoined the^, that they may
begin to bring the grace of God commonly unto the Gentiles. And that do the
words import when it is said, Separate to the work. For undoubtedly he speaks
of a new work, and which had heretofore not bin used. But how is Barnabas in
this place appointed to be Paul's companion and fellow in office, who as far as
we can read, did never execute the office of teaching? yea who did always give
Paul leave to teach, without saying any thing himself? I answer that he had
occasions enough offered him to speak in Paul his absence, so that they had
both of them enough to do. For one could not always be present in all places.
It is not to be doubted but that he did faithfully discharge that duty which
God had enjoined him, and that he was no dumb looker on. And why should we
wonder that Luke does not set down his sermons in plain words, seeing that he
scarce repeateth one of a thousand, of Paul's?

The Spirit said. Whatsoever Macedonius and his sect object that they may turn
their backs, yet we have a more plain and sound testimony of the divine
essense of the spirit in this place, than that they can escape it and make it
frustrate. There is nothing more proper to god, than with his power and
commandment to govern the Church alone. But the Spirit chalengeth this right,
when he commands that Paul and Barnabas be separated to him, and testifies
that they were called by his beck. Assuredly we must needs confess that the
body of the Church is lame and without a head, unless we confess that it is
God who orders the same at his pleasure, who sets teachers over it, who
governs the proceedings and order thereof. We shall have afterward Chapter
20. in Paul's sermon, that all Bishops are placed by the holy Ghost, which
govern the Church. Act. 20.28.
But no man is to be counted a lawful Pastor of the Church, as the same Paul
witnesses, save he which is called of God: Neither does God point out false
Prophets by any other mark, save only by this, that he has not sent them.
Therefore we gather that the holy Ghost is God in deed, whose authority is
sufficient to choose Pastors, and who has the chief rule in choosing them.
Which is likewise confirmed out of the words of Esaias: Isai. 48.
And now behold the Lord has sent me, and his Spirit. Furthermore we must
note out of these words, that he is a person truly subsisting in God. For if
we admit Sabellius his invention, that the word Spirit imports no person,
but that it is a bare adiunct, that shall be a foolish and absurd speech, that
the holy Ghost has said: Isaias also should foolishly ascribe to him the
sending of a Prophet.

3 When they had fasted and prayed. That they may obey the Oracle, they do not
only send Paul and Barnabas away: but also with a solemn rite they appoint
them to be the Apostles of the Gentiles. It is without question that this was a
public fast. Luke said before that they were fasting, forasmuch as they were
busied in their ministry: it might be that that was according to the custom,
but now there is another reason. For in appointing a public fast, which used
to be done in hard matters and of great importance, they provoke both
themselves and others unto an earnest feruentnesse in prayer. For this is
oftentimes added in Scripture as a help to prayer. But (it was a matter of
such weight to erect the kingdom of Christ amongst the Gentiles) the teachers
of Antioch do not without cause earnestly pray the Lord, that he will enable
his servants. And that was not the end of their prayer, that God would by his
Spirit of wisdom and discretion, govern their judgments in choosing: because
al disputation or doubting concerning this matter was taken away: but that God
would furnish those with the Spirit of wisdom and strength, whom he had
already chosen to himself: that he would strengthen them with his power
against all the invasions of Satan and the world: that he would bless their
labors, that they might not be unfruitful: that he would open a gate for the
new preaching of the gospel. The laying on of hands which Luke reckneth up in
the third place, was a kind of consecration, as we have said Chapter 6. Acts.
6.6.
For the Apostles retained the ceremony which was used amongst the Jews
according to the old custom of the Law: as also kneeling and such rites, which
were profitable to exercise godliness. In sum, this is the end why they laid
their hands upon Barnabas and Paul, that the church might offer them to God,
and that they might with their consent declare that this office was enjoined
them by God. For the calling was properly Gods alone: but the external
ordaining did belong to the Church, and that according to the heavenly Oracle.

4 Therefore when they were sent forth by the holy Ghost, they went to
Seleucia, and thence they sailed into Cyprus.

5 And when they were at Salamis they preached the word of God in the
Sinagogues of the Jews. And they had John also for their minister.

6 And when they had passed over the Island unto Paphos, they found a certain
false Prophet a Jew, named Ba^-iesus.

7 Who was with Sergius Paulus the Proconsul, a wise man. When he had called
Barnabas and Paul he sought to hear the word of God.

8 And Elimas the Sorcerer, for so is his name expounded, resisted them,
seeking to turn away the Proconsull from the faith.

9 And Saul which was also called Paul, being full of the Ghost and looking
steadfastly on him,

10 Said, O thou that art full of all deceit and wickedness, thou son of the
devil, thou enemy of all righteousness, do thou not cease to pervert the
streght ways of the Lord?

11 And now behold the hand of the Lord is upon thee, and thou shall be blind,
not seeing the sun for a time: and forthwith there fell upon him mist and
darkness and going about he sought some to lead him by the hand.

12 Then the Proconsull seeing what had happened, he believed, wondering at the
doctrine of the Lord.

4 Being sent out by the holy Ghost. There is no mention made here of the
Election made by the Church, because it was altogether a divine calling: the
Church did only receive those who were offered them by the hand of God. He
says that they came first to Seleucia, which was a City of Syria. There was
indeed a country of the same name: but it is more likely that Luke speaks
of the City, which was not far from Cyprus by sea.

5 He says that they began to preach the Gospel first in Salamis a famous
City of Cyprus. Notwithstanding they seem to begin amiss: for whereas they
were sent specially to the Gentiles, they preach the word of God nevertheless
to the Jews, I answer that they were not so addicted to the Gentiles, that
setting aside the Jews it stood them upon to go straight to the Gentiles.
For when God did make them teachers of the Gentiles, he did not depose them
from the office which they had heretofore exercised. So that there was no
reason to let them, but that they might take pains both with Jews and
Gentiles: yea farther it was meet that they should begin with the Jews, as
we shall see in the end of the Chapter. Moreover Luke adds by the way, that
they were helped by John: for his meaning is not that he was their minister
for any private use, or for the uses of body: but rather in that he was their
helper to preach the Gospel, he commends his godly study and industry. Not
that the degree of honor was equal, but because the labor was common to all:
for which cause he had the less excuse afterward, seeing that he forsook the
holy calling.

6 When they had passed over. It is to be thought that this their passage was
not altogether without fruit: and assuredly Luke would never have passed over
with silence a general repulse, but it was sufficient for him to say, that
they were not idle in the office of teaching, in their journey, seeing that he
makes haste unto a famous history, which he will set down immediately. And
forasmuch as Salamis situate upon the East coast, did look toward Siria, it
was requisite that Paul and Barnabas should pass through the midst of the
Island unto the otherside, that they might come to Paphus. For Paphus was a
City situate upon the Sea coast toward the South. Furthermore though all the
Island were dedicated to Venus, yet Paphus was the principal sea of the Idol.
For which cause the goodness of God is more wonderful in that he would have
the light of his Gospel to pearce into such a filthy and cruel den. For we may
thereby gather what manner integrity, and chastity, and honesty, and
temperance was in that City, in that religion did grant liberty to the
inhabitants to commit all manner shameful and heinous offenses.

They found a certain false Prophet. Seeing that religion was quite cor^upt
among the Jews, it is no marvel if they fell away unto many wic^ed
superstitions. And for as much as they had hitherto professed that they
worshipped a certain peculiar god, this was a fair color to deceive withal,
seeing that they might pretend the name of the unknown God, at their pleasure:
but this is a wonder how it was possible for E^imas with his iuggling to cousin
a grave and wise man. For we know that the Jews were at that time hated of all
the world: and especially of the Romans, and with hatred was coupled extreme
contempt of them.

Now Luke does not without cause expressly commend Sergius his wisdom, least
any man should think that his foolishness and lightness was subject to the
seducings of the Sorcerer. His meaning was in deed to show in a clear
myrrour, how frivolous and vain man's wisdom is, which cannot beware of such
gross subtlety of Satan. And assuredly where the truth of God does not
appear, the more men seem to be wise, the more filthylie foolish are they. We
see what filthy monsters of superstitions did reign amongst the most witty
Gentiles, and such as were furnished with all manner learning. Therefore there
is neither judgment not wisdom save only from the Spirit of God. And this
is the just vengeance of God upon all idolaters, that being delivered up to a
reprobate sense they can discern nothing. Romans 1.28.
Though it may be that Sergius Paulus being weary of superstitions, did then
begin to desire a more pure worship of god, at such time as he light upon that
sorcerer. Which if we receive, it was surely a wonderful judgment of God, that
he suffered a man godly affected to throw himself headlong into the snares of
satan. But God does sometimes so exercise his elect, that he causes them to
wander many ways, before they be directed into the right way.

7 And whereas Sergius Paulus desiring some better thing than that which he had
learned from his childhood, was unaptly drawn a side unto diverse
superstitions, I gather hereby, that he sends for Paul and Barnabas of his
own accord, to teach him. Therefore he had conceived a certain reverence and
fear of God, though he knew him not as yet, and forasmuch as he was persuaded
that that was the true god which was worshipped in Judea, he desired to know out
of his word a pure and certain rul^ of Godliness: so soon as he has tasted
of the dotings of the false prophet he stands in doubt. And it is not to be
doubted but that God does solicit his mind, that he may not be altogether
stayed in vanity, though he suffered himself to be disceiued for a time by a
wicked man.

8 To turn away the deputy from the faith. No marvel if the seducer seek to
put away the light, whereby he saw his own darkness driven away. The same
stoure have we at this day with a number of brablers, who using to sell their
smokes, and to shut by all shifts possible the eyes of the simple, that they
may not behold the sun of righteousness being now risen. We must wrestle with
such lets: for as there be always, and every where magicians present, which
procure us some business: Satan thrusts in lets enough which possess our
minds to drive away Christ: which the flesh is too ready to receive. Finally
both the inticements of the world and the wicked affections of our flesh, are
as many charms, whereby Satan cease not to overthrow the faith.

9 And Saul who was also called Paul. Luke shows now how God brake the bond
wherein the deputy was bound. For seeing that he was too much addicted to the
magician, he could not embrace true doctrine as one that was free and at
liberty: for the devil keeps those minds (which he has entangled) in his
slavery after a wonderful and incredible manner, that they cannot see even the
most plain truth: but so soon as he was once vanquished, Paul could easily
enter in unto the deputy. And mark what Luke says, that the faith is
overthrown, when the word of God is resisted. Whence we may gather, that Faith
is so grounded in the word, that without this shore it faints at every
assault: yea that it is nothing else but the spiritual building of the word of
God.

10 O thou full of all deceit. It was not without cause that Paul was thus hot
and angry, for he had no hope to do any good if he should deal after some
moderate and mild sort. We must always begin with doctrine, and those are
also to be admonished, exhorted, and pricked forward, who do not as yet appear
to be altogether obstinate. Neither does Paul so vehemently inueigh against the
sorcerer at the first dash: but when he sees him maliciously and manifestly
fight against the doctrine of godliness, he handles him like a bondslaue of
Satan. Thus must we deal with the desperate enemies of the gospel, in whom
appears open contumacie, and wicked contempt of God, especially when they
stop the way before others. And least any man should think that Paul was out
of measure angry, Luke says plainly, that the inspiration of the spirit was
his guide. Wherefore this heat of zeal is not only not to be reprehe^ded, but
it ought to make the profane contemners of God sore afraid, who fear not to
rebel against his word: forasmuch as this judgment is given upon them all
not by mortal man, but by the holy Ghost, by the mouth of Paul. As touching
the words, this place refuteth their error, who think that Paul took his
name of the deputy, as if he had set up some token of victory. There may
many reasons be brought and those strong enough, on the contrary: but this
one place is sufficient, where Luke shows that at such time as the deputy
was not brought to the faith he had two names. And it is not to be douted, but
that he retained his own name amongst the Jews, and we know that this was an
usual thing, that those who were citizens of Rome should borow some Italian
name. Luke joins subtlety with deceit which is contrary to sincerity: to
wit, whiles crafty men transform their wit hither and thither, so that they
have in them no simplicity, though the Greek word which Luke uses,
signifies ready boldness to do hurt: but the former signification agrees
better. By the son of the Devil, is meant a reprobate and desperate man.
Such are all those which resist maliciously and as it were of set purpose, that
which is just and right: therefore Paul adds that he is a great enemy of all
righteousness.

Do thou not cease to pervert. He calls all that means whereby the Lord
brings us unto himself, the ways of the Lord. He testifies that this is
plain and straight: and he accuses the sorcerer, for making the same,
crooked, full of turninges, and doubtful, with his boughts and turns. Whence
may be gathered a profitable doctrine, that it comes to pass through the
subtlety of Satan that we do not readily with straight course go unto the
Lord. For he shows us in his word a plain way and such as is not thornie.
Wherefore we must take good heed of seducers, which trouble the way with their
ditches or thorns, or else make the same hard and unpleasant. And it shall be
convenient to repeat here, that which I touched before, that the servants of
Christ must not be blamed if they do sore inueigh against the professed
enemies of sound doctrine: unless we will accuse the holy Ghost of
intemperancie. Neither am I ignorant how easily men may fall in this point, for
which cause godly teachers must take so much the more heed, first that they
favor not the affections of the flesh too much under the color of zeal:
secondly, that they break not out with headlong and unseasonable heat, where
there is yet place for moderation: thirdly, that they give not themselves over
to foolish and uncomely railing: but only that they express the unseemliness
of the thing by gravity and weight of words. Such was the vehemency of holy
zeal and of the spirit in the prophets, which if dainty and soft men judge
troublesome and raging, they consider not how dear and precious Gods truth is
to him. Now there rises not one Elimas to subvert the faith, but many, and
those which are far more wicked. For we see with what sacrilegious boldness
they despoyle God of al honor, with what filthy corruptions they profane all
religion, how cruelly they throw miserable souls headlong into eternal
destruction, how vnseemelily they mock Christ, how filthily they disfigure all
the whole worship of God, with what cruel reproaches they re^t the holy truth
of god, with what barbarous tyranny they lay wast the church of God: so that
you would say that they tread god under foot. And yet there be many crabbed
philosophers, who would have these furious Giants flattered and clawed by the
back. But forasmuch as it does evidently appear that such did never taste what
that means, the zeal of thy house has eaten me up: Psalm. 69.10.
let us, bidding adue to their coldness or rather sluggishnesse, be most hot
as becomes us, in maintaining the glory of God.

11 Behold the hand. The hand is put here to punish: whereby he does
signify, that God is the author of this punishment, and that he is only the
minister, Furthermore I think that this ability is that which Paul calls
dunamis or power. 1. Cor. 12.28.
For as they did excel in power of the Spirit to help the faithful with
miracles, so had they the whip in their hand to tame the rebellious and
obstinate with all. Such vengeance of God did Peter show upon Ananias and
Sapphyra. But because miracles ought for the most part to resemble the nature
of Christ, Acts. 5.
who is all gentle, sweet, bountiful, and merciful: therefore he would
seldom have the apostles to show examples of the contrary power. Neither must
we think that they were endued with this power to punish any man so often as it
seemed good in their own eyes, but the same Spirit of god which did thus arm
them, did direct them unto the lawful and right use. Therefore we must remember
that which we had before, that Paul spoke by inspiration of the Spirit.

Furthermore, it was a very fit kind of punishment. For seeing that the
sorcerer assayed to darke^ the sun, and to take from others the benefit of
the light, he was by good right cast into horrible darkness. But now forasmuch
as many of the Papists do far exceed this sorcerer at this day in
ungodliness, it is a wonder why they be suffered to be so bold without being
punished. Is the hand of God weakened? Is he less careful for his glory?
Has he no care to revenge the Gospel? I answer, that this visile punishment,
which was once laid upon the sorcerer, and such as this, are perpetual
examples of Gods wrath against all those who are not afraid either to corrupt
and deprave, or openly with slanders to resist the pure doctrine of the
gospel. For we do know that miracles were wrought for a time to this end,
that they may continually be in force, and be fresh before our eyes, and that
they may give us light to behold the judgments of God, which we cannot see so
plainly. But it is not for us to prescribe God this or that way to punish his
enemies. Sergius Paulus, who before he came to man's estate had no taste of true
religion: who from his childhood was infected with diverse superstitions, and
had very hard lets, which kept him back from embracing the faith: lastly, who
was bewitched with the dotings of the sorcerer, that he could scarce com to the
faith, had need of no small helps: hereby it came to pass, that God did as it
were reach his hand out of heaven manifestly, though he helped us all in his
person. For the same gospel, the authority whereof was then established, is
at this day preached to us, and yet notwithstanding God does not so linger,
but that he shows his fearful power diverse ways against the enemies of
the gospel: unless our eyes were so dull when he shows his judgments,
that we cannot see.

12 Then when the deputy saw. This is that which I said, that the snares were
broken, wherein Elimas kept him entangled. For he was brought by the miracle
unto faith: because the reverence of doctrine is the beginning of faith, and
the preparation. Therefore forasmuch as he saw an evident token of the power
of God, he knew that Paul was sent of God, and so he began to reverence his
doctrine, whereof he did doubt before. If God do now myraculously strengthen in
the minds of many the faith of the gospel, which is shaken with so many and
such strong ^ngines: if he bring to pass after an incredible manner, that the
course of faith does pass through a thousand lets, being content with this
his grace, let us not murmr against him or reason the matter with him, as if
our condition were worse, if he do not daily show such miracles as we would
desire.

13 And when Paul's companions had loosed from Paphus, they came to Perga of
Pamphilia. And John departing from them, returned to Jerusalem.

14 Furthermore, when they had passed over the country of Perga, they came to
Antioch a city of Pisidia, and entered into the Synagogue upon the day of the
Sabboths, and sat down.

15 And after the lecture of the Law and Prophets, the master of the
Synagogue sent to them, saying: Men and brethren, if there be in you any word
of exhortation unto the people, say on.

13 Here is set down another of Paul's stations. For being departed from
Paphus, when he came to Antioch of Pisidia, he made there a worthy sermon,
which Luke will recite together with the success. But before he come to that,
he does by the way speak of the departure of John, because it was afterward a
cause of doleful disagreement, when he says, Paul's companions loosed from
Paphus, he does in the first place mean Paul himself, secondly the other,
one excepted. So that by noting his softnes, he praises others which followed
Paul with great constancy.

14 Entering upon the day of the Sabboths. He puts the plural number in
steed of the singular, as it falls out oftentimes in other places of
scripture. For they were wont to assemble themselves together upon the
Saboths, least their rest should be unprofitable and sluggish. The institution
of the Sabbath had another end also, that it might be a figure of the
spiritual rest, when as the faithful being dead to the world, and the flesh,
abandon their own will, and cease from their works. Because we have the truth
hereof in Christ, whiles that being buried together with him we put off the
old man, therefore the old figure is past. But god had respect also unto the
politic use, that the Jews being free from all other cares and businesses
might keep their holy assemblies. So that the ceasing off from earthly works,
did give a place to their heavenly exercises: So even at this day we must use
holy days: for we must therefore omit all other things, that we may the more
freely serve God.

15 After the lecture of the law. There is no mention made of prayers, and yet
undoubtedly they were not omitted or foreslowed: but because Luke did intend to
set down the sermon made there by Paul, no marvel if he reckon up those
things only, which did belong unto the order of teaching. And this is a
notable place, out of which we learn, after what sort they handled doctrine at
that time among the Jews. The Law and the Prophets had the first place:
because there must nothing be set before the church, which was not drawn out
of that fountain. Also we gather by this, that the scripture was not
suppressed among a few, but that both one and other were admitted to the
reading thereof, afterward, those who were able and had the grace to teach and
exhort had the second place, as interpreters of the scripture which was read.
Notwithstanding Luke shows last of all, that every one was not suffered to
speak, least confusion should arise by liberty: but the office of exhorting
was committed to certain men, whom he calls Rulers of the synagogue, or
masters. Therefore Paul and Barnabas begin not forthwith to speak, least they
disturb the accustomed order with too much have: but they do modestly stay
till they have liberty granted them to speak, and that with their leave who
had authority by public consent. We know how corrupt the state of that people
was then, and Luke will at length declare in the end of the chapter, that these
men of Antioch were too stout and stubborn in receiving the grace of Christ:
and yet there remained this goodness among them, that their assemblies were
honestly and decently governed, for which cause such evil favored confusion
is so much the more shameful, which is seen at this day among those who will
be counted Christians. The Papists do in deed sing the scriptures in their
churches with shrill and sounding voice, but in an unknown tongue, so that the
people reap no fruit thereby. There is seldom any doctrine used, and it were
better for the wicked brablers even then to hold their peace, who thrust in
their own unclean inventions in steed of the word of God, and pollute with the
stink of their impiety, whatsoever is holy.

If there be in you. This speech does signify that what grace soever is in men
to edify the church, it is as it were committed to them. Although the word in,
according to the Hebrew phrase, may be superfluous. Therefore I stand not
greatly upon that: because the sense may be plain, If you have any exhortation,
which is apt and profitable for the people. An exhortation does not exclude
doctrine. But it seems that this word was commonly used among them, because
it is properly the office of the teacher to utter no new thing of his own
brain: but to apply the scripture, wherein is comprehended the whole wisdom
of the godly, unto the present use of the people. Thus they do not only teach,
but also apply the doctrine which they have else where unto the edifying of the
church, which I think is meant by the word exhortation.

16 And Paul rose, and when he had given a token of silence with the hand, he
said: Men and brethren, which fear God, hear.

17 The God of this people did choose our fathers, and exalted the people, when
they were strangers in the land of Egypt: and he brought them thence with an
high arm.

18 And about forty years he suffered their manners in the wilderness.

19 And having destroyed seven nations in the land of Chanaan, he gave them
their land for an inheritance.

20 After these things about four hundred and fifty years, he gave them
judges until Samuel the prophet.

21 Afterward they required a king, and God gave them Saul, the son of Cis, a
man of the tribe of Benjamin, forty years.

22 And when he had taken him away, he raised up to them David to be king, of
whom bearing witness, he said: I have found David the son of Iesse, a man
according to my heart, who shall do all my will.

23 Of whose seed God according to promise raised to Israel the savior Jesus.

16 We must first note the state of this sermon, least we think that he
uttered words in vain, Paul seems in deed to begin even at the very first
beginning, but he speaks nothing but that which is most convenient for the
present purpose. His purpose is to bring the Jews unto the faith of Christ,
and that he may the better do this, it is needful to declare, that they excel
other nations in this one thing, because the savior was promised them: whose
kingdom is their principal and only felicity. This is therefore Paul his
beginning, that whereas they were chosen in times past to be the peculiar people
of God: whereas they had so many benefits bestowed upon them from time to
time, though they showed themselves most unworthy, this did depend upon the
promise of the Messiah, and did tend to that end, that God might govern them
by the hand of the Messiah: and that therefore they have nothing whereof they
may boast, unless they be gathered under their head. Yea that unless they
receive him when he is offered, the covenant of life which God had made with
their fathers shall be void, and the adoption shall be frustrate. This is the
drift of the first part of the sermon, that this is the principal point of the
law and the foundation of Gods covenant, that they have Christ for their
captain and governor, that he may restore all things among them: that without
him religion cannot stand, and that they shall be most miserable without him.
Thence Paul passes unto another member, that Jesus whom he preaches is
Christ in deed, through whom salvation is offered to the people: also he
declares the means of the redemption purchased by him. Furthermore, he
entreats of his power and office, that they may know what good things they
ought to hope for at his hands. The conclusion contains a chiding. For he
threatens to them horrible judgment, if they refuse the author of salvation,
who offers himself even of his own accord, whom earnestly to desire, the
Law and prophets provoke. This is in a manner the sum, now let us discuss
every point by it self,

Men and brethren, Because Paul knew that there were many bastardly sons of
Abraham, or such as were grown out of kind, he calls the Jews to whom he
speaks by a double name. First he calls them brethren, having respect unto
common kindred, notwithstanding he shows therewithal that they shall be true
Israelites, if they fear God, and that even then they are likewise true
hearers, because the fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom. In like
sort he makes the faithful attentive, and purchases audience among them: as
if he should say, Seeing many boast that they are sons of Abraham, who were
unworthy of such honor, show your selves to be no bastardly seed. Let us
learn by this that it is not a fault common to one age only, that good and
sincere worshippers being mixed with hypocrites have the name of the church
common among them. But we must have a great care hereof, that we be in deed,
that which we are called: which thing the true fear of Almighty GOD will
bring to pass: and not the external profession alone.

17. The God of this people. This preface did witness that Paul did go about
no new thing, which might lead away the people from the law of Moses. There
is but one God who is God of all nations: but he calls him God of that
people, to whom he had bound himself, and who was worshipped amongst the
posterity of Abraham, amongst whom alone true and pure religion was to be
found. To the same end tends that which is added immediately, He chose our
fathers. For he testifies by these words, that he seeks nothing less, then
that they may fall away from the true and living God, who has separated them
from the residue of the world. Neither do I doubt, but that he did more
manifestly express that he did not preach to them an unknown or strange God:
but the same who revealed himself long ago to their fathers: so that he does
briefly comprehend the sound knowledge of god grounded in the law, that their
faith conceived out of the law and prophets may continue firm. Notwithstanding
he does in the mean season commend and set forth the free love of God toward
that people. For how came it to pass that only the children of Abraham were
the church and inheritance of God, save only because it pleased God to
disceuer them from other nations? For there was no worthiness to distinguish
them but the difference began at the love of God, wherewith he did freely love
Abraham.

Of this free love of God Moses does oftententimes put the Jews in mind: as
Deuteronomy. 4.7.10.14.32. and in other places: Deuteronomy. 4.34. and 7.8.
wherein god did set before us a mirror of his wonderful counsel: in that
finding no excellency in Abraham, an obscure person and miserable idolatrer,
he does notwithstanding prefer him before all the world. Furthermore this
election was common to all people, as was also circumcision, whereby god did
adopt to himself the seed of Abraham: but there was also a more hidden
election, whereby seuering to himself a few of many children of Abraham, he
did declare that not all who came of the seed of Abraham according to the
flesh, are reckoned in the spiritual stock.

He did drive out a people. Paul teaches that all those benefits which god
bestowed afterward upon the Jews, did proceed and flow from that free favor
which he did bear toward their fathers. For this was the cause that they were
delivered by the wonderful power of god, and brought by his hand into the
possession of the land of Canaan, after that he had driven out so many nations
for their sake. For it is no small matter for the land to be deprived of her
inhabitors, that she might receive strangers. This is the fountain and root
of all good things, whereunto Paul calls us, that god chose the fathers.
This was the reason and cause which moved god to so great patience, that he
would not cast off that rebellious people, who should otherwise have destroyed
themselves a thousand times with their own wickedness. Therefore where the
scripture makes mention that their sins were pardoned, it says, that god
remembered his covenant. He says that they were exalted, though they were
strangers, that they may remember how worthy and gorgeous their deliverance
was.

18 He suffered their manners. The compounde verb has greater force and grace
in the greek, whereby the mercifulness of god is expressed, in suffering the
people whom he knew to be stubborn and disobedient. And Paul gives us to
understand again, that the election of god was the cause, that his goodness
did strive with the wickedness of the people. Notwithstanding we must note
that god did so take pity upon his elect people, whiles that he will continue
firm in his purpose, that he did notwithstanding sharply punish the
rebellious and wicked. He spared the people in deed, so that he did not quite
destroy them, as he might by good right, but he found also means, Isai.
10.22.
that their wickedness might not remain unpunished. And so that of Isaias was
fulfilled, If the multitude shall be as the sand of the sea, the remnant shall be
saved.

20 He gave them judges. Under this name the scripture comprehends rulers and
governors, and here is another testimony of the infinite goodness of god
toward the Jews, in that he pardoned so many back slidings in the^. For it is
likely that Paul handled those things more at large which Luke gathers
briefly. And we know what was the estate of the people, during all that time,
seeing that through untamed wa^tonnes they did ever now and then shake off the
yoke. They were often punished with most grievous plagues, yet so soon as they
were once humbled, God delivered them from the tyranny of their enemies: So
that he saved the body thereof alive amidst many deaths, four whole ages and
one half. And hereby it appears how unworthy they were of the favor of God
which they did despice and reject so often, unless the constancy of the
election had gotten the victory. For how is it that God is never wearied, but
that he keeps promise with those who are truce breakers an hundredth times,
save only because turning his eyes toward his Christ, he has not suffered
his covenant grounded in him to decay or perish.

21 Afterward they desired. And this change was all one as if they would quite
and manifestly overthrow the government which he had appointed, 1. Sa. 8.5.7.
whereof God himself complains in Samuel. But the stabilitie of the election
saved them from being punished as such madness did deserve: yea the wicked
and unlawful desire of the people, was to God a new and incredible occasion
to erect the kingdom whence Christ should afterward come. For how is it that
the scepter came to the tribe of Judah, save only because the people were
desirous to have a king? And assuredly the people dealt wickedly, but God who
knows how to use evil things well, 1. Sa. 15.28.
turned that offense into safety. Whereas Saul was thrown down from the
kingdom, it served to reprove the fault of the people, but immediately when
the kingdom is established, David's family, Genesis 49.10.
the prophecy of Jacob was verified.

22 I have found David my servant. This title was not so much cited in praise
of the person, as that Paul might make the Jews more atte^tiue to receive
Christ. For the Lord does testify that his mind was thoroughly set upon David
for no light cause, but he commends in him some singular thing, and by
extolling him so highly, his intent is to lift up the minds of the faithful
unto Christ in his person. Psalm. 89.21.
The place is taken out of the fourscore and ninth Psalm. Only Paul puts
in that which is not there to be found, that David was the son of Isai, which
amplifieth the grace of God. For, seeing that Isai was a breeder of cattle, it
was a wonderful work of God, to take the least of his sons from the
sheepefoldes, and to place him in the throne of the kingdom. By the word
found, God means that he had gotten such a man as he would. Not that David
had brought to pass by his own travel and industry, that he should meet
God, being such a one, but the phrase is taken from the common custom of men.
But the question is, Seeing that David sell to grievously, how God gives
testimony of his continual obedience. We may answer two ways, for God had
respect rather unto the continual course of his life, then unto every of his
particular actions: secondly, he did thus set him forth, not so much for his
own merit as for his Christ's sake. Assuredly he had deserved by one wicked
fact eternal destruction for him and his, and so much as in him laid, the way
of the blessing of God was shut up, that there might nothing but vipers seed
come of Bersabe. But that so filthy a fact, 2. Sam, 11.2
in the death of Vrias, turns to a contrary end by the wonderful counsel of
God, because Solomon is borne and comes of that unlooked for wedlock which
was full of treachery, and finally polluted with many spots. And though David
sinned grievously, yet because he followed God all the course of his life, he
is ptaysed without exception, that he showed himself obedient to God in all
things. Though (as I have said before) the spirit carries us unto a farther
thing, Mat. 22.42. and 15.22.
yea the common calling of all the faithful in Christ the head is here
depainted out to us,

23 According to promise. This clause does also prove that which I have
already said elsewhere, that in sending Christ, the Lord had respect only unto
his own faithfulness and goodness. For he sent him because he had promised
so to do. And as the promise does testify that salvation was free, so it
does also purchase no small credit to the Gospel: because it appears by
this that Christ came not at a sudden, of whom there was never any thing
spoken: but that he who was promised from the beginning, was now given in his
time. But the promises which Luke here touches by the way, are famous and well
known. And they were so common among the Jews, that they called Christ
commonly, by no other name, but the son of David. He says that Jesus was
raised up to Israel, because though salvation belong to all the whole world,
Romans 15.8.
yet was he first a minister of circumcision to fulfill the promises made to
the fathers. He translateth the Hebrew name Jesus into soter in Greek. So that
he uttered one thing twice: and yet here is no superfluous repetition: because
he meant to declare that Christ is in deed and does perform that which the
name given him by God by the voice of the Angel, does import.

24 After that John had preached before the face of his entrance, the baptism
of repentance to all the people of Israel:

25 And when John fulfilled his course, he said: Whom do ye think me to be?
I am not, But behold, he comes after me, whose shoe latchets I am not
worthy to loose.

26 Men and brethren, children of the generation of Abraham, and those who
among you fear God, to you is the word of this salvation sent.

24 We know what office John had, to wit, to prepare the way of the Lord.
Therefore Paul brings in his testimony, that he may prove to the Jews,
that he preached no false Christ, but the true Christ of God, whom that most
famous forerunner had before commended: not that man's testimony is sufficient
to prove so weighty a matter: but there was another respect to be had to John,
whom all men almost did think to be a prophet of God. Therefore hence comes
the authority of the testimony, that a crier sent from heaven, and no private
man, speaks of Christ. And Paul recites two things summarilie concerning
John, that he taught the baptism of repentance before Christ his coming:
Secondly, that casting from him of his own accord the title and honor of the
Messiah, he submitted himself to Christ.

The baptism of repentance. Baptism brought in contrary to the rite and
custom of the law was a token of great alteration. For it was unlawful to
renew any thing before Christ's coming. The Jews had in deed in the law
their baptismes or washinges which were also exercises of repentance, but John
was the author of new and strange baptism, or rather the minister, who put
them in hope of the restoring long looked for and desired. When he calls it
the baptism of repentance, he does not exclude remission of sins, but he
speaks according to the circumstance of the place, because this baptism was
a preparation unto the faith of Christ. And we must note the phrase, that he
preached baptism: Whereby we are taught, that the sacraments are then rightly
administered, when doctrine is joined with the visible figure. For the mouth of
the baptiser must not be dumb: because the sign is vain without doctrine.

25 When John fulfilled his course. The second member of the testimony, that
when John drew near to the end of his course, he sent his disciples to
Christ. For he had fashioned the^ before with the rudimente of baptism, and
then he sent them to Christ (as they say) from hand to hand. And this
interrogatio^, Whom do ye think me to be? is not a question of one that
doubts. For John reproves and chideth the Jews, because they did falsely
give to him the honor of the Messiah, though it may be read in one text, I am
not he whom you take me to be: yet the other reading is more usual, as it has
also greater force to refute the error. Furthermore, his testimony does
deserve greater credit, in that he does willingly refuse the honor offered
him (which he might have taken to himself not without commendation) and does
submit himself to another. There cannot assuredly be any suspicion of ambition,
or of seeking after honor here, which may discredit his words.

Behold he comes. That is, he is about to come: the Hebrew phrase which is
common enough even in the new testament, whereas he confesses that he is
unworthy to loose the latchets of Christ's shoes: It is a prouerbiall figure,
whereby he abaseth himself so much as he can, least his greatness darken
Christ his glory: for he meant to do that faithfully which was given him in
charge, that Christ alone might have the pre-eminence. Therefore he says: that
how great soever he be, yet he is nothing in respect of Christ. For though God
feruants have their dignity: yet being compared to Christ, they must all be as
nothing, that he alone may excel: as we see all stars vanish away, that they
may give place to the brightness of the Sun.

26 Men and brethren. Paul does again prick forward the Jews to embrace
Christ. For this ought to have raised no small study and attentiveness in
their minds, when as they saw their salvation handled, and that the message of
salvation was appointed properly for them. He calls them children of Abraham,
not only for honors sake, but that they may know that they be heirs of
eternal life, and he speaks them so fair, that it might not grieve them to
depart from the Scribes and priests whom they worshipped: because they must
needs receive Christ: Furthermore we must remember that which I said before:
though the gate of the kingdom of heaven were set open to the Gentiles, yet
were not the Jews thrown down from their estate, but were counted the first
begotten in Gods family. Therefore is it that he says, that salvation was sent
to them, because they were first in order: yet because the carnal kindred was of
it self of no great importance, and the ungodliness of many brake out, Paul
speaks specially unto the true worshippers of God, signifying, that word^s
were but vain, unless the fear of God reign in their hearts, which may
receive them, and receiving them, may foster them. We must note this title of
the Gospel, that it is called the word of salvation. Wherefore their hardness
must needs be great whom it does not allure with the sweetness that is in it.
2. Cor. 3.16.
But though it be such naturally, yet is it made accidentally the savor of
death unto death, to the reprobate.

27 For those which dwelt in Jerusalem, and their rulers, seeing that they
knew him not, neither the voices of the prophets which are read every Sabbath
day: when they had condemned him, they fulfilled them.

28 And when they had found no cause of death in him, they desired Pilat that
he would crucify him.

29 And after that they had, fulfilled all things which were written of him,
when they had taken him down from the tree, they put him in a tomb.

30 But God raised him up from the dead.

31 Who appeared many days to those which went up with him from Galilee to
Jerusalem who are his witnesses to the people.

27 He does wisely and in due time prevent an offense which might have been a
great hinderance to their faith. For Jerusalem was Gods sanctuary, the kings
seat, the fountain of truth, and the light of all the whole world, but Christ
was put to death there. Furthermore, nothing could seem more absurd to look
too, then to receive him, who was cast out of the temple of God: and to seek
the doctrine of salvation any where else, then there whence God himself had
testified it should come. Moreover by believing in Christ they seemed to make a
departure from the church. And therefore this one objection was strong enough to
refute al Paul his sermon, why do thou force upon us under color of Gods
covenant, a man whom the principal part of the holy people condemned? This
objection does Paul answer, least it hinder the course of the Gospel. And not
that only, but he tu^neth it also to the contrary part. For seeing that the
author of life was despiced and rejected at Jerusalem, Paul exhorts the men
of Antioch, at least those who among them feared God, that they receive him so
much the more joyfully. For this does the casual word declare: as if he
should have said, seeing that Jerusalem knew not her good, it behooves you to
be the more awaked and inflamed, least the same unthankfulness and
frowardness be found in you.

But he uses another reason to remove the offense, to wit, that their
ungodliness was so far from diminishing any whit of Christ his divine
excellency, that it ought rather to serve to prove and establishe the same.
For whereby does Christ better appear, then because all that was fulfilled in
him which had been foretold in the Law and prophets? Luke 24.25.26.
Furthermore, what got the enemies of Christ, save only that in him shined the
plain truth of the scripture? It must needs be that Christ should be
rejected of the chief: for it was so foretold, The stone which the builders
refused, Psalm. 118.22
has God made the head of the corner. Christ must needs have been condemned
among the wicked, that he might acquit us before god: it was expedient that
sins should be laid upon him, that he might make satisfaction for the same:
that he should be offered upon the cross, that the shadowish sacrifices of the
law might cease. For even the scripture contained these things. Isa. 53. Dan.
9. Isai. 53.4.5. Dan. 9.26.
Therefore the more violently the captains of the people sought to extinguishe
Christ, they did in very deed prove him to be Christ, and the Lord did
wonderfully deceive them, so that their obstinate impiety does more edify
the faith of the godly, then destroy it. Of the same sort are almost all
offenses which lead away weak and inconstant souls from Christ. For if they
would thoroughly ponder the whole process of the work of God, there should be
matter of confirmation, where they faint. Therefore it comes to pass for the
most part that we be troubled with offenses and stumbling blocks, because
whiles we behold those things which belong to Christ with poreblind eyes, we
imagine that to be black which is white. And we see how far Paul is from
dissimulation, and how freely he professes the truth of the matter, that
Christ was hated not only of the common sort, but also of the chief
chieftaines, and that he was not hissed at by a few, but oppressed by the
wicked conspiracy of all the people. That was hard and hateful at the first
conflict, but Paul opposes a more strong engine, that God used them against
their wills as a touch stone whereby he might try his son. Seeing that the
Gospel stands in the same state at this day, let us not be ashamed with Paul
to confess, that the proud princes of the world, and those who bear the
greatest sway in the church, are the deadly enemies of Christ, seeing that does
rather turn to Christ's praise then reproach. For by this means is the
scripture fulfilled.

Seeing they knew him not. Though deliberate malice did enforce the rulers to
oppress Christ, yet does Paul truly impute it to ignorance, because otherwise
they would never have crucified the Lord of glory. 1. Cor. 2. 1. Cor. 28. 2
Cor. 3.15.
For the malice of the wicked is like to raging madness, and in seeing it does
not see. Undoubtedly, we ned not doubt of this that they were deprived of a
sound mind and the light of the Spirit, who were not afraid to fight against
God to their own destruction. Again he hitteth them in the teeth with
ignorance of the scripture. And least any should object that he speaks of
some dark and unknown matter: he adds also, that he does speak of no other
prophesies then of those which are read every Sabbath day, as if he should say,
that the oracles of scripture are most plain and known to the most ignorant,
and yet they knew the^ not. Thus does Paul teach, how monstrous their unbelief
was, that he may make the hearers loath it. And by this example are we taught
that although the Lord appear to us by the scripture, yet all men have not
eyes. After that, also the blockishnesse of the nation waxed more gross: as
Paul says elsewhere, that there is a veil put before their face, that they
cannot see Moses when he is present. In the mean season we must note that we
are recalled to the scripture, least the authority of great men deceive us,
neither is there any cause why any man inue^ting to himself a prejudice
according to the wicked meaning of other men, should think that he is
acquitted. For Paul exhorts the men of Antioth to judge out of the scripture
against the visured governors of the church. For, for this cause is it given,
that it may be read: and reading is not appointed in vain by the Lord, but
that al godly men may thereby profit, and judge what is right.

This they fulfilled. Act. 3.23. Act. 4.28.
So that we see that not only creatures void of understanding, but even the
very Devil and also the wicked are subject to the power of God: that he may
execute by them that which with himself he has decreed. The same had we in the
third and fourth chapters, that when the enemies of Christ did most of all
rage to destroy him, yet could they not obtain their purpose: but rather they
brought that to pass with their own hands, which God had in his counsel
determined: which thing makes not a little for commendation of Gods truth:
because he is not only of sufficient power to perform those things which he
has promised: but also those who go about to bring his counsels to naught,
do their endeavor to establish them, though it be against their will. For how
should not the truth of God stand which the chiefest enemies are enforced to
fulfill. Yet wisdom is necessary here, least we ioin God and Satan together.
For the Jews are not therefore excusable because they fulfilled the
scriptures: because we must consider their wicked will, and not the event which
they did not look for: yea which ought to be counted a miracle. If we look
into their work by it self, it is quite contrary to God. But as god does in
the Sun and other planets by wonderful cunning temper contrary motions, and
such as strive among them selves: so he directs the peruers endeavors of the
wicked by his secret power unto another end then they thought upon and did
desire, least they should do any thing but that which he would. They in deed,
as touching themselves do contrary to his will: but it falls out according to
the will of God after an incomprehensible manner. Forasmuch as this course is
contrary to nature, no marvel if the wisdom of the flesh see it not. Therefore
it must be discerned with the eye of faith, or rather it must be reverenced:
and those dogs who bark against it, must be despised with their wantonness.

28 When as they found no cause of death. It was very appertinent to the matter
that they should know that Christ was put to death giltlesse, For we could not
have bin justified by his death, if he had suffered death for his own evil
deeds. Therefore it was requisite that he should be giltlesse, that his
death might be a satisfaction for the sins of the world. And undoubtedly I
think that Paul did plainly declare, that Pilat condemned Christ, not
according to the office of a judge, but that he consented that he should be put
to death, after that he was overcome with the ungodly requests of the people:
and also that the Jews were driven by lust, and not enforced by reason to
desire Christ's death. For it stood him upon to terrify the hearers, that they
might not couple themselves to so wicked a fact. But Luke does now in few
words set down after his common custom, those things which Paul did then
more at large declare.

29 When they had fulfilled all things. To wit, which it pleased God should be
done by them. For they did so handle Christ, that there was nothing of the
prophesies of the scripture left unfulfilled. By this means is the stumbling
block (which the understanding of the flesh conceiueth by reason of the
ignominy of the cross) taken away, that the son of god was not laid open to
the furious fury of the wicked: but he obeyed his fathers decree. Mat. 27.57.
Furthermore it does also in scripture appear, what co^ditio^ was appointed for
him in times past. Whereas he says that Christ was buried by the same which
had slain him: it seems contrary to the history of the Gospel: but it may
be that Luke did take the word buried indefinitely. And if it please you to
refer it unto the same it shall be Synecdoche. For he was buried with Pilat
his leave, and at the appointment and pleasure of the priests, there were
watchmen set to watch the grave. Therefore though Joseph and Nicodemus did
bury Christ: that is ascribed improperly and yet not absurdly to the Jews:
because it is not Paul's drift in this place to commend the good deed, but to
prove Christ his resurrection: because God took him out of the grave whom his
enemies had shut up there. Therefore he gives us to understand that the
body of Christ was not taken thence privily or by stealth, but that it was
laid in a place both famous and known to the adversaries, and so
consequently, that even they were set to watch it, and yet for all this it was
not found: Whence we may gather the certainty of the resurrection.

30 God has raised him up. The death of Christ was the salvation of the godly,
yet joined with the resurrection: therefore does Paul stand longer upon this
second point. For he should never have persuaded his hearers that they were
to seek salvation in Christ's death, unless the power of Almighty GOD had
appeared in raising Christ from death.

31 After that he has said that Christ came out of the grave, which was beset
with the hired ministers of the adversaries: he adds now that he appeared
to many of the disciples, which bare faithful witness to the people. And he
calls them witnesses either in respect of their office: Acts. 1.8.
because they were chosen for this purpose, as we have already said in the first
chapter: or else declaring simply, that they professed openly and freely that
which they knew concerning Christ. Whereupon it follows that the matter
was made known openly at Jerusalem. And the proof was not so light, because
in the fearful power of the enemies, who were ready and bent to resist, and
did omit nothing, there were notwithstanding such as did openly affirm that
Christ rose again, and were also such as saw that thing with their eyes: for if
there had bin any refutation in readiness, the Scribes would not have
neglected it.

32 And we preach to you glad tidinges that the promise made to the fathers,

33 Has God fulfilled to their children: having raised up Jesus, as it is
written in the second Psalm, Thou art my son this day have I begotten thee.

34 And in that he has raised him up from the dead, not to return hereafter to
corruption, he has said thus, I will give you the holy things of David.

35 Therefore he says also in another place: Thou shall not suffer thine holy
one to see corruption.

36 David in deed when he had served his time, by the counsel of God he fell
on sleep: and was laid unto his fathers, and saw corruption.

37 But he whom God raised saw no corruption.

32 We preach to you glad tidings. He does now challenge to himself the
office and honor of an Apostle, that he may be heard as a lawful minister of
God. And he says the sum of the Embassage enjoined him, is, that that is
revealed and given in their time which was promised in times past. And in few
words does he comprehend many and great matters. First, he gives them to
understand that he brings in nothing which is new or contrary to the law
and prophets, but that he did reveal the fulfilling of that doctrine which
they themselves did confess and were persuaded to have been delivered by God.
Whereupon it follows that they cannot refuse that which he offers them,
but they shall break the covenant made with the fathers by God, so much as in
them shall lie: secondly, he commends the faithfulness of God, because it
does now in very deed appear, that there was nothing promised in times past
unadvisedly or in vain: but he does chiefly extol the greatness of the grace
given at length in Christ. For we must note the comparison between them and
the fathers, when he says, that they had gotten that which was promised to
the fathers. For the more liberally the grace of God is powered out upon them,
the more filthy shall their unthankfulness be, if they shall despice or
loath that inestimable good thing. For what else were this, but to cast down at
their feet a treasure even reached out to them that they might take hold
thereof, and so consequently laid in their lap, the hope whereof was
reverently embraced by the father when it was showed them a far off, and
which they did foster during their whole life? But some man may ask this
question concerning those who lived under the law, whether even they were not
made partakers of the promises? I answer, that there is such a society of the
same grace among us which does not hinder the long distance. But this was Paul
his meaning, that their faith stood as it were in doubt, until Christ
appeared, in whom all the promises of God are Yea and Amen: 2. Cor. 1.19.20.
as he teaches, 2. Cor. 1. Therefore we be the heirs of the same kingdom of
heaven, and partakers of the same spiritual good things, which God bestows
upon his children: also God gave to them some taste of his love in this life, as
we taste him now. But Christ who is the substance of all good things and of
eternal life, was only promised to them but he is given to us: and they
desired him as being far off, we enjoy him being present.

33 To their children, namely to us. It is certain that Paul speaks of
natural children, who had their beginning of the holy fathers, which we must
therefore note, because certain brainsicke men drawing all things unto
allegories, dream that there is no respect to be had in this place of kindred,
but only of faith. And with such an invention they make the holy covenant of
God of none effect, where it is said, I will be thy God, and the God of thy
seed. It is faith (say they) alone, which makes us the children of Abraham.
Genesis 17.7.
But I say on the other side, that, even those who are borne the children of
Abraham according to the flesh, are also counted the spiritual children of
God, unless they grow out of kind through unbelief. For the boughs be
naturally holy, because they spring from an holy root, Romans 11.16.
until they become profane through their own fault. And assuredly it is Paul
his drifte, to allure the Jews unto Christ, and that he may do this, they
must be distinguished from the common sort by some privilege, and yet it
follows not thereuppon (which these knaves do odiously object) that the
gtace of God is tied to the carnal seed. Because though the promise of life
came by inheritance to the posterity of Abraham: yet many were deprived by
their unbelief. Therefore faith is the cause that of a great multitude, only a
few are counted children. And that is the double election whereof I spoke
before. The one common to all the whole nation alike: because the first
adoption of God contains the whole family of Abraham. The other which is
restrained unto the secret counsel of god: and is at length established by
faith, that it may be confirmed to men. Therefore Paul does well and truly
affirm that that was performed to the Jews, which god had promised to the
fathers. For it was promised to them also, as Zacharias says in his song, The
oath which he swear to our father Abraham that he would give himself for us,
etc. And yet the worthiness of that nation does not hinder but that the grace
of Christ may also spread it self throughout the whole world: because the
first begotten has the first degree of honor, so that he does notwithstanding
leave the second place to his brethren. For in that after the old people were
cast off, the possession of the church was left empty for strangers, it began
to be a new occasion of gathering the church of the Gentiles, but and if that
people had stood in the faieth, the Gentiles had been joined into the common
society of honor.

After that he had raised Christ. The word raised, in my judgment reaches
farther, the^ it does where it is shortly after repeated. For he does not only
say that Christ rose from the dead, but that he was appointed of god, and as it
were brought to light by the hand of god, that he might fulfill the office of
the Messiah, as the scripture teaches every where, that kings and Prophets are
raised up. For the word anastesai, is sometimes taken in this sense: And this
reason moves me thus to think, because God by sending his son into the
world, did fulfill his promise made to his servants in times past, by the
effect it self.

Like as in the second Psalm. Though the Greek books agree in the number,
yet we must not pass over that which Erasmus says, that many of the old
writers read the first Psalm. And it may be that Luke wrote so. For that which
at this day is counted the second Psalm, might have bin called the first not
without reason, seeing that it is likely that the first Psalm was added in
steed of a Proeme by the Scribes and Priests, by whose industry the Psalms
were gathered into one body. For the name of the author is not set to it, and
it does only exhort to meditate upon the Law of God. But there is no great
weight in that matter. For this is the chiefest thing, that we know how
properly and how well Paul applies the testimony taken out of the Psalm unto
the matter which he has in hand. We do not deny that David when he saw that
he was on every side assailed by his enemies, and that they were of greater
power and might, than that he was able to resist them, does set against them
Gods aid, who he knew was the author of his kingdom and Reign. But
forasmuch as he was a figure of the true Messiah, we know that those things
were shadowed in his person, which do appertain wholly and perfectly to the
Messiah alone. And the text it self does prove sufficiently, that there is not
only a simple and bare thanksgiving contained there, agreeable to David's
kingdom, but it is a higher prophecy. For it is well known that David did in
his life scarce taste of the hundredth part of the glory which is spoken of in
this place, concerning which we have spoken more at large Chapter 4. Now let us
look nigher into the words, kings are in deed called sons of God. Psalm.
82.6. But seeing that God does intend to prefer David before all other kings,
and to exempt him out of the number of them: this title of honor is given to
him principally above all other: not because so great honor rests in his
person, because by this means he should pass the Angels, as it is in the
Epist. to the Heb. 1. cha. Therefore he is thus gorgeously set out in respect of
Christ, whose image he was, that God does not take him for one of the common,
sort, or for some one of a great multitude, but he does as it were acknowledge
him to his only begotten son. The proof follows, Because God did beget
him, when he established the kingdom in his hand. For that was not done by
man's industry, but God showed from heaven the invincible power of his hand,
whereby it might plainly appear that he reigned according to Gods counsel.
Therefore this Begetting by him mentioned, must be referred unto the
understanding or knowledge of men: to wit, because it was then openly known
that he was begotten of God, when as he was set upon the throne of the kingdom
wonderfully, contrary to the hope of all men, and did by the heavenly power of
the Spirit break infinite conspiracies: because he could not reign, until he
had brought all nations round about him in subjection, as if a certain world
were subdued. Now let us come unto Christ. He came not into the world without
testimony, whereby he did prove that he was the son of God. For his glory did
appear, as became the only begotten son of god, as it is written John. 1.14.
and he says euerywhere that he has God for the witness and maintainer of
this honor. Therefore God begat Christ, when he gave him certain marks,
whereby he might be known to be his true and lively image and son. And yet
this does not let, but that Christ is the wisdom, begotten of the eternal
father before time, but that is the secreat generation: and now David declares
that it was revealed to men: so that the relation is as we have said, unto men
and not unto God: because that which was hidden in the heart of God, was made
known to me^. And it is a very fine figure, because Christ his divinity was
no less declared and established, then if he had bin begotten of God before
the eyes of men. I know that Augustine his deep sight does please some, that
by to day is meant perpetuity. But when as the spirit of God himself is his
own interpreter, and whereas he does expound that by the mouth of Paul which
he had said by David, we must not invent any other sense. And forasmuch (as the
same Paul does witness) that Christ was declared to be the son of god in power,
when he rose from the dead, we gather that this was the principal token of
celestial excellency, and that the father did then bring him truly to light,
that the world might know that he was begotten of him. Therefore though God
began to raise Christ when he came into the world, yet his raising was then as
it were perfect and full: because whereas he was humbled before, having taken
as it were the form of a servant, he did then appear to be the conqueror of
death and the Lord of life, so that he wanted nothing of that majesty which was
meet for the son of god, and that for the only begotten son.

34 That he should not return. He adds now the other member, that Christ was
once raised from death that he may live for ever, as Paul teaches Romans 6.10.
Romans 6.10.
He dies no more, neither shall death have dominion over him any more: because
he lives to God. For the hope conceived of Christ his resurrection should be
slender and cold, if he were yet subject to destruction or to any change.
Therefore he is said to be entered into the kingdom of God, that he may also
give to his, eternal felicity, living for ever. For because Christ rose rather
for our sake then for himself, the perpetuity of life which the father has
given him, reaches unto us all, and is ours. Notwithstanding the place of Isay
which is here cited, seems to make but a little for proof of Christ his
immortality, I will give you the holy things of David. But it is not so. For
seeing Isaias speaks of the redemption promised to David, Isai. 55.3.
and affirms that the same shall be firm and stable, we do well gather by
this, the immortal kingdom of Christ wherein the eternity of salvation is
grounded. And Paul followed the Greek interpreters, when he put Holy things,
for mercies. Chessed, which signifies meek, merciful and gentle, is wont by
the Grecians to be translated Holy. Therefore they translated (...) of David,
the holy things of David, whereas the Prophet means rather the grace
promised to David. But Paul granted this to the ignorant and weak, who were
better acquainted with the Greek reading, especially for as much as the force
of the testimony consists in another point. For this is Paul his meaning in
sum, If the grace be eternal which God says he will give in his son,
the life of his son must be eternal, and not subject to corruption. For we
must hold this rule, that all the promises of God are in Christ, yea and Amen:
2. Cor. 1.20
and that therefore they can not be of any force unless he do quicken them.

35 Thou shall not suffer thy holy one. This place was likewise cited by Peter
in the first sermon set down by Luke in the second Chapt. where I expounded
the same: therefore let the readers repair thither. Acts. 2.27.
Only I will touch this briefly, that David puts two Hebrew words for the
grave, as he uses repetitions commonly, the former whereof is derived of
desiring or lusting, because the grave deuoureth all things as an insatiable
gulf: and the other of corruption: according to this etymology David's meaning
is faithfully expressed in Greek. For the quality of the grave is noted, when
as it receives the corpse, and does as it were swallow it up, that it may rot
there, and may at length perish when it is consumed. Paul affirms that that
belongs to Christ alone, that he was free and saved from corruption. For
though his body was laid in grave, corruption had notwithstanding no title to
it, seeing that it laid there whole as in a bed until the day of the
resurrection.

37 When David had served his time. Least any man should think that that place
entreats of David, Paul shows briefly, that this agrees not to David in
all points, whose corpse was rotten in the grave. Therefore it remains, that
because this was a privilege belonging to Christ alone, that David Prophesied
of him in Spirit. Nevertheless we must note the proportion between the members
and the head: for as the truth of this prophecy was found whole and perfect in
Christ alone as in the head: so it takes place in all the members according to
the measure and order of every man. And for as much as Christ rose to this
end that he may fashion and make our base body like to his glorious body:
upon this condition do the godly go down into the pit, Phil. 3.21.
that rottennes may not consume their bodies. Therefore according to the hope
of the resurrection to come, David says by good right that he shall not see
corruption: for that ought not altogether to be counted corruption, for which
there is a better restoring prepared: for the bodies of the faithful corrupt
to this end, that they may put on blessed incorruption in their time. Yet this
is no let, but that the estate of the head and members may be far unlike, and
that we may follow the son of God a far off and lasily. Now we see that
both things are true and fitly said, that David and the rest of the faithful
in as much as they shall be like to their head, shall not see corruption, and
yet the son of God alone shall be free from corruption wholly. We must note
the phrase when he says that David served his age, or the men of his time.

The old interpreter distinguishes it otherwise, and certain Greek copies
agree thereto: to wit, that David served the will of God in his time. Which
reading though it be to be allowed, yet it does not cause me to mislike the
other. For it is neither superfluous nor cold, that he slept by the will of God
or the counsel of God: because the meaning thereof is, that God in the death of
David did not forget that prophecy: as if he should say that the body of
David laid in the grave not without the counsel or purpose of God, until it
should rise again, that the effect of the prophecy might be extended unto
Christ. If no man mislike that which I say, we are taught heerby to what end
men live in the world, to wit, that one man may help another. For every man
does not live neither is born for himself, but mankind is knit together with
an holy knot. Therefore unless we be disposed to overthrow the laws of
nature, let us remember that we must not live for our selves, but for our
neighbors. But here may a question be asked whether we ought not also to care
for our posterity? I answer that the ministry of the godly is also
profitable for the posterity: as we see that David being dead does profit us
more at this day, then a great part of those which live with us: but Paul
means simply, that the faithful during their whole life employ themselves
and their offices to help their neighbors, and that death is unto the^ as a
goal because they have made an end then, when the Lord calls them out of the
world. The sum is, that we must have respect first to our time, that we may
serve our brethren with whom, and among whom we lead our life: and secondly we
must do our endeavor that the fruit of our ministry may redound unto our
posterity. Seeing that God prescribes his servants this law, their rashness
cannot be excused, who faigne that the dead pray for us, and that they do no
less serve the Church, then whiles they lived.

By the counsel of God he fell on sleep. Paul might have said simply, that
David died: he adds by the counsel of God, that we may know that that was
not fulfilled in the person of the Prophet, which is read in the psalm.
Notwithstanding we are taught that the bond of life and death is in like sort
appointed for us by God, as it is. Psa. 90.3. Thou sendest out men and make
them to pass over, again thou say: Come again ye children of men. Yea Plato
sets down this very eloquently, that it is meet that men pass out of the
world not without the leave and pleasure of God, by whose hand they are placed
there as a standing for a time. And for this cause when he speaks of David's
death, he makes mention of the counsel of God, that we may know that
corruption did not happen to him by chance, as if God had forgotten his
promise: but that it came to pass by Gods providence, that the faithful might
know that the prophecy was to be referred unto another. To sleep and to be
laid unto the Fathers, are forms of speeches so well known and so common, that
they need no exposition.

38 Therefore be it known unto you, that through him remission of sins is
promised to you.

39 And from all things from which ye could not be justified in the Law of
Moses.

40 Whosoever believes in this man, is justified.

41 Therefore take heed, least that befall you, which is said in the Prophets:

42 Behold ye despicers, and wonder and vanish away: because I do a work in
your days, a work which ye shall not believe, if a man tell it you.

38 Therefore be it known unto you. After that he has declared the mean
whereby salvation is purchased through Christ, he does now entreat of his
office and power. And this is the principal point, to know what good things we
have by the coming of Christ, and what we are to hope for at his hands. And
although Luke sets down in a word that Paul preached of the benefits of
Christ: yet there is no cause why any man should doubt but that so great
matters were handled weightily and only according as their dignity did
require. By this word Be it known unto you, Paul means that nothing should
hinder them from knowing such an excellent and plain matter save only sloth:
and that therefore it was an absurd thing that those benifits of God should be
hidden from the faithful, which were offered by Christ. For he was sent with
the shrill preaching of the Gospel, which our faith ought to hear, that it may
enter into the sure possession of his good things. For we must know what he is
that we may enjoy him truly. Forgiveness of sins is set first, whereby God
does reconcile us unto himself. That which God will have preached to all his
people, does he show to be necessary for all men. For Paul speaks not to
one or two, but to all the Jews which were at Antioch. Therefore we must first
mark that we be all enemies to God through sins 2. Chapt. Collos. Whereupon
it follows that we are all excluded from the kingdom of God, and are given
over to eternal death, until God receive us to favor by the free
forgiveness of sins. We must also note this, that God does pardon to us our
sins, and that he is reconciled through the Mediator, because like as without
him there is no satisfaction, so neither is there any pardon or forgiveness of
guiltines. These be principles of our faith which are not learned in the
schools of the Philosophers, That all mankind is condemned, and drowned in
sin, that there is in us no righteousness which is able to reconcile us to
God: that the only hope of salvation rests in his mercy, whiles that he
does freely forgive us: and that those remain under the gilt, which fly not
unto Christ, and seek not forgiveness in his death.

And from all things. He does secreatly prevent that which might seem contrary
to the former doctrine. For look how many ceremonies of the Law there were, so
many exercises were there to obtain remission of sins. Therefore the Jews
might readily object, if he alone do reconcile God to us, our sins being
done away, to what end serve so many washings and sacrifices, which we have
hitherto used according to the prescript of the Law? Therefore least the
Ceremonies of the Law hinder the Jews, Paul teaches that Christ does that,
which they were not able to do. Not that Paul spoke so briefly and
compendiously (for he did not hope that the Jews would at the first come unto
Christ, casting from them suddenly the affiance which they had in the
righteousness of the Law) but it was sufficient for Luke briefly to collect
the sum of those things which he then taught in just and due order. His meaning
is, that the Mediator took away that let from the Jews, wherein they did
stick. The ceremonial Law ought in deed to have bin a schoolmaster to lead
them by the hand unto Christ: all rites commanded by God were helps to help and
further their faith: but as men use preposterously to corrupt the holy
ordinances of God, they stopped the way before themselves by their ceremonies,
and they shut the gate of faith, that they could not come to Christ. They
thought they had righteousness in sacrifices, that by washings was gotten true
cleannes, that god was pleased with them so soon as they had ended their
external pomp: in sum, forsaking the body they laid hold upon vain shadows.
God did in deed appoint no unprofitable or vain thing in the Law. Wherefore
ceremonies were sure and undoubted testimonies of remission of sins. For God
did not lie in these words, Let the sinner do sacrifice and his iniquity
shall be purged. But as Christ was the end of the Law, and the heavenly pattern
of the tabernacle, so the force and effect of all Ceremonies did depend upon
him. Whereby it is proved that they were vain shadows, when he was set aside.
Now we see Paul's drift and purpose, to wit, that he meant to draw away the
Jews from the false and perverse confidence which they reposed in the Law,
least being puffed up, they should think that they had no need of Christ's
help, Heb. 8.5.
or least they should seek only external felicity in him.

Be justified in the Law. This place does plainly show, what the word Justify
does import in all other places where it is used: to wit, to be delivered and
acquitted. There was mention made of remission of sins, Paul affirms that
there is no other way whereby we can obtain the same but the grace of Christ.
Least any man should object that there be remedies to be found in the law: he
answers that there was in the^ no force. Therefore the sense is plain, That
they cannot be justified from sin in the law, because the rites of the law were
neither just nor lawful prices to remove giltines, they were nothing worth of
themselves to deserve righteousness, neither were they sufficient recompenses to
appease God. Certainly it cannot be denied (but wickedly) that that
justification annexed to remission of sins, is as it were the means and way to
obtain the same. For what else does Paul go about, but to co^firm that saying,
that our sins are forgiven us through the benefit of Christ: by answering
contrary objections? And he proves it, because neither satisfactions, neither
all the rites of the law can justify us from sin. Therefore he is justified by
Christ, who is freely losed from the gilt and judgment of eternal death, to
which he was subject. This is the righteousness of faith, whiles that God
counts us just, by not imputing our sins. This only propriety of the word is
sufficient to refute the cauils of the Papists, who hold that we are not
justified by pardon or by free accepting, but by habit and infused
righteousness? Therefore let us not suffer them to rent in pieces unworthily and
wickedly this text of Paul, when he says that we are justified from all
things, that we may be assured of remission of sins. And now we must know that
the law of Moses is set against Christ, as the principal mean to obtain
righteousness, if there had bin any besides Christ, Paul disputes in deed of
ceremonies: but we must note that there was nothing omitted in the^, which
might serve to purge sins and to appease god. Yet there was not one of all the
ceremonies of the law, which did not make man gilty, as a new handwriting: as
Paul teaches Col. 2. What then? Assuredly God meant to testify, that men are
justified by the death of his son alone, Col. 2.14.
because he made him sin for us, who did no sin, that we might have
righteousness in in him. 2. Cor. 5. Whereupon it follows that whatsoever
satisfactions are invented by men, they tend to rob Christ of his honor. In the
Law and in Christ, signify as much as by the Law and by Christ, according to
the Hebrew phrase.

From all things. By this member is refuted the wicked invention of the
Papists, who teach that only original sin, and actual sins committed before
baptism are clearly and freely forgiven by Christ, and that other are redeemed
by satisfactions. But Paul says plainly that we are justified from sins by
Christ throughout the whole course of our life. For we must remember that the
ceremonies of the Law were committed to the Jews, that as well the profit as the
use thereof might flourish daily in the church, that is that the Jews might in
deed understand, that their sacrifices and washings were not continually
iterated in vain. If the truth and substance of them be found in Christ, it
follows that there is no other satisfaction or sacrifice to put away sins,
but his death, otherwise there should be no analogy or proportion between
this and the old figures. The Papists call us back unto repentance and the
Keys: as if the ceremonies of the Law were not exercises to think upon
repentance, and as if the power of the Keys were not annexed unto them. But
the faith of the Godly was helped by such helps, that they might fly unto the
grace of the Mediator alone. Therefore let this remain sure and certain, that
the righteousness which we have in Christ is not for one day or a moment, but it
is everlasting, as the sacrifice of his death does daily reconcile us to God.

39 Every one that believes. Paul shows how men obtain the righteousness of
Christ: to wit, when they receive it by faith, and that which faith does
obtain, is not obtained by any merits of works. Wherefore Paul his opinion is
plain, That we are justified by faith alone: which notwithstanding the Papists
oppugn and strive against no less obstinatly than bitterly. Nevertheless it
is requisite that we know what the word believe does import, which is made
unsavory to the papists through ignorance. There be also other benefits of
Christ which we reap by faith. For when he regenerateth us by his Spirit, he
restores in us the image of god, and after that the old man is crucified, he
fashioneth us unto newnes of life. But it was enough for Luke to express this
one thing, how men return into favor with God, from whom they be estraunged
by sin, because we may easily pass thence unto the residue.

40 Take heed that that come not upon you. Because he had to do with
stiffenecked men, or at least there were diverse in the company which were
stiffenecked, (as if he meant with a hammer to soften their stubbernes) he
adds a chiding unto doctrine. For if the Jews had bin obedient, and willing
to obey, undoubtedly he would have sought sweetly to allure them unto Christ.
But it was either their sluggishnes or else their wilfulness that caused him
to be more angry. Like as all those must be cited to appear before Gods
judgment seat, who contemn the grace of Christ, and the horrible judgment of
eternal death must be denounced to those. He signifies in deed that there is
yet place left for repentance, when he wills them to take heed: yet
notwithstanding he tells them therewithal, that unless they beware in time,
the horrible vengeance of God is not far off.

Abac. 1.5.
Which is said in the Prophets. The place which is cited is taken out of the
first Chapter of Abacuk, but because all prophecies were gathered into one
volume or body, Paul says that it is written in the prophets.

41 And yet he does not recite word for word the words of Abacuk, which go
thus, Behold the Gentiles, and see and wonder, and be astonished: because a work
shall be done in your days, which no man shall believe when it shall be told
him. Paul says, Behold ye despicers, that the Jews may know that the
vengeance which was once brought upon their fathers, is common to the despicers
of the word: as if he should say, God does at this day make no less account
of his word, the contempt whereof he did once punish so sharply. Therefore the
Prophet his denunciation does appertain unto all ages: so that the despicers
cannot hope, that they can escape that vengeance now, whereof others have
tasted. They boasted of the Temple, they vanted that they were the people of
God, being puffed up with wicked pride they despised all threatenings. Therefore
Paul puts them in mind, of that, which God by his Prophets does threaten to
the despicers.

A work in your days. The sense is, Those who refuse to believe the word of
God, shall feale his hand, that being at length with plagues convict, they may
know that he spoke in earnest. It is a common proverb, that experience is the
mistress of fools. So the Lord does in deed punish the wicked, that being
tamed with miseries, they may begin to confess his power. And what manner
punishment does he denounce? Because you (says he) do not believe my word, I
will show an example among you which no man will believe: by which words he
means that he will punish them, so that the world shall be afraid to see it.
For as rebellion against God is a detestable monster, so it is no marvel if of
it self it beget monsters of punishments. Therefore we must beware least if we
cease to give credence to gods word, we feel his hand more mighty than all our
senses do comprehend, and even unto the astonying of all the whole world, and
least even we be made astonyed through fear, Abacuk prophecieth of the
destruction brought upon them by the Chaldeans: but the punishment whereby God
revenged the contempt of his Gospel was more cruel. Therefore let us accustom
our selves to fear God and reverently embrace his word, least some such
things befall us.

42 And when the Jews were gone out of the Synagogue, the Gentiles exhorted
them that they would speak to them words between the Sabaoths.

43 And when the Synagogue was dissolved, many of the Jews and religious
proselytes followed Paul and Barnabas, who talking with them, persuaded them to
continue in the grace of God.

44 And when the Sabbath was come, almost all the whole city was gathered to
hear the word of God.

45 And when the Jews saw the multitudes, they were filled with indignation,
and spoke against those things, which were spoken by Paul, contrarying them and
blaspheming them.

42 When they were gone out of the Synagogue. It may be also read, out of the
Synagogue of the Jews and peradventure more fitly. For it is likely that they
were gone out before the multitude was dispersed: and that is gathered out of
the text, because Luke says shortly after, that when the Synagogue was
dissolved certain of the Jews did follow Paul and Barnabas. Therefore the sense
is, that Paul and Barnabas went out, whiles the Jews were yet assembled, and
that they were then requested by the Gentiles to take some pains with them in
the mean season.

43 And that afterward there came certain of the Jews and proselytes to Paul,
being both desirous to learn, and also that they might make profession of
their faith. When as the old interpreter and Erasmus did translate it the
Sabbath following, they did not understand Luke his meaning. For seeing that he
entreats in this place of the Gentiles, I do not think that they choose a
Sabbath wherein they may hear Paul and Barnabas. For that day was appointed
for the Jews, but the Gentiles had no less opportunity upon other days:
therefore to what end should they defer their desire and prayers until the
eight day? yea rather they covet to hear Paul whiles he is at leisure, and is
not occupied in teaching the Jews. So that the Lord does not suffer the^ to be
idle until the Sabbath come, offering unto the^ matter in the Gentiles, wherein
they may exercise themselves.

42 They would speak words. I have translated it as it is in Luke, though the
article ta, may be taken for ta auta, as in some other places. Then the sense
should be, That they were requested, that they would that week entreat of the
same things before the gentiles. Furthermore whiles that the gentiles do snatch
gredily at every first opportunity, the Jews being quiet, do neglect that which
is set before them: save only that certain of them join themselves to Paul and
Barnabas. Luke expresses the proselytes by name: who seeing they had embraced
the doctrine of the Law and did worship the God of Israel, were not puffed up
with that pride, which hindered the Jews who made boast of their long stock and
race.

43 Who speaking. The sense is doubtful. For it may be referred unto the Jews
and Proselytes, that they exhorted Paul and Barnabas that they should not
faint, but stand stoutly in the grace of God. Neither did they want occasion:
for they saw cumbates prepared for them: and that therefore they had need of
invincible constancy to suffer and abide the brunts of the contrary faction.
Wherefore that might very well agree, that being enflamed with a desire to go
forward, they sought to encourage Paul and Barnabas to hold on. If you refer
it unto Paul and Barnabas, the sense shall be this: that they did not reject
those which came, but they entertained them courteously and gently, and
confirmed and strengthened them, that they might persist in the grace which they
had received. And this word Grace, does first comprehend the faith of the
Gospel, secondly those good things which come thence to us: or that I may
speak more briefly, the calling into the hope of eternal salvation.

44 And when the Sabbath came. The great assembly of people does prove that
Paul and Barnabas loytered not between the Sabaoths, and that they did not
take pains with the Gentiles in vain. For the studies and desires of the
people had beeene so prepared, that they all desired to know the whole matter
more surely: which they did hope would be, if it should be discussed among the
Jews. For we may guess that though they were allured with some sweet taste,
yet were they not as yet thoroughly persuaded to receive the doctrine of the
Gospel without doubting, but that they came into the Synagogue in a quandarie
between hope and desire.

45 They were filled. It is no new matter, for the rage of the wicked to be
inflamed when the light of the Gospel is set somewhat nearer: especially when
they see the increase of sound doctrine, they break out with greater violence
to resist. And it is to be doubted whether Luke do mean by the word zeal, that
they were moved with a certain wicked indignation, to set themselves against
Paul and Barnabas: as ambition is the mother as well of envy as of all
contention: or he take zeal for indignation conceived thereupon: because they
did lament that the Gentiles were made equal with the people of God. For they
counted this a very unmeet thing, that the holy treasure of doctrine, which
was the proper inheritance of the children, should lie as it were at all men's
feet.

Gainesaying and blaspheming. They were so sore set upon resisting, that they
break out at length into Blasphemy. And Satan does for the most part drive the
wicked unto such madness, that when they be overcome with reasons and
discouraged, they wax harder and harder, and wittingly and willingly they spue
out at length blasphemies against God and the truth. Wherefore we must take so
much the more heed, when as the truth of God is plainly set before us, least
if we be carried away with a desire to speak against it, we fall streightway
into that steep down.

46 And when Paul and Barnabas had taken Or boldness.
liberty, they said: It was necessary that we should first preach the word of
God to you. And after that ye reject it, and do not judge your selves worthy of
eternal life, behold we turn unto the Gentiles.

47 For thus has the Lord commanded us: I have made thee a light of the
gentiles: that thou may be the salvation unto the end of the earth.

48 And when the Gentiles heard, they reioysed, and glorified the word of the
Lord: and they believed, as many as were ordained unto eternal life.

49 And the word of the Lord was spread abroad thoughout the whole Region.

50 And the Jews stirred certain religious and honest women, and the chief
men of the City, and they raised persecution against Paul and Barnabas, and
expelled them out of their coasts.

51 And they shaked off the dust of their feet against them, and came to
Iconium.

52 And the Disciples were filled with joy and with the holy Ghost.

46 When they had taken liberty. Luke shows that the servant of Christ
were so far from being discouraged with the stubbernesse of the enemies, that
they began therefore to inueigh against them a fresh more freely. For though
they had sharply pricked them, yet they did yet spare them a little: but now
when they see Christ obstinatly rejected by them, they excommunicate them and
deprive them of the kingdom of God. And by this example are we taught, that
we must not use extreme severity, save only against those who are quite past
hope. And the more bold the reprobate are to oppress the truth, the more
courage ought we to take to our selves. For the servants of God must be armed
with invincible constancy of the Spirit, that they may never give place to the
devil nor to his ministers: as the Lord commands Jeremy to encounter with
the reprobate with a face of iron.

It was necessary. He accuses them of unthankfulness, because whereas they
were chosen by God out of all people, that Christ might offer himself unto
them, they refuse so great a benefit maliciously. And in the former member he
sets down the degree of honor and excellency whereunto God had exalted
them: afterward follows the vpbraiding, because they do willingly cast from
them so great grace: whereupon he concludes that it is now time that the
gospel be translated unto the gentiles. In that he says that it was meet that
it should first be preached to them, it does properly appertain unto the time
of Christ his kingdom. For under the Law before Christ was given, the Jews
were not only the first, but alone. Exo. 19.5.6
Therefore was it that Moses called them a priestly kingdom, and the peculiar
people of God. But the adoption of God rested then with them alone upon this
condition (the Gentiles being omitted) that they should be preferred as yet
before the gentiles by the coming of Christ. For though Christ reconciled the
world to his father, yet they were former in order, who were already near unto
god, and of his family. Therefore that was the most lawful order, Acts. 1.8.
Romans 1.16.
that the Apostles should gather the Church first of the Jews, afterward of
the Gentiles, as we saw in the first Chapter and in other places, so that the
fellowship of the Gentiles did not take from the Jews the right of the first
begotten, but that they were always the chief in the Church of God. In this
respect Paul says, that the righteousness of God is made manifest in the
Gospel, first to the Jews than to the Grecians.

Such greatness of grace which God vouchsafed to bestow upon them, does
exaggerate and increase the greatness of their sin, whiles that they reject that
which is so mercifully offered unto the^. Therefore he adds that they give
judgment of themselves, that they are unworthy of eternal life. For seeing that
the rejecting of the gospel is the denial of the righteousness of God, we need
no other judge to condemn the unbelievers.

And after that ye reject. Paul seems to reason unfitly. For first it was not
of necessity that the Jews should be excluded that the Gentiles might be
admitted unto the hope of salvation: secondly this was more convenient, that
after the Jews had embraced the gospel, they should grant the second place to
the Gentiles. And Paul speaks in like sort as if they could not grow together
into one body: and as if the Gospel could not come unto the Gentiles, unless
it were rejected of the Jews. And now was he not ordained to be the Apostle
of the Gentiles before he found such stubbernes in the Jews? I answer that
there is great force in the word we are turned. For his meaning is that he is
now turned away from the Jews, that he may addict and give over himself wholly
to the Gentiles. If they had remained in their degree, such turning had not
followed, but he should have drawn the gentiles also with a continual course,
after that the Jews were received into the bosom, and he should have embraced
the^ both together. Now forasmuch as the Jews turn their backs, and withdraw
themselves from his ministry, he cannot look upon the^ and the gentiles both
at once. Therefore taking his leave of them, he is enforced to translate his
care unto the Gentiles. Therefore unless the Jews had estranged themselves
from the Church, the calling of the gentiles should have bin such as is by the
Prophets described: In that day shall seven strangers take hold of the cloak
of a man that is a Jew, and shall say we will walk with you, because God is with
you. But now the gentiles are called after a new and accidental manner: because
when the Jews were rejected they entered into the empty possession. They ought
to have bin gathered unto the Jews, but after that they fell away and were
driven out, they came in their place. So that their death was the life of the
gentiles, and the natural branches being cut off, the wild Olives were
ingraffed into the holy root: until god do at length restore them also unto
life being ingraffed into their former root, that the Israel of God being
gathered together from all quarters may be saved.

47 As he has commanded. The place is taken out of Isaias, where
notwithstanding god does rather speak unto his son then unto the Apostles. But
we must note that many things which the scripture attributes to Christ, do
appertain unto his ministers: I say many things, not al things. For there be
certain titles proper to the person of Christ, wherewith to adorn the
ministers were wicked sacrilege. Christ is called our righteousness: because he
was the only purging sacrifice, and has reconciled the father to us by his
death, and did rise again afterward, that having ouercom death, he might
purchase for us eternal life. Therefore the whole substance of our salvation is
in Christ's person, but inasmuch as he works by his ministers, by resigning
to them his office, he does also impart with them his titles. Of this sort is
the preaching of the Gospel. He alone was appointed by the father to be our
teacher: but he has put in his place Pastors and Doctors, who speak as it
were out of his mouth. So that the authority remains wholly to him, and he
is nevertheless heard in his ministers. Therefore Paul does fitly apply unto
himself the testimony of Isaias, where he entreats of the preaching of the
Gospel.

I have made thee a light. It should seem that he speaks in that place of
such a calling of the Gentiles as does not carry with it the casting off of the
old people. For God does rather associate strangers unto the Jews who were
before of the household. It is but a small matter says he, that thou be my
minister in teaching Israel, because I have made thee a light to the Gentiles.
God does seem to begin his Church among the children of Abraham, and that done
to reach out his hand to the Gentiles, that they may both make one Church by
one consent of faith. But Paul does in such sort cite the prophecy, as if it
could not be fulfilled, unless the Jews had bin cast off. For he signifies
that the light of Christ was lighted to the gentiles, after that they were cast
into the darkness of death. I answer that this cannot be necessarily proved out
of the text, that Paul does affirm that the Gentiles could not have bin
illuminate before the light of the Jews had bin put out. For this may be the
sense, Forasmuch as you have deprived your selves of eternal life, there is no
cause why ye should think that the grace of God is profaned, if leaving you
we take care and charge of the Gentiles. For the Messiah is not given to you
alone, but he is appointed to be the savior of all the whole world, as it is
written, I have made thee etc. Although if you weigh the place of the Prophet
more thoroughly, you shall find the casting off of the old people included
therein. For God pronounces that he will be glorious and renowned in the
ministry of Christ, though Israel be not gathered together. He adds
afterward by way of exposition, that the power of Christ shall not be restrained
unto one people only, because his light shall shed abroad his beams unto the
farthest parts of the world, unto salvation. It seems that Paul notes this
occasion of calling the Gentiles: namely because seeing he found no matter to
exercise himself in among the Jews, he gave himself wholly to the Gentiles.
We must note this by the way in the words of the Prophet, that salvation is put
after light, according to that saying of Christ, This is eternal life, to know
thee the true God, etc. For if the knowledge of God alone, John 17.3.
bring to us salvation, it is likewise the only resurrection from destruction
of eternal death, for us to be illuminate into the faith of Christ, after that
we be delivered from the darkness of ignorance.

48 And when the Gentiles heard. The matter of the Gentiles joy was this, when
they heard, that they were not called to salvation at a sudden as if this had
not bin decreed before by God, but that that is now at length fulfilled, which
was foretold many years before. For doublesse it was no small confirmation of
their faith, because salvation was promised to the^ by the coming of Christ,
whereby it did also come to pass, that they did with more earnest desire and
reverence embrace the Gospel. To glorify the word of God may be expounded two
manner of ways, either that they did confess that it was true which was
prophesied by Isaias, or that they embraced the doctrine which was set before
them, with faith. Assuredly there is a full subscription noted our, because
they dispute or doubt no longer so soon as they saw that Paul had gotten the
victory. And surely we do then honor the word of God as we ought, when we
submit our selves obedientlie to it by faith: as it cannot be more grievously
blasphemed then when men refuse to believe it. And here we see how the Gentiles
were not hindered by that stubbernesse which they saw in the Jews, from giving
their name to Christ. With like courage must we despise and tread underfoot the
pride of the wicked, when by their obstinacy they study to stop the way
before us.

And they believed. This is an exposition of the member next going before, at
least in my judgment. For Luke shows what manner glory they gave to the
word of God. And here we must note the restraint when he says that they
believed, but not al in general, but those who were ordained unto life. And we
need not doubt but that Luk calls those tetagmenous, who were chosen by the
free adoption of God. For it is a ridiculous cauil to refer this unto the
affection of those which believed, as if those received the gospel, whose minds
were well disposed. For this ordeining must be understood of the eternal
counsel of God alone. Neither does Luke say that they were ordained unto
faith, but unto life: because the Lord does predestinate his unto the
inheritance of eternal life. And this place reaches that faith depends upon
Gods election. And assuredly seeing that all the whole raze of mankind is blind
and stubborn, those diseases stick fast in our nature until they be redressed
by the grace of the spirit, and that redressing flows from the fountain of
election alone. For in that of two which hear the same doctrine together, the
one shows himself apt to be taught, the other continues in his obstinacy,
it is not therefore because they differ by nature: but because God does lighten
the former, and does not vouchsafe the other the like grace. We are in deed
made the children of God by faith: as faith, as touching us, is the gate and
the first beginning of salvation: but there is a higher respect of God. For he
does not begin to choose us after that we believe: but he seals his adoption
which was hidden, in our hearts, by the gift of faith, that it may be manifest
and sure. For if this be proper to the children of God alone, to be his
disciples: it follows that it does not apperrein unto all the children of Adam
in general. No marvel therefore, if al do not receive the Gospel: because
though our heaue^lie father inuiteth al men unto the faith by the external
voice of man, yet does he not call effectually by his spirit any, save those
whom he has determined to save. Now if Gods election whereby he ordeineth us
unto life be the cause of faith and salvation, there remains nothing for
worthiness or merits. Therefore let us hold and mark that which Luke says:
That those were ordained before unto life, who being ingrafted into the body
of Christ by faith, do receive the earnest and pledge of their adoption in
Christ. Whence we do also gather, what force the preaching of the Gospel has
of it self. For it does not find faith in men, save only because God does
call those inwardly whom he has chosen, and because he draws those who were
his own before, unto Christ. John. 6.25. John. 6.37.
Also Luke teaches in the same words, that it cannot be that any of the
elect should perish. For he says not that one or a few of the elect did
believe, but so many as were elect. For though Gods election be unknown to
us, until we perceive it by faith: yet is it not doubtful or in suspense in his
secret counsel: because he commends all those whom he counts his to the
safeguard and tuition of his son, who will continue a faithful keeper even unto
the end. Both members are necessary to be known. When Election is placed
above faith, there is no cause why men should challenge to themselves any thing
in any part of their salvation. For if faith wherein consists salvation,
which is unto us a witness of the free adoption of God, which coupleth us to
Christ, and makes his life ours, whereby we possess God with his
righteousness, and finally whereby we receive the grace of sanctification, be
grounded without us, in the eternal counsel of God: what good things so ever
we have, we must needs acknowledge that we have received it of the grace of
God, which does prevent us of it own accord. Again because many entangle
themselves in doubtful and thornie imaginations, whiles that they seek for
their salvation in the hidden counsel of God, let us learn that the election
of God is therefore approved by faith, that our minds may be turned unto
Christ, as unto the pledge of Election, and that they may seek no other
certainty, John. 3.3^.
save that which is revealed to us in the Gospel: I say, let this seal suffice
us, that whosoever believes in the only begotten son of God, has eternal
life.

49 The word of the Lord was spread abroad. Luke does in this place declare
the proceeding of the Gospel. Wherein appears how true the parable of Christ
is, when he says that it is like to Leaven. We had before that there was
great concourse of people, so that the seed of true doctrine was sown
throughout the whole City: Luke says now that it was spredde farther: to
wit, throughout the whole country.

50 Nevertheless he declares that that was done not without great pains and
trouble. Therefore the beginning of the calling of the Gentiles was joyful and
prosperous, neither could Satan hinder the course of the grace of God: but in
the mean season, it stood Paul and Barnabas upon (whom God had brought forth
into the field,) to strive. And we must mark what Luke says, that the
religious and honest women together with the chief men of the City were
enforced to persecute the servants of Christ. For this was no small offense
to the rude, and those who were as yet scarce begotten in Christ, when they
saw all those men and women which were of any accounte or estimation set
against Christ, and also whatsoever was praise woorthye according to men. A
great multitude of men received Christ, but it was but the multitude and the
ofscouringes of men. Against them were set the chief men of the City,
who with their pomp did easily oppress the base and obscure multitude. That
might also cause doctrine to be suspected, yea to be hated, in that godly and
honest matrons to look to, were enemies to it. If wicked, ungodly, and
mischievous men should have issued out of their Tauerns and dens: if companies
of whores should break out of their brothilhouse, it should be no reproach to
the gospel: yea rather the dignity thereof should thereby appear more
plainly: but now what may the weak think with themselves, but that the
doctrine which has such adversaries is not of God? Therefore it was expedient
that not only the faithful who were as yet weak should be confirmed by the
Lord, least their faith should fail, but also that the hand should be reached
out to Paul and Barnabas, least being discouraged they should leave of. And by
this example the lord meant to teach us, that we must valiantly resist such
lets, and that we must beware least the vain visures of virtue do blind our
eyes, so, that we cannot see the glory of Christ which shines in the Gospel.
For it is certain that all that virtue and honesty which is in men, is mere
hypocrisy, where they set themselves against Christ. Though it may be that
those who are rashly carried against Christ for a time may afterward repent.
Notwithstanding we must thus think with our selves, that whatsoever fair show
of holiness those bear, who resist the Gospel: they are neither indewed with the
perfect fear of God, neither are they any thing else but a vain shadow, how
greatly soever they boast of their virtue. Neither is it without cause that
Christ has this title given him, Luke 2.35.
that he reuealeth the cogitations of many hearts.

Religious. And what manner religion could that be, where there was no reverence
of the word of God? We must note that there be four kinds of men: as there be
few which worship God syncerely and from the heart, so there be few who openly
profess the manifest and gross contempt of him. These be two sorts. And the
more part is neither quite without religion, neither is it altogether void of
the common worship of God: but yet notwithstanding whiles they do coldly and as
it were ouerfields play with God, if they be thoroughly examined, they be but
profane. Like as at this day the ungodliness of many is after a sort shrouded
under ceremonies, and the feigned profession of the worship of God. So that in
all ages there have bin certain worshipers of God who have worshipped him like
stage players, whose holiness did wholly consist in gestures and vain pomps.
In Paul's time, even as at this day, a peculiar study of godliness was to be
found in a few: whose religion though it were impure, and their heart feigned,
deceitful, and double: yet are they counted after a sort religious in respect
of their zeal. But hereby appears what account we may make of bare religion,
which drives headlong through unadvised heat the professors thereof, to resist
the kingdom of god, and to oppress his glory. Furthermore it is to be thought
that though these matrons had not altogether given their name to Iudaisme,
neither had they bin nousled in the doctrine of the Law, yet were they half
Iewisses and that was the cause that they did so willingly take upon them the
defense of the nation. For thus are women led about captive being laden with
sins as Paul witnesses.

51 When they had shaken off the dust of their feet. Mat. 10.14, Luke 9.5. and
10.11.
We may also gather even by the commandment of Christ, that this was a token
of cursing among the Jews. For it is not to be thought that Christ meant to
have his use an unknown sign: forasmuch as it was his purpose to terrify the
gross and professed contemners of his doctrine. Furthermore, he meant by this
means to declare that God does so detest the wicked, that we must take great
heed, that we have no fellowship with them: least we be infected with their
uncleanness. All the wicked are said in deed to pollute the ground whereon
they tread: but the Lord did never command that any save only the conte^ners
of his word should be so rejected with such execration. If any adulterer, or
whoremonger, if any perjured person, if any drunkard were to be excommunicate,
this sign was not used. Therefore it appears how intolerable the contempt
of the word of God is in his sight: because when as he commands that the
dust of the feet be shaken off, it is as much as if he should pronounce, that
they are the bondslaues of Satan, men past hope, and worthy to be banished
from of the earth. Wherefore let this so great severity teach us to reverence
the Gospel. Also the ministers of the word are taught, with how great
feruentnesse of zeal they must maintain the majesty of the word, that they do
not coldly dissemble and wink at the contempt thereof.

52 The disciples were filled with joy. This member may be expounded two manner
of ways, that they were filled with joy and the Spirit, by hypallage thus,
with joy of the Spirit, or (which is al one) with spiritual joy: because there
is no quietness, peace, or joy of conscience, but it comes of the Spirit of
God, in which respect Paul says that the kingdom of God is righteousness,
peace, and joy in the Spirit, Romans 14.17.
or that the word Spirit, may contain under it other virtues and gifts. Yet
this pleases me better, that they were filled with joy: because the grace of
the holy Spirit reigned in them: which alone does so make us glad truly and
perfectly, that we are carried up above all the whole world. For we must
mark Luke his drift, that the faithful were so far from being troubled and
shaken with those stumbling blocks, how great soever they were, with the
reproach of their teachers, with the disquieting of the city, with terrors and
threatenings, also with fear and dangers hanging over their heads: that they
did with the loftiness of their faith despise valiantly the gorgeousness as
well of their feigned holiness as of their power. And assuredly if our faith
shall be well grounded in god, and shall be thorowlie rooted in his word, and
finally if it shall be well fortified with the aid of the Spirit as it ought,
it shall nourish peace and joy spiritual, in our minds though all the whole
world be on an vproare.

The end of the former book of the Commentaries upon the Acts of the Apostles.
THE LATTER BOOK OF THE Commentaries of M. John Calvin, upon the Acts of the
Apostles.
CHAP. XIIII.
1 AND it came to pass at Iconium, that they went "together into the Synagogue
of the Jews: Or at the same time.
and spoke so, that a great multitude both of Jews and Gentiles believed.

2 And the Jews which believed not, stirred, and with envy infected the
minds of the Gentiles against the brethren.

3 Therefore they were long time conversant there, behauing themselves boldly
in the Lord, who bare witness of the word of his grace, granting that signs
and wonders might be done by their hands.

4 And the multitude of the city was divided* and some stood with the Jews,
and some with the Apostles.

1 IN the chapter last going before Luke declared, how Paul and Barnabas took
in hand their embassage unto the Gentiles. Furthermore it might seem to be an
unprosperous and unlucky beginning, in that they were not only expelled out of
Antioch, but also enforced by the obstinate wickedness of certain to shake off
the dust from their feet. But though they had but short intertainment in one
place, yet do they not yield: because they consider that the Lord had called
them upon that condition, that they should do their duty though the whole world
and Satan, did say nay. Therefore we see that they came not only ready to
teach, but also armed to enter conflictes, that they might courageously
proceed in publishing the Gospel, even through the midst of cumbats. And
assuredly that which was once spoken to Jeremy, is common to all the prophets
and ministers of God, they shall fight against thee, Ier. 1.19.
but they shall not prevail. Now whither soever they fly, they carry with
them the same courage still: whereby it appears that they were not only
furnished for one combat, but even for continual warfare: which Luke does now
prosecute. He says first, that they came to Iconium, and there withal he
shows that they sought not there some haven, where they might rest quietly:
but they entered the Synagogue, as if they had suffered no hurt at all. I refer
the word Cata to auto, for as much as it signifies among the Grecians together,
or at the same time rather unto the Jews than unto Paul and Barnabas. Therefore
I interpret it thus, not that they went in both together, but that they
followed the multitude at the solemn and appointed time of the meeting, whence
we gather that they spoke not secretly with a few men, but in a great assembly
of people: whereby they declare their boldness and ready desire, they are so
far from fearing envy, or avoiding danger.

That a great multitude believed. As Luke did before show the power of the
Spirit in Paul and Barnabas: so now he commends another grace of God in that
prosperous success which they had, for one only sermon which they made, was
not without fruit, but it brought forth many children of god: as well of the
Jews as of the Gentiles. If one, or two, or a few, had believed they might
have thought that they sped well, but the Lord confirms the^ far better, when
as they gather such plentiful fruit of their doctrine even in a short time. For
they knew that so many hearts of men were converted to believe, not so much by
their voice, as by the power of the Spirit: whereby they might also assure
themselves, that they themselves were defended by the outstretched hand of God:
which did not a little in courage them.

2 And those Jews which believed not. Lo, they are persecuted now afresh, and
that by the Jews. For they were like firebrands to inflame the minds of the
Gentiles, For it is to be thought that the Gentiles could abide to hear the
gospel preached, unless they had bin incensed to resist by these fannes. I
interpret cacosai in this place, for to resist with a malicious affection, or
to enforce to do hurt, Under the name Brethren, Luke comprehends in my
judgment all the godly: to wit, that they were vexed and troubled whosoever
embraced the gospel, as if some pernicious sect had risen to spread discord, to
trouble the peace of the city, to shake the public state. Yet if any had
rather restrain it unto Paul and Barnabas, I am not greatly against him.

3 A long time. Luke declares here, that Paul and Barnabas did not depart the
city, so soon as they saw some set against them. For when he says, that
they behaved themselves boldly, he gives us an inckling that there was cause
of fear offered them. Whence we gather that they stood stoutly, and that
through rare constancy and courage they counted al dangers as nothing, until
they were compelled by violence to depart to an other place. This clause Epi
curio may be expounded diversely, either that they behaved themselves stoutly in
the Lords cause: or that they trusted to his grace, and were thereby encouraged.
I have followed that which was more common, that they behaved themselves freely
and boldly in the Lord, that is, being helped not by their own strength, but by
his grace. He shows immediately after, after what sort they were incoraged in
the Lord: to wit, because he approves the doctrine by signs and miracles. For
seeing that they knew thereby, that the Lord was present with them, and that his
hand was nigh to help them, they were worthily pricked forward to behave
themselves stoutly. But in noting one kind, he does not exclude other kinds.
For the Lord did lift them up unto boldness, and establish them in constancy
by other means. But it seems that Luke did speak of miracles expressly,
because the Lord showed in them his power openly before all the people.
Therefore Paul and Barnabas were not a little imboldened, when the Lord did so
deliver their doctrine from contempt. Furthermore, we must note this phrase,
that the Lord gave witness to the gospel in miracles, for it shows the true
use of miracles. This is indeed the first end, that they may show to us the
power and grace of God: but because we be wrong and peruers interpreters of
them, least they be drawn unto abuse and corruption, God does never suffer
them to be separated from his word. For if miracles were wrought at any time
without his word, first that was very seldom: secondly there came but small
fruit thereof. And God has wrought miracles for the most part, whereby the
world might know him not simply or in his bare majesty, but in his word. So
Luke says in this place that the Gospel was established by miracles, not that
some confused religion might possess the minds of men, but that Paul his
doctrine going before, they might be brought unto the pure worship of God:
whence we may easily gather, how foolishely the Papists deal, when as they
endeavor to lead away the world from the reverence of God and the gospel by
bare miracles. For we must hold that principle, that those miracles which came
from God at any time did never tend to any other end, but that the gospel
might have his perfect and full authority.

Now must we see whether the Gospel command us to call upon the dead: to burn
incense to idols: to translate unto fained Saints the grace of Christ: to take
in hand vowed pilgrimages: to invent profane worshippings, whereof there is no
mention made in the word of God. But there is nothing more contrary to the
Gospel, then that these superstitions should take place. Whereupon it
follows that the Papists do wickedly make engines of the shoares of the
gospel to oppugn it. To the same end tends that which Luke says, that the
Lord granted that by the hands of his servants miracles might be done: in
which words he teaches that those were only ministers, who obeyed God: and
that he was the author, who used their hand and industry. Wherefore in
speaking properly we cannot say that they were Paul and Barnabas his miracles:
but the miracles of God alone, who does so work by men, that he will not have
his glory darkened by their ministry. Furthermore, we must note the title of
the Gospel, which Luke puts in here, that it may be made to us more
amiable. For in calling it the word of grace, it has a most pleasant taste:
because salvation is offered to the world in it through Christ, and we must
understand the contrariety with the law, wherein only the curse is set before
us. Therefore let us remember that God speaks to us in the Gospel to this end,
that he may reconcile himself to us, and may testify that he is merciful to
us. Neither does this hinder that it is the savor of death unto death to the
reprobate: because they change not the nature thereof by their fault. Read
those things which we have spoken in the second Chapter touching signs and
wonders. 2. Cor. 2.16


4 The multitude was divided. The most troublesome part of the tragedy
follows now, for the city is divided into two parts: and at length Paul and
Barnabas (being enforced by the uproar of the people) depart unto an other
place. If it be demanded what was the original of the discord, assuredly it
flowed from the Gospel: to which notwithstanding there is nothing more
contrary then to cause discord. But the frowardness of men causes that the
gospel which ought to be the bond of unity is, (so soon as it comes abroad)
the occasion of tumults. Wherefore so soon as any scisme arises before we
condemn those who seem to be the authors, it behooves us wisely to consider
who ought to bear the blame. We hear here that one city was divided,
whereby some were brought unto Christ. The Spirit of God pronounces this to
the praise, and not to the shame of Paul and Barnabas. The same rule must we
observe at this day, least the Gospel be burdened with false envy, if it
bring not men together unto God, but the wicked rage against it. It is
assuredly a miserable matter to see division among men. But as the unity is
accursed which does separate us all from God: so it were better that a few
should depart an hundred times from all the whole world, and in the mean
season come in favor again with GOD, then that disagreeing with him
continually, they should have peace with the world.

5 And when there was an assault made of the Gentiles and Jews together with
their rulers, to do them violence, and to stone them:

9 When they knew the matter, they fled into cities of Lycaonia, to Lystra and
Derbe, and to the country lying nigh there about on every side:

7 And there they preached the Gospel:

8 And there sat a certain man at Lystra, impotent in his feet, who had bin
lame from his mothers womb, neither had he ever walked.

9 This man heard Paul speak: who beholding him, and seeing that he had faith
to be healed.

10 Said with a loud voice, Arise upright upon thy feet. And he lept up and
walked.

5 Mark how far forth the holy cha^pions of Christ did suffer. They give not
back when their enemies do only set themselves against the^: but when the
sedition waxes whot, and they be in danger of stoning: though they have many
favorers of their doctrine, they go no further: but remembering the saying of
Christ, wherein he warns the faithful in patience to possess their souls,
they avoid the fury of the enemy. And though they flie-least they throw
themselves headlong into death: yet their constancy in preaching the gospel,
does sufficiently declare that they feared not danger. For Luke says that
they preached the gospel in other places also. This is the right kind of fear
when the servants of Christ do not run wilfully into the hands of their
enemies, of them to be murdered, and yet they do not forslow their duty:
neither does fear hinder them from obeying God when he calls: and so
consequently they can afoord if need be to go even through death it self to do
their duty.

8 A certain man at Lystra. Luke teciteth one miracle, which we may think
was one of many: but there was mention made of it alone by reason of the
famous event. For we shall see by and by what happened. Luke reckons up the
circumstances, which do more plainly set forth the power of God, when he
says that the man did never walk, and that he was a creeple even from his
mothers womb, and that he was suddenly healed by the voice of Paul alone,
before the eyes of all men, and that his legs which were dead were made nimble,
so that he leapt up whithout making any stop.

9 He heard Paul speak. Hearing is set down first, that we may know that the
faith which Luke will commend by and by, was conceived of Paul his doctrine.
Therefore when he heard Paul, he hoped to be healed. But the question is,
whether this was promised to him specially: for God does not command us to
hope for every thing by and by, when he offers unto us eternal salvation in
the Gospel. I answer, that this was a singular and extraordinary motion of
the Spirit of God in the creeple, as it was on the other side in Paul, when he
knew his faith by beholding him only. It may be that many may receive the
Gospel: and yet they shall not be cured of those diseases wherewith they are
vexed. But forasmuch as God was determined to show a token of his grace in the
creeple, he prepared his mind before, and made him capable of this that should
come upon him. Wherefore we must not make this a common rule, because the
creeple believed that he should be healed, but it was a peculiar preparation to
receive the gift of healing. And this kind of faith is likewise particular,
which gives place to miracles, which many of Gods children do want, who are
notwithstanding endued with the Spirit of adoption.

Whom when Paul beheld steadfastly. We know how doubtful and how deceitful a
thing the countenance of man is, therefore there could no sure judgment be
given thereby of faith, which has God alone to be witness thereof: but as I
have alredie said, the creeples faith was reveled to Paul by the secret
inspiration of the Spirit: as he was to the Apopostles their only guide and
master to work miracles.

10 He said with a loud voice. Many old books, and those of great credit,
add, I say to thee in the name of Jesus Christ, and surely we see how careful
the Apostles were to magnify the name of Christ in all miracles: therefore I
think that that was expressed by Luke, and yet we can not find it commonly
now in the printed books. Whereas Luke says afterward that the lame man
leapt up, it serves not only for the commendation of gods power: but also such
readiness and willingness to obey, did testify that he was rightly prepared
by the Lord: so that he did already walk in mind, when as his feet were as
yet dead. Although his speed in rising made the power of God more manifest, to
which end also Paul exalted his voice, that the sudden change might the more
move the multitude.

11 Furthermore when the multitude had seen what Paul had done, they lifted up
their voice, saying in the speech of Lycaonia, Gods being made like to men are
come down to us.

12 And they called Barnabas Jupiter: and Paul Mercury, because he was the
captain of the speech.

13 And Jupiters priest, which was before their city, bringing Bulls and
crowns unto the gates, would have done sacrifice with the multitude.

11 Furthermore, the multitude. This history does abundantly testify how
ready and bent men are unto vanity. Paul uttered not that word abruptly,
arise: but he added it as it were a conclusion to the sermon made concerning
Christ. Yet the people ascribe the praise of the miracle unto their idols, as
if they had heard no word of Christ. In deed it is no such wonder, that the
barbarous men fell unto superstition, which they had learned from their
childhood, so soon as they saw the miracle. But this vice is too common every
where, and it is so bred in us, to be peruers and wrong interpreters of the
works of god. Hence com such gross dotings of superstitions in popery,
because catching rashly at miracles, they take no heed to doctrine. For which
cause we must take the better heed, and be the more sober, least we happen
with the sense of the flesh to corrupt (whereunto we are so bent) the power of
god, which shines and appears to us for our salvation. And no marvel if the
Lord would have only a few miracles wrought, and that for a short time: least
through the lust of men they should be drawn unto a far contrary end: because
it is unmeet that he should set his name to be mocked of the world: which must
needs be, when that which is proper to him is translated unto Idols, or the
unbelievers corrupt his works, to invent corrupt worshipping: while that
setting the word aside, they catch at every divine power which they feign.

Gods like to men. This was an opinion drawn from old fables, which
notwithstanding took the beginning of truth. The books of the poets are full
of these toys, that the gods were often seen upon earth in the likeness of
men: and yet we may well think that this came not of nothing: but rather that
profane men did turn that into fables, which the holy fathers taught in times
past concerning angels. And it may be that Satan, when he had men besotted, did
with diverse iuglings, delude the^. This is of a truth, whatsoever was gods,
whenever it went with the infidels; it was corrupt by their wicked
inuentio^s. The same must we likewise think of sacrifices, wherein God did
exercise his even from the beginning, that they might have external signs of
godliness and of the worship of God. And after that the unbelievers invented to
themselves strange gods, they abused the sacrifices unto their sacrilegious
worship. When the men of Lycaonia see unwonted power in the creeple that was
healed, they persuade themselves that it is a work of god: this is all well. But
it was evil done, in that they forge to themselves false gods in Paul and
Barnabas, according to the old error. For what is the cause that they prefer
Barnabas before Paul, save only because they follow the childish surmise
concerning Mercury the interpreter of the gods, in which they had been
nourished. By which example we are taught what a mischief it is to be
accustomed and acquainted with errors in youth: which can so hardly be rooted
out of the mind, that even through the works of God, whereby they ought to
have been redressed, they wax more hard.

13 Also Jupiters priest. Though Luke do not express with what affection he
was moved to be so diligent, yet it is to be thought, that, forasmuch as there
was great hope of most plentiful gain offered, he was moved with coueteousnes.
For he had great hope of gain in time to come, if it should be noised abroad,
that Jupiter appeared there. For this opinion would by and by have followed, that
Jupiter was more delited in the temple of Lystra then in any other. And so
soon as such superstition has once filled the minds of men, they spare no
cost to offer sacrifice. The world is in deed of it self inclined to this: but
then came the sacrificing priests, who are like fannes and bellows. And it is
not to be douted, but that the whole multitude was moved with ambition, to be
so desirous to offer sacrifice to Paul under the name of Jupiter, that their
city might be the more famous and noble. Hence has Satan so great liberty
to deceive, whiles that the sacrificing priests set nets to get gain, and the
people are delighted to have errors confirmed.

14 Furthermore, when the Apostles Barnabas and Paul had heard, renting their
garments, they ran in into the prease, crying:

15 And saying, Men, why do ye these things? We be also men subject to like
miseries as you are, preaching to you that you turn from those vain things
unto the living God, who has made heaven and earth, and the sea, and
whatsoever are in them.

16 Who in times past suffered all nations to walk in their own ways.

17 Though he left not him self without witness doing good, giving to us from
heaven rain and fruitful times, replenishing with food and gladness our
hearts.

18 And when they had thus said, they scarce appeased the multitude, that they
should do sacrifice to them.

14 When the Apostles had heard. In that Paul and Barnabas rent their garments
and leap into the midst of the multitude, it appears thereby how zealous
they were for the glory of God: being content only to speak to the people,
they trobled the preparation of the sacrifice so much as they are able. It
comes to pass sometimes that even hypocrites refuse excessive honor: but they
rather provoke the simple to give it them, with their feigned modesty. There
was no such thing in Paul and Barnabas. For they declared both by words and
also by all gesture of body, that they were so far from taking pleasure in
that worship which the men of Lystra gave unto them, that they did utterly
detest it. This is holy anger, wherewith the servants of God must be inflamed,
so often as they see his glory profaned and overthrown by the sacrileges of
men. And assuredly no man shall be able otherwise to serve God sincerely and
faithfully, unless he put on that affection of jealousy, whereof Paul speaks
in the second Epistle to the Corinthians, 2. Cor. 11.2.
that those men to whom the Lord has committed the charge of his church be no
less courageous and stout to defend the glory of their Lord, then a husband is
vigilant to defend his wives chastity. Therefore we must take good heed, that
we suffer not that honor to be given us, which may darke^ the glory of God:
but rather so sone as there appears any profaning of gods glory, let this
heat break out, whereof we have an example in Paul and Barnabas. And though the
teachers of the church ought especially to be endued with this zeal, yet there
is no one of the godly, which ought not to be sore displeased, when he sees
the worship of God polluted, or given to some other: because it is written of
all, The zeal of thine house has eaten me up, and the rebukes of them that
rebuked thee fell on me. Psalm. 69.10.
And if so be it holy men being yet compassed about with the flesh did so
greatly detest idolatry, how shall we think the^ to be affected now, when they
are stripped out of all the affections of the flesh? Whenas the world abuses
their names and persons unto superstition, it thinks it does them a great
pleasure: but it is greatly deceived. For they will stand up first against
their worshippers, and will in deed declare that they never make more account
of any thing, then that the worship of God might remain whole and sound to
him. Moreover, there can be no greater injury done to them, then when the
honor which is taken from God is given to them: which must needs be when any
divine thing is ascribed and given them. Whereas Luke says, that Paul and
Barnabas did rent their garments, it appears by other places of scripture,
that this rite and custom was used among the men of the East country, so
often as they would by external gesture express either great sorrow, or
detesting of any thing. When Luke calls Barnabas an apostle together with
Paul, he extends the signification of the word farther then unto the chief
order which Christ appointed in his Church: like as Paul makes Andronicus and
Iunias excellent among the Apostles. But if we should speak properly they
were Evangelists and not Apostles: unless peradventure because Barnabas was
made Paul his fellow in office, we place them both in like degree of office,
so may he be truly called an Apostle.

15 Men why do ye those things. They begin with a reprehension, as the matter
did require: that done, they show to what end they were sent. Afterward they
preach concerning the only God, and show that he was unknown to the world.
Lastly, that they may more strongly pluck out of their hearts the deceites and
sleights of the Devil, they teach that this ignorance was without excuse.
Therefore the first part of the sermon is a reprehension, wherein the men of
Lystra are condemned, for worshipping mortal men preposterously in steed of
God. Though the reason which they allege seems to be cold. For it were an
easy matter to gather thence, that it is not unlawful to worship those who
are delivered from humane miseries by death. By this means all the
superstitions of the Gentiles should stand untouched which were wont to count
none gods but those who were dead. With the same color also have the Papists
colored their idolatry, who worship rather the dead men's bones, stones and
wood, then living men in whose nose thrilles is breath. I answer that Paul
and Barnabas drew this argument from the matter which was now in hand, We be
miserable men: therefore you do falsely and filthily imagine us to be Gods, and
worship us as gods. If idolatry be handled generally, this shall be a perpetual
reason to condemn it, and shall alone be sufficient enough, that the perfect
and whole worship of godliness is due to god alone, and that therefore it is
profaned, so soon as it is in any point given to creatures, whether they be
angels, or men, or stars. But occasion shall oftentimes be offered, that many
things may be spoken against one kind of Idolatry, which do not appertain
unto another neither are agreeable to the same: and yet shall they be of no
small force for the matter which is in hand, as Paul and Barnabas, by
confessing that they be mortal men, subject to diverse calamities, had a fit
reason to reprove the fury and madness of the people.

We preach to you. An argument drawn from contraries. For here they show that
the end of their coming was quite contrary: to wit, that they might remove
superstitions, which had hitherto reigned. For it is all one as if they had
said, Does the miracle move you? Then give credence to our words. And the
sum of our embassage is, that al feined Godheads, wherewith the world has
hitherto been deceived, may be done away and perish. And this is a general
doctrine, whereby they do not only appease the present madness, but also
reprehend all manner superstitions, and whatsoever was contrary to, or
disagreeing with the rule of godliness. For without doubt they call all that
vain which men have invented to themselves of their own brain, And we must
mark this definition, that all religion is vain, which departs and
degenerateth from the pure and simple word of God. There is no express
mention made in deed of the word, because they spoke to the Gentiles. But
because God is no otherwise rightly worshipped, then according to his
appointment, it follows out of Paul his words, that so sone as me^ depart
from that worship which God has commanded and does allow, they are wearied
foolishly and vainly, with a vain and unprofitable labor. For that religion
wherein God has not the pre-eminence is nothing worth, nether has it any truth
or soundnes. And this was the cause, that sincere and perfect godliness was
never found, neither did it ever floorish in the more part of the world. For
they stood only about the removing of the old Idolatry: and the other thing
was in the mean season foreslowed, to bring men unto the true God alone, after
that they had forsaken Idols. They turned in deed the name of an Idol
sometimes, into the name of God: but under that color they did nevertheless
cherish the old errors, which they should have endeavored to redress. So the
priests of France begat the single life of great Cybele. Nuns came in place
of the vestall virgins. The church of al Saints succeeded Pantheo, or the
church of all Gods: against ceremonies were set Ceremonies not much unlike. At
length came in the multitude of gods, who they thought would be lawful and
tolerable if they had once decked them with the titles of Saints. Corruptions
are not by this means purged, neither are the stables both profane and full of
filth turned into the temple of God: but the name of God is mixed with profane
pollusions, and God himself is brought into a filthy stall. Wherefore let us
remember that the apostles did not only employ themselves to overthrow
Idolatry which had long time reigned in former ages: but did also take great
heed that pure religion might reign afterward, having put all corruptions to
flight.

Who has made heaven and earth. We know that the order of teaching does
require that we begin with things which are better known. Seeing that Paul and
Barnabas spoke to the Gentiles, they should have in vain assayed to bring them
unto Christ. Therefore it was expedient for them to begin with some other point,
which was not so far separate from common sense, that after that was confessed,
they might afterward pass over unto Christ. The minds of the men of Lystra
were possessed with that error, that there be more gods then one. Paul and
Barnabas show on the contrary, that there is but one Creator of the world.
After that, that feined number and multitude of the Gods was taken away, there
was passage now made unto the second member, that they might teach what that
god was, who was the Creator of heaven and earth. The case stands otherwise
at this day between us and the papists, they confess that there is but one
God, and they admit the scripture. Therefore it remains that we prove to the^
out of the scripture what God is, and after what sort he will be worshipped of
men.

16 In times past. Because the men of Lystra might object that that god was
unknown, hitherto Paul and Barnabas prevent them and say, that all men
wandered indeed in darkness, and that all mankind was stricken with
blindness, but that they deny that any prejudice must be made according to
the peruers ignorance of the world. These were two no small lets for the
unbelievers, long antiquity of time, and the consent almost of all nations.
Paul and Barnabas remove both in this place: If, say they, men have erred many
years, and if the world have wa^dered without reason and judgment, let not
therefore the truth of God when it appears be less precious to you. For
seeing that it is eternal and is not changed, it is an unmeet thing that the
long prescription of years should be set against it. They prove that there is
no more aid or patronage to be found in the number of men. There is no cause
(say they) why the conspiracy of all the whole world should keep you from
coming to the right way. Blindness has got the upper hand among all people:
but god does now appear and give light to you. Therefore your eyes must be
open, and you must not slumber and sleep in darkness, though all people have
been drowned therein hitherto.

Their ways. If he had only said that men were deceived until that time
through gods sufferance, we might easily gather thereby, that all men can do
nothing else but err, so long as they be not governed of god. Yet he speaks
far more plainly, when he calls errors the ways of men. For we are
plainly taught by this, what the wisdom and understanding of man's mind can
do in beholding and keeping the way of salvation. All people (says he) have
walked in their own ways, that is, they have wandered in darkness and death:
it is all one as if he should say that there is no sparkle of true reason in
all the whole world.

Therefore there is but one rule of true godliness, that is, that the faithful,
casting from the^ al confidence in their own wit, do submit themselves to god.
For the ways of me^ are now, as they were in times past: and the examples of
all times teach how miserably blind those men be, who have not the word of
God to give them light, though they think they can pass other men in
quickness of sight. Immediately after the Beginning of the world, the more
part fell away unto diverse superstitions and wicked worshippings: whence came
that? Save only because it pleased them to follow their own imaginations? When
it might have seemed that the world was purged with the flood, it fell again
streightway to the same vices. Therefore there is nothing more deadly then to
lean to our own wisdom. But Paul and Barnabas show no cause here why the
Lord suffered the world to err so long: and assuredly we must count the will
of god alone, the chiefest law of equity. God has always a good reason for
his works: but because it is oftentimes hid from us, it is our duty
reverently to wonder at his secret counsel: we must in deed confess, that
the world was worthy of such destruction: but there can no other reason be
brought why the Lord had mercy rather on one age then on another, save only
because it seemed good to him that it should be so. Therefore Paul calls
that time which was appointed of God for preaching the gospel, Gal. 4.4.
the time of fulness, least any other opportunity be sought And we must
remember that which we had in the first chapter, that it is not for us to know
the times and seasons, which the father has placed in his own power. So that
the cavil of the papists is refuted, who say that it cannot be that God
suffered his church to err so long. For whence I pray you came the Gentiles
but from the Ark of Noe, when there was a certain singular purity of the
church? Also the posterity of holy Sem together with others did degenerate.
Yea Israel the peculiar people of the Lord was also left for a long time. Genesis
9.9.
Wherefore it is no marvel, if God did punish the contempt of his word with the
same blindness under the reign of his son, as he did in times past.

17 Notwithstanding he did not suffer himself to be without witness. Paul and
Barnabas take from the Gentiles in this place the cloak of ignorance. For how
greatly soever men please themselves in their own inventions, being at length
convict of error, they fly unto this fortress, that they ought to bear no
blame: but that God was rather cruel, who did not vouchsafe so much as with one
hiss to call those back whom he saw perish. Paul and Barnabas cut off this
frivolous objection when they show that God lay hid in such sort, that he bare
witness of himself and his divinity. Notwithstanding we must see how these
two things can hang together: for if God bare witness of himself, he did not
suffer (so much as in him lay) the world to err. I answer, that this kind
of testimony whereof mention is made, was such, as that it made men without
excuse, and yet was it not sufficient to salvation. For that of the apostle is
true, that by faith it is understood that the worlds were ordained by the word
of God, Heb. 11.3.
but faith is not conceived by the bare beholding of the heaven and earth, but
by the hearing of the word. Whereupon it follows that men are brought by
the direction of the word alone unto that knowledge of Almighty GOD which
brings salvation. And yet this lets not but that they may be made without
excuse, even without the word, who though they be naturally deprived of light,
are blind notwithstanding through their own malice, as Paul teaches in the
first chapter to the Romans.

Giving rain and fruitful seasons. God has indeed revealed himself to all
mankind by his word since the beginning. But Paul and Barnabas show that there
was no age, on which God did not bestow benefits, which might testify, that
the world is governed by his government, and commandment: and because the
light of doctrine had been buried long time, therefore they say only, that God was
showed by natural arguments. And it is to be thought, that they did in such
sort set forth the magnificence and greatness of the works of God as became
them: but it was sufficient for Luke to touch the sums and chief points of
matters. Neither do I so understand it that they entreated subtly and after
the manner of the philosophers of the secrets of nature, for they spoke unto an
unlearned multitude: therefore it behooved them to set that before them plainly,
which the most ignorant did know. Notwithstanding they take this principle,
that in the order of nature there is a certain and evident manifestation of
god: in that the earth is watered with rain, in that the heat of the Sun does
comfort it, in that there comes such abundance of fruit out of the same
yearly, it is thereby gathered for a surety that there is some God who
governs all things. For even the heaven and earth are not moved or governed
by their own motion: and much less by fortune. Therefore it remains, that
this wonderful workmanship of nature does manifestly show the providence of
God: and those who said that the world was eternal, spoke not as they thought,
but they went about by malicious and barbarous unthankfulness to suppress the
glory of god: wherein they bewrayed their impudency.

Filling with meat and gladness. The ungodliness of men is more convict in
that, if they knew not God, because he does not only set before their eyes,
testimonies of his glory in his works: but does also appoint all things for
their use. For why does the Sun and stars shine in the heavens, save only
that they may serve men? Why does the rain fall from heaven? Why does the
earth bring forth her increase, save only that they may minister food to men?
Therefore God has not set man upon earth, that he may be an idle beholder of
his works as being set upon a Theater, but to exercise himself in praising the
liberality of God, whiles that he enjoys the riches of heaven and earth. And
now, is it not more than filthy frowardness, not to be moved with so great
goodness of god in the manifold abundance of things? To fill the hearts with
meat does signify nothing else but to give food, which may satisfy the
desires of men. By this word gladness Paul and Barnabas do mean that God does
give more to men according to his infinite goodness, then their necessity
does require: as if it had been said, that men have meat given them not only
to refresh their strength, but also to make their hearts merry. If any man do
object that it falls out so oftentimes, that men do rather mourn being
hungry, then rejoice being full. I answer, that that comes to pass
contrary to the order of nature: namely, when the Lord shuts his hand
because of the sins of men. For the liberality of God should flow unto us
abundantly of his own accord, as it is here described by Paul and Barnabas,
unless it were kept back by the lets of our vices. And yet there was never so
great barrennes, wherein the blessing of God in feeding men did quite wither
away. It was indeed well said of the Prophet, Open thy mouth, and I will fill
it, that we may know that we be hungry through our own fault, Psalm. 81.11.
whiles that we do not admit the goodness of God. But how unworthy soever we
be and straight, yet the fatherly love of God breaks through even unto the
unworthy. Especially the generality of mankind does testify that the
benefits of God do never cease, wherein he appears to be our father.

18 When they had said thus. Luke said before that they did not only use
words, but they ran also with violence into the multitude. Now he adds
that the fury of the people was scarce appeased with that vehemency, whereby
appears how mad and untamed the heat of the world is toward Idolatry. For
if they believe the gods, why do they not believe their word, whereby they
put from them false honor? But all idolaters are sick of this disease, that
they are oftentimes ready to shake off the yoke, unless religion be subject
to their will and pleasure. Wherefore no marvel if the prophets say oftentimes,
that men are carried into the blind affection of superstitions, even as brute
beasts are carried into their lust.

19 And there came from Antioch and Iconium Jews, by whom the multitudes were
persuaded, and when they had stoned Paul, they cast him out without the city
thinking that he was dead.

20 And as the Disciples stood about him he rose, and entered into the city:
and on the morrow he went forth with Barnabas to Derbe.

21 And when they had preached the gospel to this city, and had framed many
disciples, they returned to Lystra and Iconium and Antioch.

22 Strengthening the souls of the disciples, and exhorting them to continue
in the faith, and that through many afflictions we must enter into the
kingdom of heaven.

19 There came. Paul and Barnabas can hardly stay the people from doing
sacrifice: but a company of knaves do with small ado persuade them to stone
Paul whom of late they made a God. Whereby appears how much more men be bent
unto superstition, then unto the true worship of God, and how arrogant
superstition is, which will always bear the chief sway in appointing the
worship of god. The servants of god seek no other thing, but to bring men under
obedience of him, which is salvation and felicity alone. They challenge to
themselves no Lordship, they hunt after no gain: and yet the world cannot
abide them. For almost all men murmr: and now and then there rise tumults.
Those who are thus stubborn against God, they be too to ready to believe
seducers, and willingly submit themselves to their tyranny. So the Pope had
liberty to deceive at his pleasure, and not only to oppress miserable souls
with slavery, but also cruelly to torment them. Whatsoever he commanded it
was obediently received, and even at this day, though he make impossible laws,
yet dare no man once mutter against them. Nevertheless the yoke of Christ is
sweet, Mat. 11.30.
and yet few there be who will suffer it.

Therefore in this history is most lively painted out unto us the frowardness
of the world. Paul might have reigned under the title of Mercury, with the
commendation of all men: he will not be a God. Because he serves Christ
faithfully, he is stoned. His constancy is commended, to the end we may follow
it. He was in deed wonderfully delivered by the Lord: 2. Cor. 11.25.
but as touching himself he suffered a most cruel kind of death. Therefore we
must make like account of this testimony, which he does also recite in the
second Epistle to the Corinthians, as if he had been slain. Furthermore, we
need not doubt but that the common sort made insurrection against him
outragiously. So that what violence soever the wicked do to the servants of
Christ, it is never called in question: the laws are whist, judgments cease:
the magistrate is asleep: there is no patron to be found.

20 As the disciples. Though no man defended Paul, yet Luke shows that the
godly were desirous of his life: yet they did so moderate themselves, least
they should attempt any thing with great danger to no end, seeing they could
not help him unless it were done privily. And surely we must always mark
what the Lord has brought to our hand. If I standing upon the bank shall see
a man in the midst of the water, and cannot reach him my hand when he is
like to be drowned: what is remaining for me to do, but to commend him to the
Lord? And if there be any hope to help him, then must I endanger my self.
Therefore we will not say that Saint Paul was left alone by the Disciples
through sloth: seeing they could not help him. And they declare their love
and care, when they stand about him after he is cast out.

They went to Derbe. It appears plainly by this that Paul was miraculously
saved, seeing that on the morrow after he was cast out for dead, he takes
his journey being fresh and sound, whence it is also gathered what an
invincible heart he bare against all evils and afflictions. For he creeps not
into a corner, where like an ouerworn soldier he may live idly: but he goes
to the same places, where he was discourteously and cruelly handled but a little
before. Notwithstanding Luke shows that the church was first planted among
the men of Derbe, he adds afterward that Paul and Barnabas returned unto the
Churches, which they had ordained, that they might confirm the Disciples,
Whereby he gives us to understand that the use of the word consists not in
instruction only, whereby the hearer is only taught: but that it is also
available for confirmation of faith in adomonishing, exhorting and reproving,
And Christ does not only command his ministers to teach, but also to exhort:
2. Tim. 3.16
and Paul says that the scripture is profitable, not only to teach, but also
to exhort. Wherefore let not Pastors think that they have done their duty as
they ought, when they have well trained up the people in true knowledge,
unless they employ themselves to this part also. Again, let not the faithful
neglect the word of God as if the reading and preaching thereof were
unnecessary: because there is no man who has not need of continual
confirmation.

And exhorting them. This was the principal way to cofirme, in that they
provoke the disciples who had before embraced the Gospel and did profess it,
to go forward, by exhorting them. For we are far from being so ready and
stout as we ought. Therefore our lasinesse needs pricks, and our coldness
must be warmed. But because GOD will have his exercised with diverse cumbates,
Paul and Barnabas admonish the disciples to be ready to suffer tribulation. A
very necessary admonition, that we must go on warrefare in this world that
we may live well and godlilie. If the flesh should not molest us, if Satan
should attempt nothing, if the wicked should not trouble us with some
stumbling blocks, it were no such troublesome thing to persevere: because that
were a sweet walk through a soft and pleasant way: but because there arise on
every side, and every minute of an hour, infinite assaults which provoke us to
fall away, there arises the hardness, and therefore is it that the virtue of
constancy is so rare. Therefore to the end we may persist even unto the end,
we must be prepared for war. But Luke speaks not in this place only of the
persecutions which the adversaries raise against us with drawn swords, and
flaming fires: but he comprehends under the word tribulations all sorrows
and miseries, whereunto the life of the godly is subject, not because the
faithful alone are miserable: because this is the common state both of good
and badde. Whence also comes that famous proverb, It is the best, not to be
borne: and the next, to die very quickly. But when as God does oftentimes spare
the wicked, and does fat them with ptosperitie: he is more sharp and hard
toward his children. For besides common molestations, they are oppressed
peculiarly with many discommodities, and the Lord does humble them with such
exercises, keeping their flesh under correction least it wax wanton: he awaketh
them, least they lie sleeping upon earth. Unto these are added the reproaches
and slanders of the wicked: for they must be as it were the ofscourings of the
world. Their simplenes is laughed at: but they use wicked mocks and scofs
principally against God. Last of all, the lust of the wicked breaks out into
open violence. So that they have need to strive with many tribulations, and it
cannot be but that all their life shall be inuied and unquiet amiddest so
many enemies. But this is the best comfort, and which is sufficient enough to
confirm their minds, that, this way (though it be hard and sharp,) leads
unto the kingdom of heaven. For we gather by this, that the miseries of the
godly are more happy then be all the doting dainties and delights of the
world. Therefore let us remember, first, that rhis condition is set down for
us, that we suffer many tribulations: yet let us also remember to add this,
to mittigate the bitterness thereof, that by them we be brought unto the
kingdom of God. Furthermore their babbling is frivolous, who gather hereby that
patience is a work which deserves eternal salvation, seeing that the cause of
salvation is not in this place handled: but after what sort God uses to handle
his in this world: and the comfort is added, not to extol the dignity and
merit of works, but only to encourage the godly that they faint not under
the burden of the cross. All mankind as we have said before, as well one as
other, is subject to many miseries. But the afflictions of the reprobate are
nothing else to them but the very entry of hell: but these turn to the
saints to an happy and joyful end, and for them they fall out well, and so
consequently they be helps for salvation, because they take part with Christ.
We must note that Paul and Barnabas being not content with the plural number,
do plainly set down Many tribulations, least any man after he has suffered
one or two or a few, do at length sink down. Therefore let the faithful
think that they must pass through continual miseries: that done, let them
prepare themselves not for one kind of persecution only, but for diverse
kinds. For though God handle some men more courtiously and gently: yet does he
pamper none of his so daintily, that he is free from all tribulations.

23 And when by voices they had ordained them Elders through all Churches,
having prayed with fasting, they commended them to the Lord in whom they had
believed.

24 And passing over through Pisidia, they came to Pamphilia.

25 And when they had spoken the word at Perga, they went down to Attalia.

26 And thence they sailed to Antioch, from whence they were commended to the
grace of God, unto the work which they had fulfilled.

27 And when they were come, when the Church was gathered together, they showed
what great things God had done by them, and that he had opened to the Gentiles
the door of faith.

28 And they were there no small time with the disciples.

23 When they had ordained Elders. By this it appears sufficiently, that it
is not enough if men have bin once taught the doctrine of godliness, and to
have the sum of faith, unless they go forward continually. Therefore Christ
did not only send his Apostles to preach the gospel, but he commanded also
that there should be Pastors appointed that the preaching of the Gospel might
be perpetual and in daily use. Paul and Barnabas do mark that this order was
set down by Christ, when they assigned Pastors to every Church, least after
their departure doctrine should cease and be whisht. Furthermore this place
teaches that the Church cannot want an ordinary ministry: neither can any
be counted christians before God, but those who during their whole life are
willing to learn. I take it that those are called Elders in this place, who
had the office of teaching enjoined them. For it appears by Paul that some
were only Censors of manners and such as had authority to punish enormities.
Now forasmuch as Luke says, that they were set over every Church, 1. Tim. 5.17.
the difference between their office and the office of the Apostles is
gathered hence. For the Apostles had no certain place of abode: but they went
too and fro to found new Churches. But Pastors were set and appointed every
man to his own Church, and were as it were placed to watch over their
Congregations.

Had ordained by Election. The Greek word Cheirotonein does signify to
decree or ordain a thing by lifting up the hands, as they use to do in the
assemblies of the people. Notwithstanding the Ecclesiastical writers do often
use the word cheirotonia in an other sense: to wit, for their solemn rite of
ordaining, which is called in scripture, Laying on of hands. Furthermore by
this manner of speech is very excellently expressed the right way to ordain
Pastors. Paul and Barnabas are said to choose Elders. Do they this alone by
their private office? nay rather they suffer the matter to be decided, by the
consent of them all: therefore in ordaining Pastors, the people had their free
election. But least there should any tumult arise Paul and Barnabas sit as
chief moderatours. Thus must the decree of the Council of Loadicia be
understood, which forbids that the people have liberty granted them to
Elect.

They having prayed with fasting. They had a double end and reason of their
prayer: the first that, God would direct them with the spirit of wisdom and
discretion, to choose the best and most meet men. For they knew that they
were not furnished with so great wisdom, but they might be deceived: neither
did they so much trust to their diligence, but that they knew that the
principal point did consist in the blessing of god: as we see men's judgments
err daily, where the heavenly government is not: and that all their labor is
nothing worth, where the hand of God is not. These be the true signs and
tokens of the godly, to call upon the Spirit of God, that he may govern their
counsels. And if so be it this rule be to be observed in all businesses: so
often as the government of the Church is in hand, which depends wholly upon
his will and pleasure, we must beware that we attempt nothing unless we have
him for our guide and governor. And the second end of their prayer was, that
God would furnish with necessary gifts those Pastors which were chosen. For
it is a harder matter to fulfill such a function faithfully as a man ought,
than that man's strength is sufficient for it. Therefore they crave Gods help
even in this part also, having Paul and Barnabas for their authors. They fast
likewise, that even that may be a help to stir up the feruentnes of their
prayers. For we know how great our coldness is otherwise. Not because it is
always necessary that we should pray fasting, seeing that god does inuit eue^
those who are full to give thanks: but when we are urged by any necessity to
pray more fervently than we use commonly to do, this is a very profitable
prouokement. And now we have already declared what a weighty matter the
choosing of Pastors is, wherein the soundness of the Church is handled.
Wherefore no marvel, if Luke write that they used extraordinary prayers. And
it is profitable for us to mark this use and other of fasting, least we
imagine with the Papists that it is a meritorious work: or least we place the
worship of God in it, seeing it is of it self nothing, neither is it of any
importance with God, save only in as much as it is referred unto another end.

They committed themselves to the Lord. We gather hereby first, what great care
Paul and Barnabas had for the salvation of those, who by their industry were
turned unto the Lord. For they testify that in this infirmity of the flesh men
be subject to more dangers, then that their faith can continue steadfast through
his own strength. Therefore this is the only refuge and aid, if the Lord keep
them continually whom he has once received. And when Luke says that they were
commended to God in whom they believed, there comes no small confidence hence
unto us: because he assigns this office to God as proper to him, to save and
defend all those who by true faith have embraced his word.

24 Passing through Pisidia. We have already said that Paul and Barnabas came
to Antioch of Pisidia: being now about to return to Antioch of Syria, whence
they were sent away: they go through Pamphilia, which is the middle region
toward the mount Taurus. And Perga, and Attalia are Cities lying near
together. And whereas Luke says that they preach the word in the one only, we
may thereby guess that they had not opportunity offered them every where to
teach, which they were wont to neglect or let pass no where.

26 When they had bin commended. Luke might have said that they were ordained
there to be the Apostles of the Gentiles, but by a circuit of words he does
more plainly express, that they were neither sent away of men, neither did
they attempt any thing trusting to their own strength, but that their whole
journey together with the success was committed to God the author thereof.
Therefore their preaching was no man's work, but a work of the grace of God.
And the word Grace is referred as well unto the power and efficacy of the
Spirit, as also unto all the rest of the signs of favor: because all those
gifts be free which God bestows upon his servants. And the sentence may be
thus resolved, that they prayed God that he would show forth his grace, to
further the labors of his servants.

27 After they had called the Church together. As those who return from an
embassage use to give an account of their Acts: so Paul and Barnabas declare
to the Church all the sum of their voyage: that it may thereby appear what good
success they had and how faithfully they behaved themselves in their office:
and also that they may exhort the faithful to give thanks to god, as the thing
it self gave the^ large matter: therefore Luk says not that they did extol the
things which they themselves had done, but whatsoever things the Lord had done
by them. It is word for word, With them: but according to the phrase of the
Hebrew tongue it is all one, as if it had been said, In them, or By them, or
Toward them, or simply To them, in the Dative case. Therefore Luke does not
say sun autois, but meta autoon: which I say for this cause, least any
unskillful man ascribe some part of the praise to Paul and Barnabas, as if they
had bin partners with God in the work: whereas he does rather make him the
only author of all those famous factes which they had done. Luke adds
immediately after, that the Lord had opened the door of faith to the Gentiles.
For though they were sent unto the Gentiles, yet the strangeness of the matter
causes them to wonder not a little: and not only the sudden change did make
the Jews astonished: but also because it was to them as it were a monster, that
unclean me^ and such as were strangers from the kingdom of God, should be
mixed with the holy seed of Abraham, that they might both together make one
and the same Church, of God: they are now taught by the event it self, that it
was not for nothing that there were Apostles sent to them. Moreover it is said
that the door of faith was set open to the Gentiles, not only because the
Gospel was preached to them with the external voice: but because being
illuminate by the Spirit of God, they were called effectually unto the faith.
The kingdom of heaven is in deed set open to us by the external preaching of
the Gospel: but no man enters in save he to whom God reaches out his hand: no
man draws near unless he be drawn inwardly by the Spirit. Therefore Paul
and Barnabas show and prove by the effect, that their calling was approved and
ratified by God: because the faith of the Gentiles was as it were a seal
engraven by the hand of God, Romans 16.15. 2. Cor. 3.7.
to establish the same, as Paul says.

CHAP. XV.
1 AND certain which came down from Judea, did teach the brethren, that
unless they should be circumcised according to the manner of Moses, they could
not be saved.

2 And when there arose sedition, and disputing not a little to Paul and
Barnabas against them, they appointed that Paul and Barnabas and certain other
of them should go up to the Apostles and Elders to Jerusalem, about this
question.

3 And when they were sent by the Church they passed through Phenice and
Samaria, declaring the conversion of the Gentiles, and they brought great joy
to all the brethren.

4 And when they were come to Jerusalem, they were received of the Church, and
of the Apostles and Elders, and they showed what things so ever God had done
with them.

5 And there arose certain of the sect of the Pharisees which believed, saying
that it was needful that they should be circumcised, and to declare that the
Law of Moses must be kept.

1 When Paul and Barnabas had endured many cumbates against the professed
enemies of the Gospel: Luke does now begin to declare that they were tried by
domestical war. So that it was meet that their doctrine and ministry
should be proved by all means, to the end it might the better appear that
they were furnished by God and armed against all the assaults of the world and
Satan. For that was no small confirmation for their doctrine, in that being
shaken and battered with so many ingines, it stood nevertheless, neither
could the course thereof be broken off by so many hindrances. Therefore to
this end does Paul boast that he suffered fights without and terrors within.
2. Cor. 7.5.
This history is most worthy the noting. For though we do all naturally
abhor the cross and all manner persecution, yet civil and domestical discord
is more dangerous, least happily they discourage us. When tyrants bend their
force and run violently upon men, flesh in deed is afraid, and al those who are
not endued with the spirit of fortitude, do tremble with all their heart: but
then their consciences are not properly touched with any temptation. For this
is known to be as it were the fatal estate of the Church. But when it falls
out so that the brethren go together by the ears, and that the Church is on an
uproar within it self, it cannot be but that weak minds shall be troubled and
also faint: and especially when the controversy is about doctrine, which alone
is the holy bond of brotherly unity: finally there is nothing which does more
indamage the Gospel, then civil discord: because it does not only pearce and
wound weak consciences, but also minister occasion to the wicked to backbite.
Wherefore we must diligently note this history, that we may know that it is no
new example, if among those who profess the same Gospel there arise some
wranglings and strife about doctrine, when proud men can get them a name (whereof
they are so furiously desirous) by no other means, but by bringing in their
own inventions. It is certain, that as there is but one god, so there is but
one truth of this God. Therefore when Paul goes about to exhort the faithful
unto mutual consent, he uses this argument, One God, one faith, one Baptism
etc. Ephesians. 4.6.
But when we see wicked men arise, who go about both to divide the Church by
their factions, and also either to corrupt the Gospel with their false and
filthy inventions, or else to bring the same in suspicion: we ought to know
the subtlety of Satan. Therefore Paul says elsewhere that heresies come
abroad, that those who are tried, may be made manifest. 1. Cor. 11.19.
And assuredly the Lord does wonderfully make void the subtlety of Satan, in
that he tries the faith of his by such trials, and does beutifie his word
with worthy and excellent victory: and causes the truth to shine more
clearelie, which the wicked went about to darken. But it is very convenient to
weigh all the circumstances of the history which Luke notes.

Which came down from Judea. This cloak and color was very forceable to
deceive even good men then. Jerusalem was honored not without cause among all
Churches: because they reverenced it even as their mother. For the Gospel was
deducted as it were by pypes and conduits from that fountain. These seducers
come thence: they pretend the Apostles: they boast that they bring nothing but
that which they learned of them. They blind and bleare the eyes of the
unskillful with this smoke: and those who are light and wicked do greedily
snatch at the color which is offered the^. The perturbation of the church, does
like a tempest shake those who were otherwise good and moderate, so that they
are enforced to stumble. Therefore we must note this subtilty of satan, that he
abuses the names of holy men, that he may deceive the simple, who being won
with the reverence of the men, dare not inquire after the thing it self. Luke
does not expres in deed with what affection these knaves were moved: yet it is
likely that perverse zeal was the cause which moved the^ to set themselves
against Paul and Barnabas. For there be certain churlish natures which nothing
can please but that which is their own. They had seen that circumcision and
other rites of the law were observed at Jerusalem: whersoeuer they become, ^.
Cor. 11.14.
they can abide nothing which is not agreeable thereto: as if the example of one
church did bind all the rest of the churches with a certain Law. And though such
be carried with a preposterous zeal to procure tumults: yet are they pricked
inwardly with their ambition, and with a certain kind of stubbernes.
Nevertheless satan has that he would: for the minds of the godly have such a
mist cast before them, that they can scarce know black from white. Therefore we
must beware first of this plague that some prescribe not a law to othersome
after their manner: that the example of one church be not a prejudice of a
common rule. Also we must use another caution, that the persons of men do not
hinder or darken the examination of the matter or cause. For if Satan
transfigure himself into an Angel of light, and if by sacrilegious boldness he
vsurp the holy name of God: what marvel is it, if he do like wickedly deceive
men under the names of holy men? The end shall at length declare that the
Apostles meant nothing less, than to lay the yoke of the Law upon the neck of
the Gentiles: and yet Satan meant under this shift to get in. So it falls out
oftentimes that those who contrary the doctrine of Christ, creep in under the
title of his servants. Therefore there is one only remedy, to come to search
out the matter with sound judgments: also it behooves us to prevent an offense
least we think that the faithful servants of God do therefore strive among
themselves: because Satan does falsely abuse their names, that he may set
certain shadows by the cares together to terrify the simple.

2 When there was sedition arisen. This was no small trial in that Paul and
Barnabas are hailed into a troublesome tumult. There was mischief enough
already in the matter it self: but it is a more cruel mischief, when the
contention waxes so hot, that they are enforced to fight with their brethren
as with enemies. Add moreover the infamy, wherewith they saw themselves
burdened among the simple and unskillful, as if they would trouble the peace of
the Church with their stubbernes. For it falls out oftentimes so, that the
faithful servants of Christ are envied alone, and bear all the blame, after
that they have bin unjustly troubled, and have faithfully employed themselves
in defense of a good cause. Therefore they must be endewed with invincible
courage to despise al false reports which are carried about concerning them.
Therefore Paul boasts in an other place that he went through the midst of
seditions. But the servants of God must observe such moderation, 2. Cor. 6.5.
that they abhor so much as they can all discord: if at any time Satan raise
tumults and contentions, let them endeavor to appease them: and finally let
them do all that they can to foster and cherish unity. But again on the other
side when the truth of god is assailed, let them refuse no cumbate for defense
thereof: ne let them fear to oppose themselves valiantly though heaven and
earth go together. And let us being admonished by this example, learn, so
often as there arises any tumult in the church, wisely to weigh through whose
fault it came, least we rashly condemn the ministers of Christ: whose gravity
is rather to be praised, because they can abide so valiantly such violent
assaults of Satan. Secondly let us call to mind that Satan was bridled by the
wonderful providence of God, that he might not put the doctrine of Paul to the
foil. For if he had bin suffered to do hurt at his pleasure so soon as the
faith of the Gentiles had bin pulled down and overthrown the Gospel preached
by Paul should have fallen to the ground, and the gate should have shut against
the calling of the Gentiles. Thirdly let us learn that we must in time prevent
dissension of what sort so ever it be, least it break out into the flame of
contention: because satan seeks nothing else by the fans of dissension, but
to kindle so many fires. But again seeing we see the primitive Church on an
uproar, and the best servants of Christ exercised with sedition, if the same
thing befall us now, let us not fear as in some new and unwonted matter: but
craving at the Lords hands such an end as he now made, let us pass through
tumults with the same tenor of faith.

Unless ye be Circumcised. Luke sets down briefly in these words the
state of the question: to wit, that these seducers went about to bind men's
consciences with necessity of keeping the Law. Circumcision is in deed
mentioned alone in this place: but it appears by the text that they moved the
question about the keeping of the whole law. And because Circumcision was as
it were a solemn entrance and admission into other rites of the law,
therefore by Synecdoche the whole law is comprehended under one part. These
enemies of Paul did not deny that Christ was the Messiah: but though they gave
him their names, they retained therewithal the old ceremonies of the Law. The
Error might have seemed tolerable at the first glimse. Why does not Paul
then dissemble, at least for some short time, least he shake the Church with
conflict? For the disputation was concerning external matters, concerning
which Paul himself forbids elsewhere to stand and strive too much. But
there were three weighty causes which enforced him to gainestande. For if the
keeping of the law be necessary, man's salvation is tied to works, which
must be grounded in the grace of Christ alone, that the faith may be settled
and quiet. Therefore when Paul saw the worship of the law set against the
free righteousness of faith, it was unlawful for him to hold his peace, unless
he would betraie Christ. For seeing the adversaries did deny that any should
be saved, save he which did observe the Law of Moses, by this means they did
translate unto works the glory of salvation, which they took from Christ,
and having shaken assurance they did vex miserable souls with unquietness:
again it was no small thing neither of any small importance to spoil and rob
faithful souls of the liberty gotten by Christ's blood. Though the inward
liberty of the Spirit were common to the fathers as well as to us, yet we know
what Paul says, that they were shut up under the childish ward and custody of
the Law, so that they did not much differ from servants: Gal. 4.13.
but we are loose from the schoolemastership of the law after that Christ was
revealed, and we have more liberty, the time of our nonage being as it were
ended. The third vice of this doctrine was, because it darkened the light of the
Church, or at least did put in as it were certain clouds, that Christ the
son of righteousness might not give perfect light. In sum, Christianity
should shortly have come to nothing, if Paul should have yielded to such
beginnings. Therefore he enters the cumbate not for the external uncircumcision
of the flesh, but for the free salvation of men. Secondly that he may acquit
and set free godly consciences from the curse of the Law, and the gilt of
eternal death. Last of all that after all hindrances are driven away, the
brightness of the grace of Christ may shine as in a pleasant and clear heaven.
Moreover these knaves did great injury to the Law when they did wickedly
corrupt the right use thereof. This was the natural and right office of the
Law, to lead men by the hand like a scholemaster unto Christ: therefore it
could not be worse corrupt, then when under color of it, the power and grace
of Christ were diminished. After this sort must we look into the fountains of
all questions, least by our silence we betray the truth of God, so often as we
see satan by his subtlety aim right at it: neither let our minds be changed
and wax faint through any perils, or reproaches and slanders: because we must
constantly defend pure religion though heaven and earth must go together. 2.
Tim. 2.24.
The servant of Christ must be no fighters: therefore if there be any
contention risen, they must rather study to appease and pacify the same by
their moderation, than by and by to blow to the assault. Secondly they must
take good heed of superfluous and vain conflicts: neither shall they handle
controversies of any small weight: but when they see Satan wax so proud, that
religion cannot any longer continue safe and sound unless he be prevented,
they must needs take a good heart to them, and rise to resist: neither let them
fear to enter even most hateful cumbates. The name of peace is in deed
plausible and sweet: but cursed is that peace which is purchased with so great
loss, that we suffer the doctrine of Christ to perish, by which alone we
grow together into godly and holy unity. The Papists cause us at this day to
be sore hated, as if we had been the causers of deadly tumults, wherewith the
world is shaken, but we can well defend our selves, because the blasphemies
which we endeavored to reprove, were more cruel, than that it was lawful for
us to hold our peace. Therefore we are not to be blamed, because we have taken
upon us to enter cumbates in defense of that cause, for which we were to fight
even with the very Angels. Let them cry till their throats be sore, Paul
his example is sufficient for us, that we must not be either cold or slack in
defending the doctrine of godliness, when the ministers of satan seek to
overthrow it with might and maine. For their brainsick distemperature ought not
to pass the constancy of the servants of god. When Paul did zealously set
himself against the false Apostles, sedition began at length by reason of the
conflict: and yet the Spirit of God does not therefore reprove him, but does
rather with due praises commend that fortitude which he had given that holy man.

They determined etc. The Spirit of God put them in mind of this remedy to
appease the tumult, which might otherwise have gone farther with doing much
hurt. Whereby we be also taught, that we must always seek such means as be
fit for ending discord: because God does so highly commend peace, let the
faithful show that they do what they can to nourish the peace of the Church.
The truth must always be first in order with them, in defense whereof they
must be afraid of no tumults. Yet they must so temper their heat, that they
refuse no means of godly agreement: yea let them of their own accord invent
what ways so ever they can, and let them be witty in seeking the^ out.
Therefore we must observe this mean: least being carried away through
immoderate vehemency of zeal, we be carried beyond the just bounds. For we
must be courageous in defense of true doctrine, not stubberne, nor rash.
Therefore let us learn to join together these two virtues which the Spirit of
God commends in Paul. When he is drawn into the field by the wicked, he is
not afraid boldly to offer himself: but when he does meekely admit the remedy
which was offered, he declares plainly what small desire he had to fight. For
otherwise he might have boasted that he did not pass for the Apostles, and so
have stood stoutly in that: but the desire of peace did not suffer him to
refuse their judgment. Moreover ignorant and weak men should have conceived a
sinister opinion, if they should have seen two men only separated from all the
servants of Christ. And godly teachers must in no case neglect this way to
cherish faith, that they may show that they agree with the church. Paul in deed
did not depend upon the beck of the Apostles, that he would change his
opinion, if he should have found them contrary to him, who would not have given
place even to the very Angels, Gal. 1.8.
as he boasts in first Chapt. to the Galathians. But least the wicked should
slanderously report that he was a man that stood too much in his own conceit
and which was too proud, and which did please himself with an unseemly contempt
of all men: he offered to give an account of his doctrine, as it became him,
and as it was profitable for the Church. Secondly he presented himself before
the Apostles with sure hope of victory, because he knew full well what would
be their judgment: seeing they were guided by the same spirit wherewith he was
governed. Notwithstanding it may be demanded for what purpose the men of
Antioch sent Paul and Barnabas unto the rest of the Apostles. For if they did
so greatly reverence them, that they stood in doubt, until they had given
judgment on this side or that, their faith was hitherto vain and altogether
none. But the answer is easy: Seeing they knew that all the Apostles were sent
by Christ alone with the same commandments, and that they had the same Spirit
given them, they were fully persuaded of the end and success, and undoubtedly
this counsel proceeded from honest and stout men, who were not ignorant that
the knaves did falsely pretend the names of James and Peter. Wherefore they
sought nothing else but that the Apostles might further a good matter with
their consent. To the same end were all holy Synods assembled since the
beginning, that grave men and such as were well exercised in the word of God
might decide controversies, not after their own pleasure, but according to the
authority of God. This is worth the noting, least the papists pearce any man
with their loud outcries, who to the end they may overthrow Christ, and his
Gospel, and put out all the light of godliness: thrust upon us Councels: as if
every definition and determination of men were to be counted an heavenly oracle.
But if the holy fathers had their fitting at this day, they would cry with one
mouth, that there was nothing more unlawful for them, neither did they mean
any thing less, than to set down or deliver any thing, without having the
word of Christ for their guide, who was their only teacher even as he is ours.
I omit this that the Papists lean only unto untimely Councels which breath
out nothing but gross ignorance and Barbarism. But even the best and most
choice must be reckened in that number, that they may be subject to the word
of God. There is a grievous complaint of Gregory Nazianzene extant, that there
was never any Council which had a good end. What excellency so ever did
flourish and was in force in the Church, it cannot be denied but that it began
to decay an hundred years after. Therefore if that holy man were now living
how stoutly would he reject the toys of the Papists? who without all shame
most impudently bring in the iuglings of visures in steed of lawful Councels,
and that to that end, that the word of God may pack, so soon as a few bald
and foolish men have set down whatsoever pleased them.

3 Being brought on the way by the Church. Where as by the common consent of
the Church there were joined to Paul and Barnabas companions, who might for
duties sake conduct them, we may thereby gather, that all the godly were on
their side: and that they did never otherwise think but that the cause was
theirs as well as the Apostles. Wherefore they determined the journey of Paul
and Barnabas with like minds as they took it in hand: to wit, that they might
tame and put to silence those troublesome spirits, who did falsely make boast
of the Apostles. Whereas he says shortly after that they certified the
brethren in their voyage of the wonderful conversion of the Gentiles, it is a
testimony and token that they came not to Jerusalem fraught with fear: but
that they did even without fear stoutly profess that which they had taught
before. Therefore they come not to plead their cause before their judges: but
that they may with common consent and judgment, on both sides approve that
which was commanded by God touching the abolishing of ceremonies. For though
they did not despise the judgment of the Apostles, yet because they knew that
it was not lawful for them, neither for the Apostles to decree otherwise
concerning the cause, it did not become them to stand as men whose matter is
handled at the bar: thence comes the boldness of rejoicing. To this end
tends the joy of the godly whereby they subscribe both to the doctrine of
Paul, and also the calling of the Gentiles.

4 They were received of the Church. By this word Church he means the
multitude it self and the whole body: that done he assigns a peculiar place
to the Apostles and Elders, by whom Paul and Barnabas were specially received.
Furthermore because the Apostles had no certain place of abode at Jerusalem:
but went ever now and then sometimes to one place and sometimes to another,
whither soever occasion did call them, that Church had Elders to whom the
ordinary government of the Church was committed: Chr. 14.23.
and what the one function differs from the other we have before declared.
And hereby it appears what brotherly courtesy there was in the Apostles and
Elders, because they do not only courteously receive Paul and Barnabas: but
so soon as they hear what success they had with their pains they took,
they magnify the grace of God. Luke repeateth again that form of speech
which we had before in the chapter next going before, when he says that they
declared whatsoever things God had done with them. Wherein we must remember that
which I said before, that God is not made a fellow labourer, but all the whole
praise of the work is ascribed to him. Therefore it is said that he did that
with Paul and Barnabas, which he did by them: as he is said to deal
mercifully with us, when he helps our miseries.

5 Certain of the sect of the Pharisees. It is not without cause that Luke
expresses what kind of men they were, which went about to trouble or hinder
Paul even at Jerusalem also. And it is to be thought that the evil flowed
from that fountain: and that Luke does now more plainly express, that
there brake out now also fannes, out of that very same fect, from whence the
authors of that wicked dissension came. For though they had given Christ their
names, yet there remained relics of their former nature. We know how proud
the Pharisees were, how hautie, how lofty their looks were: all which they
would have forgotten, if they had truly put on Christ. like as there remained
no phariseisme in Paul, but a great part had gotten the habit of stubbernnesse
by long custom which they could not shake off so easily by and by. Forasmuch
as there reigned most of all among them hypocrisy: they were too much addicted
to external rites, which are couerings for vices. They were likewise puffed up
with pride, so that they did tyrannously covet to make all other men subject to
their decrees. It is well known how sore sick the munks are of both diseases.
Whereby it comes to pass that nothing is more cruel than they to oppress the
Church, nothing is more wicked or froward then they to despise the word of god.
Moreover we see many of them which came out of those dens which have cast
from them their cowle, and yet (...) they never forget those conditions which
they learned there.

6 And the Apostles and Elders came together, that they might look to this
business.

7 And after there had been great disputing, Peter arose and said to them,
Men and brethren, ye know how that of old time God did choose in us, that by
my mouth the Gentiles should hear the word of the Gospel, and believe.

8 And God who is knower of the hearts, bare witness to them giving them his
holy Spirit, as to us.

9 And he put no difference between them and us, after that by faith he had
purified their hearts.

10 Therefore why do ye now tempt God, to lay a yoke upon the necks of the
disciples, which neither our fathers nor we were able to bear?

11 But we believe that we have salvation through the grace of our Lord Jesus
Christ, even as they.

6 The Apostles and Elders met together. Luke says not that all the whole
Church was gathered together, but those who did excel in doctrine and
judgment, and those who according to their office were competent judges in
this matter. It may be in deed that the disputation was had in presense of
the people. But least any man should think that the common people were
suffered hand over head to handle the matter, Luke does plainly make mention
of the Apostles and Elders: as it was more meet that they should hear the
matter and to decide it. But let us know that here is prescribed by God a form
and an order in assembling synods, when there arises any controversy, which
cannot otherwise be decided. For seeing that many did daily gainstand Paul, this
disputation alone, by reason whereof there was great ruin like to ensue, and
which was already come to hot cumbates, did enforce him to go to Jerusalem.

7 And when there had bin great disputation. Though there were choice made of
grave men and such as were public teachers of the Church, yet could not they
agree by and by. Whereby appears how the Lord did exercise his Church even
then by the infirmity of men, that it might learn to be wise with humility.
Moreover he suffered (even in that company and assembly, wherein he was
chief) the principal point of Christian doctrine to be diversely tossed and
handled: least we should wonder, if at any time it so fall out, that men who
are otherwise learned and godly, do through unskillfulness fall into an
error. For some were not so quick witted, that they could thoroughly see into
the greatness of the matter. So that when they judge that the law ought to be
kept, being unadvisedly carried away with the zeal of the law, they see not
into how deep a laberinth they throw the consciences of other men and their
own also. They thought that Circumcision was an eternal and unviolable token
of Gods covenant: the same opinion had they of all the whole Law. Wherefore
Peter stands chiefly upon this, to show the state of the question, which
the most of them knew not. And his oration has two members. For first he
proves by the authority of god, that the gentiles must not be enforced to keep
the law: secondly he teaches that all man's salvation is overthrown, if the
conscience be once caught in this snare. Therefore the former part (wherein he
declares that he was sent of God to teach the Gentiles, and that the holy
Spirit came down upon them) tends to this end, that men did not unadvisedly
disanull the ceremonies of the Law, but that God is the author of that
disanulling. And so soon as the authority of God is brought forth, all
doubting is taken away because this is all our wisdom, to stay our selves
upon the authority, government and commandment of God, and to make more
account of his beck and pleasure, then of all reasons. Now it is meet that we
ponder the words of Peter, whereby he proves that this was granted to the
gentiles by God, to be free from the yoke of the Law.

You know. He calls them to bear witness, and unto them he appealeth,
least any man should think that he is about to speak of some dark and
doubtful thing. The history was well known to them all. That which remained,
he shows that they were blind even in most clear light, because they do not
rightly consider and mark the work of God, yea because they had not long ago
learned that which was openly showed. He calls the beginning of the preaching
of the Gospel Old days, or the old time: as if he should say, Long ago: as it
were since the first beginning of the Church, after that Christ began to gather
to himself any people.

God did choose in us. The word Choose does signify to apoint or decree.
Though Peter does comprehend as well the free Election of God, as the choice,
whereby God did adopt the Gentiles to be his people. Therefore he chose, that
is as it were making choice, that he might show a token of his free election in
the gentiles, he would that by my mouth they should hear the doctrine of the
gospel. These words, In us, do import as much, as in our sight, or we being
witnesses, or, among us. For his meaning is that he declares nothing, but that
which they knew full well, to wit, which was done before their eyes. The phrase
is common enough both among the Grecians, and also among the Hebritians:
unless we had leffer resolve it as some other do, He has chosen me out of
this company.

And believe. This was a seal to confirm the calling of the Gentiles. The
office of teaching was enjoined Peter by an oracle: but the fruit which came
of his doctrine, does make his ministry noble, and authentical, as they call
it. For seeing that the elect are illuminate into the faith by a peculiar grace
of the Spirit, doctrine shall bring forth no fruit, unless the Lord show forth
his power in his ministers: in teaching the minds of those inwardly which
hear, and in drawing their hearts inwardly. Therefore seeing the Lord commanded
that the doctrine of the Gospel should be brought unto the Gentiles, he did
sanctify them to himself, that they might be no longer profane. But the
solemn consecration was then perfect in all points, when he imprinted in their
hearts by faith, the mark of their adoption. The sentence which followth
immediately is to be understood as set down by way of exposition. For Peter
annexeth the visible graces of the Spirit unto faith: as assuredly they were
nothing else but an addition thereof. Therefore seeing that the Gentiles are
ingraffed into the people of God without Circumcision and Ceremonies, Peter
gathers that it was not well done to lay upon them any necessity to keep
the Law. Yet it seems to be but a weak argument to prove their Election
withal, because the holy ghost came down upon them. For they were such gifts
that they could not reason from the same, that they were reckoned in the number
of the godly. But it is the Spirit of regeneration alone, which distinguishes
the children of God from strangers. I answer, Though men who were otherwise
vain, were endued with the gift of tongues and such like: yet does Peter take
for a thing which all men grant, that which was known, that God had sealed in
Cornelius and his cosins, his free adoption by the visible grace of the
Spirit, as if he should point out his children with his finger.

The knower of the hearts. He applies this adiunct to God according to the
circumstance of the present matter: and it has under it a secreat
contrariety, That men are more addicted to external purity, because they
judge according to their gross and earthly sense and understanding: but God
does look into the heart. Therefore Peter teaches that they judge
preposterously in this matter according to man's understanding, seeing that the
inward pureness of the heart alone is here to be esteemed, which we know not. And
by this means does he bridle our rashness, least taking to our selves more
than we ought, we murmur against the judgment of God. As if he should say: If
thou see no reason of that testimony which God gave them, think with thy self
what great difference there is between him and thee. For thou art holden with
external pomp according to thy gross nature, which must be abandoned, when we
come to the throne of God, where the hearts of men are known spiritually. But
in the mean season we must note a general doctrine, that the eyes of God do
not look upon the vain pomp of men, but upon the integrity of men's hearts,
as it is written Ier. 5. Iere. 5.3.
Whereas the old interpreter and Erasmus translate it, that God knows the
hearts, it does not sufficiently express that which Luke says in greek: for
when he calls God Cardiagnosten, he sets him against men, who judge rather
for the most part by the vtwarde appearance: and therefore they may be called
prosopognostai or knowers of the face, if they be compared with God.

9 And he put no difference. There was in deed some difference, because the
Gentiles who were uncircumcised were suddenly admitted unto the covenant of
eternal life: where as the Jews were prepared by circumcision unto faith. But
Peter's meaning is, that they were both chosen together by God unto the hope of
the same inheritance, and that they were extolled into the like degree of
honor, that they might be the children of God and members of Christ, and
finally the holy seed of Abraham, a priestly and princely generation.
Whereupon it follows that they cannot without sacrilege be counted unclean,
Ephe. 2.14
sithence God has chosen them to be a peculiar people, and has consecrated
them to be holy vessels of his temple. For the wall of separation being pulled
down whereby the Gentiles and Jews were divided among themselves, he has
joined the Gentiles to the Jews, that they might grow together into one
body: and that I may so say, he has mixed circumcision and uncircumcision
together, that as well those of the householde as strangers may be one in
Christ, and may make one Church: and that there may not be any longer either
Jew or Grecian.

Seeing that by faith he had purified. This member is answerable to that former
adiunct which he applied to god: as if he should say, that god who knows the
hearts, did inwardly purge the Gentiles, when he vouchsafed to make them
partakers of his adoption, that they might be endued with spiritual cleannes.
But he adds farther that this purity did consist in faith. Therefore he
teaches first that the Gentiles have true holiness without ceremonies, which
may suffice before Gods judgment seat. Secondly he teaches that this is
attained unto by faith, and from it does it flow. In like sort Paul gathers,
Romans 4.1.
that uncircumcision does not hinder a man but that be may be counted holy and
just before god: because Circumcision did follow after righteousness in the
person of Abraham, and by order of time it was latter. But here arises a
question, whether that purity which the fathers had in times past were unlike
to that which God gave now to the Gentiles. For it seems that Peter
distinguishes the gentiles from the Jews by this mark, because being content
with the cleanness of the heart alone, they need no help of the Law. I
answer that the one of them differ from the other, not in substance, but in
form. For God had respect always unto the inward cleannes of the heart: and
the ceremonies were given to the old people only for this cause; that they
might help their faith. So that cleannes as touching figures and exercises,
was only for a time, until the coming of Christ, which has no place among us
at this day: like as there remains from the very beginning of the world unto
the end, the same true worship of God, to wit, the spiritual worship: yet is
there great difference in the visible form, Now we see that the fathers did
not obtain righteousness by Ceremonies, neither were they therefore pure
before God: but by the cleanness of the heart. For the Ceremonies of
themselves were of no importance to justify them: but they were only helps,
which did accidentally (that I may so term it) purge them: yet so that the
fathers and we had the same truth. Now when Christ came, all that which was
accidental did vanish away: and therefore seeing the shadows be driven away,
there remains the bare and plain pureness of the heart. Thus is that
objection easily answered which the Jews think cannot possibly be answered,
Genesis 17.13
Circumcision is called the eternal covenant, or of the world: therefore say
they, it was ^ot to be abolished. If any man shall say that this is not
referred unto the visible sign, but rather unto the thing figured: it shall
be well answered, but there is another answer besides this. Seeing that the
kingdom of Christ was a certain renewing of the world, there shall no
inconvenience follow, if he made an end of all the shadows of the Law. For as
much as the perpetuity of the Law is grounded in Christ. I come now unto the
second member, where Peter places the cleanness of the Gentiles in faith. Why
does not he say, In perfection of virtues, or holiness of life save only
because men have righteousness from another, and not from themselves? for if men
by living well and justly should purchase righteousness, or if they should be
clean before God by nature: this sentence of Peter should fall to ground.
Therefore the Spirit does in these words plainly pronounce, that all mankind is
polluted and with filthiness defiled: secondly that their blots can by no other
means be wiped away, than by the grace of Christ. For seeing that faith is the
remedy whereby the Lord does freely help us, it is set as well against the
common nature of all men, as against every man's own merits. When I say that
al mankind is polluted, my meaning is, that we bring nothing from our mothers
womb but mere filthiness, and that there is no righteousness in our nature,
which can reconcile us to God. Man's soul was in deed indewed with singular
gifts at the first: but all parts thereof are so corrupt with sin, that
there remains in it no drop of pureness any longer, therefore we must
seek for cleanness without our selves. For if any man allege that it may be
recovered by merits of works: there is nothing more absurd than to imagine
that wicked and froward nature can deserve any thing. Therefore it rests that
men seek elsewhere for that, which they shall never be able to find within
themselves. And surely it is the office of faith to translate that unto us
which is proper to Christ, and to make it ours by free participation. So that
there is a mutual relation between faith and the grace of Christ. For faith
does not make us clean, as a virtue or quality powered into our souls: but
because it receives that cleanness which is offered in Christ. We must also
note the phrase, that God purified the hearts: whereby Luke does both make God
the author of faith, and he reaches also that cleannes is his benefit. To
make short, he signifies unto us, that that is given to men by the grace of
God, which they cannot give to themselves. But forasmuch as we said that faith
takes that of Christ which it transpoureth into us: we must now see how the
grace of Christ does make us clean, that we may please god. And there is a
double manner of purging, because Christ does offer and present us clean and
just in the sight of his father, by putting away our sins daily, which he
has once purged by his blood: secondly because by mortifying the lusts of the
flesh by his spirit, he reformeth us unto holiness of life. I do willingly
comprehend both kinds of purging under these words: because Luke does not touch
one kind of purging only, but he teaches that the whole perfection thereof
consists without the ceremonies of the Law.

10 Now therefore why tempt ye. This is the other part of the sermon, wherein
Peter shows how deadly that doctrine is, which Paul his enemies sought to
bring in: to wit, which might drown godly souls in despair. He infers and
gathers out of the former member, that God is tempted, if the Gentiles be
enforced to keep the law of necessity: he rises higher and pearceth even
unto the very fountain. For he reasons hitherto, that the Gentiles should
have injury done them, if there be more required at their hands, then God
will, and seeing that he made them equal with the holy people, and did
vouchsafe them the honor of adoption, it was an unmeet and inconvenient matter
that they should be rejected, and so his liberality should be restrained. For
he says last of all that this faith is sufficient for them, though they want
ceremonies. And now he takes an higher principle, that those who tie men's
salvation to the works of the law, leave the^ no good hope: but rather throw
the whole world headlong into horrible destruction, if it can obtain
salvation by no other means but by keeping the law, with what arguments he
proves this we shall see in their place. As touching the words, seeing the
scripture says, that God is tempted diverse ways, Peter his meaning is in this
place, that God is provoked as it were of set purpose, when there is an heavier
burden laid upon men, then they be able to bear: and that his power is
brought within bounds when that yoke is bound which he does loose, which is
nothing else, but by striving against nature to match our selves with Giants, as
they say.

That the yoke should be laid upon their necks. The meaning of the words is
plain* that God is tempted when there is laid upon men's consciences, a sorer
burden, then they are able to bear, and by this means the salvation of men's
souls is sore shaken: Seeing that they must needs by this means be drowned in
despair, which cannot be without their destruction. But that injury which is
done to god is no whit more tolerable, when as he is robbed of his right, that
he may not have liberty to deliver us. But we may easily gather out of the
thing it self, that he does not speak of the ceremonies only. The servitude
of the old training up under the law was hard and laborious: but yet it were
too absurd to call it a yoke that cannot be borne: and we know that not only
holy men, but also even most hypocrites did well and exactly accomplish the
outward observation of the rites.

Moreover, it were not any hard matter to satisfy the moral law, if it were
content with corporal obedience only, and did not require spiritual
righteousness. For it is granted to many to bridle their hands and feet:
but to moderate all the affections so, that there may reign perfect abstinence
and purity as well in the soul as in the body, this is too hard a matter.
Therefore those be too foolish who restrain unto ceremonies Peter's words,
whereby the weakness of men to perform the righteousness of the heart is
expressed: which does not only far pass their strength, but is altogether
contrary to nature, These men were I warraunt you deceived by one reason,
because the question was moved concerning ceremonies only: but they do remember
that Peter did more attentively and more wisely consider as became him, what a
labyrinth this error (to look to, but light) did bring with it. The false
Apostles did avouch that no man could attain unto salvation unless he did
keep the ceremonies. If man's salvation be tied to works, it shall be no
longer grounded in the grace of Christ, and so by this means free
reconciliatio^ shall fall flat to the ground. Now seeing that man's strength is
unable to keep the law, all men are subject to the curse, which the Lord
there denounces against the trangressours, and so by this means all men shall
come in danger of despair, seeing that they see themselves guilty of eternal
death by the law. Peradventure the false apostles understood these things
craftily. But Peter pearceth the very fountain, that he may bring to light the
deadly poison of that doctrine: and thus must we do, so often as Satan does
craftily thrust in wicked errors. At this day we seem to some to be too
contentious, when as we do so stoutly stand in this, that men must not pray for
the dead. For it is both a most ancient custom, neither is it a thing to
look to, very dangerous, though men power out superfluous prayers: yet it is a
plausible opinion, because it carries some color of humane godliness.

Furthermore unskillful men judge thus, because they seek not out the head
spring. For if we grant that men may pray for the dead, we must also admit
this, that they are now punished by the judgment of God, because they made
not satisfaction in this life for their sins. And so by this means the force
of Christ's satisfaction is translated unto the works of men: secondly the
rule of praying aright is overthrown, if me^ may pray at all adventure without
the word of God, this is also a greater absurdity, than that we ought lightly
to pass over it. In sum, we can never give true judgment of any question,
unless having throughlye ripped up the fountain of that doctrine which is called
in question, we deduct all consequents, which it brings with it. Therefore it
is no marvel if Peter to the end he may pull the false apostles out by the
ears, as it were out of their lurking dens, do generally dispute touching
the whole law: because he does nothing else but open the matter it self, whereof
the simple were ignorant: that they may all see what a deadly doctrine it is,
which does both extinguish the grace of Christ, and drown souls in the
horrible dungeon of despair.

Neither we nor our fathers. Peter does not only dispute what men have done in
deed, but what they were able to do, neither does he speak only of the common
riffe raffe, but of the holy fathers. Seeing that he denies that they were
able to bear the yoke of the law* it is manifest that the law cannot possibly
be kept. I know that Jerome his saying is so generally received, that it is as
it were an undoubted and most certain maxim, If any man say that it is a
thing impossible to keep the law, let him be accurssed: but we must not
hearken to any voice of man which is contrary to the judgment of the Spirit
of God. We hear what the Spirit pronounces in this place by the mouth of
Peter, not concerning the will and works of men, but touching their ability
and power. And hereunto agrees Paul, affirming that it was an impossible
thing that the law should give us life, forasmuch as it was weak through the
flesh. In deed if any man were able to fulfill the law, he should find the
life, which is there promised: but forasmuch as Paul denies that life can be
gotten by the law, it follows that there is farther and higher righteousness
required there, then man is able to perform. I confess in deed that Jerome
does not wholly grant to the strength of nature, power to fulfill the law, but
partly also to the grace of God: as he does afterward expound himself, that a
faithful man helped by the grace of the Spirit, may be said to be able to
fulfill the law. But even that mitigation is not true. For if we do weigh the
strength of nature only, men shall not only be unable to bear the yoke of the
law: but they shall not be able to move so much as a finger, to perform the
least jot of the law. And surely if that be true, that, all the cogitations of
man's mind are wicked from his childhood, that all the understandings of flesh
are enemies to god, that there is none which seeks after God: and other such
places which are common in the Scripture, tending to the same end: Genesis 8.21.
Romans 8.7. Psalm. 14.3. Romans 3.11.
but especially which are cited by Paul in the third to the Romans: man his
power and ability to fulfill the law shall not only be weak and lame, but
altogether none, to begin. Therefore we must thus think, that even the very
faithful after they being regenerate by the spirit of God, do study to
attain unto the righteousness of the law, do perform notwithstanding but
the half and far less then half, not the whole. For doutlesse Peter speaks
not in this place of the Epicure or profane me^: but of Abraham, of Moses, and
of other holy fathers which were the most perfect in the world, and yet he says
that these fainted under the burden of the law: because it did pass their
strength. It is hatefully objected, that the spirit of God is blasphemed, when
as ability to fulfill the law is taken away from his grace and help, but we
may readily answer: because the question is not what the grace of the spirit
is able to do: but what that measure of grace is able to do, which God does
divide to every one in this life. For we must always consider what God does
promise to do; neither let us unadvisedly ask this question, whether that can
be done which he himself does testify shall never be, and which he will not
have done. He promises the grace and aid of the Spirit to the faithful, whereby
they may be able to resist the lusts of the flesh, and to subdue them: yet shall
they not quite abolish and drive them away. He promises them grace whereby
they may walk in newnes of life: yea shall they not be able to run so swiftly as
the law requires. For he will have them kept under during their whole life,
that they may fly to beg pardon, If it be unlawful to separate from the power
of god his counsel and the order by him set down, it is a foolish and vain
cavil whereby the adversaries go about to burden us, when as they say that we
diminish the power of God: nay rather they transform God when they hold that
his counsel and purpose can be altered. The Pelagians did in times past in
like sort burden Augustine. He aunsweareth, that though it be a thing
possible that the law should be fulfilled, yet is that sufficient for him,
that no man did ever fulfill it, and that the Scripture does not testify that
it shall be fulfilled until the end of the world. By which words he
delivers himself from their importunate subtlety. But there was no cause
why he should doubt, but freely and flatly grant, that it might be fulfilled,
the holy ghost being the author. For we must limit the grace of the spirit that
it may agree with the promises. Furthermore, we have already declared how
far the promises reach. There is no man which moves any question
concerning this, whether god be not able if he will, to make men perfect: but
they dote foolish which separate his power from his counsel, whereof they
have an evident and plain testimony in the scripture. God does plainly
declare an hundredth times what he will and what he has determined to do, to
go any farther is sacrilege. Hierom was enforced by reason of philosophy to
hurl out the thunderbolt of his curse against Peter and Paul: because the
laws must be applied unto their ability for whom they be appointed, which
as I confess to take place in man's laws: so I utterly deny that it is good
as touching the law of God, which in exacting righteousness does not respect
what man is able to do, but what he ought to do. Though here arises a harder
question, whether the law were not given to this end, that it might enforce
men to obey God.

And this should be in vain, unless the Spirit of god should direct the
faithful to keep it: and that solemn protestation of Moses seems to put
the matter out of doubt, when he says that he gives precepts to the Jews:
not such as they may read, but in deed fulfill. Deu. 30. Deu. 30.12.
Whence we gather that the yoke was laid upon the neck of the Jews when the
law was given, that it might make them subject to God, that they might not live
as them lusted. I answer, that the law is counted a yoke two ways. For in as
much as it brideleth the lusts of the flesh, and delivers a rule of godly
and holy life, it is meet that the children of God take this yoke upon them,
but in as much as it does exactly prescribe what we owe to God, and does not
promise life without adding the condition of perfect obedience: and does again
denounce a curse, if we shall in any point offend: it is a yoke which no man is
able to bear. I will show this more plainly. The plain doctrine of good
life, wherein God does inuit us unto himself, is a yoke, which we must all of
us willingly take up. For there is nothing more absurd, then that God should
not govern man's life, but that he should wander at pleasure without any
bridle. Therefore we must not refuse the yoke of the law, Leuit. 18.5. Deu.
27.26.
if the simple doctrine thereof be considered. But these sayings do otherwise
qualify (that I may so term it) the law. He which shall do these things shall
live in the^, etc. Again, Cursed is he which continues not in all things
which are written* that it may begin to be a yoke which no man can bear. For
so long as salvation is promised to the perfect keeping of the law alone, and
every transgression is called into judgment, mankind is utterly undone. In
this respect does Peter affirm that God is tempted, when man's arrogancy does
burden the consciences of men with the Law. For it is not his purpose to
deny, but that men must be governed by the doctrine of the law, and so he
grants that they be under the law not simply to teach, but also to humble
men with the gilt of eternal death, considering that that quality was annexed
unto doctrine, he affirms that the souls of the godly must not be tied with
the yoke of the law: because by this means it should of necessity come to
pass that they should be drowned in eternal destruction. But when as not only
the grace of the holy Spirit is present, to govern us, but also free
forgiveness of sins to deliver and acquit us from the curse of the Law:
then is that of Moses fulfilled, that the commandment is not above us: Deuteronomy.
30.11 Mat. 11.30.
and then do we also perceive how sweet the yoke of Christ is, and how light
his burden is. For because we know that through the mercy of God that is
forgiven us, which is wanting through the infirmity of the flesh, We do
cheerfully and without any grief take upon us that which he inioyneth us.
Wherefore so that the rigor of the law be taken away the doctrine of the Law
shall not only be tolerable, but also joyful and pleasant: neither must we
refuse the bridle which does govern us mildly: and does not urge us sorer then
is expedient.

11 By the grace of Jesus Christ. Peter compares these two together as
contrary the one to the other: to have hope in the grace of Christ, and to be
under the yoke of the law. Which comparison does greatly set out the
justification of Christ, in as much as we gather thereby, that those are
justified by faith, who being free and quit from the yoke of the law, seek
for salvation in the grace of Jesus Christ. Furthermore, I said before that the
yoke of the law is made of two coardes. The former is, He which does these
things shall live in them. The other, Cursed is every one which does not
continue in all the commandments. Let us return unto the contrary member.
If we cannot otherwise attain unto salvation by the grace of Christ, unless
the yoke of the law be taken away, it follows, that salvation is not placed
in keeping the law, neither are those which believe in Christ subject to the
curse of the law. For if he could be saved through grace, who is as yet in
wrapped in the yoke of the law, then should Peter's reasoning be but foolish,
which is drawn from contraries, thus, We hope for salvation by the grace of
Christ: therefore we are not under the yoke of the law. Unless there were a
disagreement between the grace of Christ and the yoke of the law, Peter should
deceive us.

Wherefore those must needs depart from the righteousness of the law,
whosoever desire to find life in Christ. For this contrariety appertains
not unto doctrine: but unto the cause of justification. Whereby is also refuted
their surmise, who say that we are justified by the grace of Christ: because he
regenerateth us by his Spirit, and gives us strength to fulfill the law: those
who imagine this, though they seem to ease the yoke of the law a little, yet they
keep souls bound with both the cords thereof. For this promise shall always
stand in force, He which shall do these things shall live in them, on the
otherside, the curse shall com upon all which shall not absolutely fulfill the
law. Wherefore we must define the grace of Christ far otherwise (whereunto
the hope of salvation leans) then they dream: to wit, that it be free
reconciliation gotten by the sacrifice of his death: or which is all one, free
forgiveness of sins, which by pacifying and appeasing God, does make him of an
enemy or severe judge, and which cannot be pleased, nor entreated, a merciful
father. I confess indeed that we be regenerate into newnes of life by the
grace of Christ: but when we are about assurance of salvation, then must we
call to mind the free adoption alone, which is joined with the purging and
forgiveness of sins. For if works be admitted, that they may make us
righteous even in part only, the yoke of the law shall not be broken, and so
Peter his contrariety shall fall to the ground, or else be dissolved.

Even as they. Peter does testify in this place, that though the servitude of
the law were laid upon the Fathers as touching the external show: yet were
their consciences free and quit: whereby is put away that absurdity, which
might otherwise have troubled godly minds not a little. For seeing that the
covenant of life is eternal, and the same which God made with his servants
from the beginning until the end of the world: it were an absurd thing and
intolerable that any other way to obtain salvation should be taught at this
day, then that which the fathers had in times past. Therefore Peter affirms
that we agree very well with the fathers: because they no less then we reposed
hope of salvation in the grace of Christ. And so reconciling the law and the
gospel together, as touching the end of the doctrine, he takes from the Jews
the stumbling block, which they feigned to themselves by reason of the
discord. Whereby it appears that the law was not given to the fathers, that
they might thereby purchase salvation: neither were the ceremonies added, that
by the observing thereof they might attain unto righteousness: but this was the
only end of all the whole law, that casting from them all confidence, which
they might repose in works, they might repose all their hope in the grace of
Christ. Whereby is also refuted the doting of those who think that the old
people in as much as they were content with earthly goods, did think no whit of
the heavenly life. But Peter makes the fathers partners with us of the same
faith: and does make salvation common to both, and yet there be some which
delight in that brainsicke fellow Seruetus with his so filthy sacrileges.
Furthermore we must note that Peter teaches that the faith of the fathers was
always grounded in Christ, seeing that they could neither find life any where
else, neither was there any other way for men to come unto God. Therefore this
place agrees with that saying of the Apostle, Christ yesterday and to day,
Heb. 13.8.
and for ever.

12 And all the multitude kept silence, and heard Barnabas and Paul declare,
what signs and wonders God had wrought by them among the Gentiles.

13 And after that they had done speaking, James answered, saying, Men and
brethren hear me:

14 Simeon has showed how at the first God has visited that he might take of
the Gentiles a people in his name.

15 And hereunto agree the words of the prophets, as it is written.

16 After these things I will return, and will build again the Tabernacle
of David, which is decayed, and I will restore the ruins thereof, and will set
it up.

17 That the men which remain may seek the Lord, and all nations which call
upon my name, says the Lord which does all these things.

18 Known from the beginning are all his works.

12 All the multitude held their peace. By these words Luke gives us to
understand that the Spirit of God did so reign in that assembly, that they
yielded forth with to reason. The disputation was whot before, but now after
that Peter has laid open the counsel of God, and has handeled the question
according to the doctrine of the scripture, by and by all noise being stayed,
they are quiet and whist, who did of late unadvisedly defend the error. This
is a lively image of a lawful counsel, when the truth of God alone so soon as
it is once come to light, makes an end of all controversies: and assuredly it
is effectual enough to appease all discord, when the Spirit bears the chief
sway: because he is again a fit governor, as well to moderate their tongues
who must speak before other, as to keep the rest under obedience, that they
be not too much addicted to themselves, and wedded to their own wills, but
that laying away stubbornness they may show themselves obedient to god.
Neither is it to be doubted but that there was some few which would not yield,
as it falls out in a great assembly: yet the truth of GOD had the upper hand,
so that the silence whereof Luke speaks, was a manifest testimony of common
obedience. And this was no small moderation in Peter, in that having suffered
every one to say for himself what he could: he deferred his judgment (least
it should be prejudicial to others) so long, until the question had bin
througly discussed too and fro.

They heard Barnabas and Paul. We may gather by these words that they were not
heard with silence before. For seeing that the more part was persuaded that
they did wickedlie admit the profane Gentiles into the church, there should
nothing which they should have said, have been patiently received until this
false opinion were corrected and reformed: but all should have been taken at
the worst. We see what a poison displeasure conceived for no cause, is, which
does so possess men's minds, that it stops the way so, that the truth can
never have entrance. Hereby we learn how true that saying is, all things are
sound to the sound, for there is nothing so wholesome but corrupt affections do
turn the same in to that which is hurtful. Tit. 1.15.
And to this end tends the narration made by Paul and Barnabas, that they may
show and prove that God does allow their Apostleship among the Gentiles:
forasmuch as it was ratified and confirmed by miracles which are as it were
certain seals thereof.

13 James answered saying. Some old writers of the church, think that this
James was one of the disciples, whose syrname was Iustus and Oblia, whose cruel
death is recorded by Josephus in the twentieth book of his antiquities. But
would to God the old writers had traveled rather to know the man, tha^ to set
forth with feined praises the holiness of a man whom they knew not. It is a
childish toy and surmise, in that they say that it was lawful for him alone to
enter into the most holy place. For if in that entering in there had bin any
religion, he had done it contrary to the law of God forasmuch as he was not the
highest Priest. Secondly, it was a superstitious thing thus to foster the
shadowishe worship of the Temple. I omit other trifles. And they are greatly
deceived in that they deny that he was one of the 12. Apostles. Gal. 2.9.
For they are enforced to confess that it is he whom Paul commends so
honorably, that he makes him the chief among the three pillars of the
church. Assuredly a man inferior in order and degree could never have excelled
the Apostles so far. For Paul gives him the title of an Apostle. Neither is
that worth the hearing which Hierome brings, that the word is general
there: seeing that the dignity of the order is there handled, for as much as
Christ did prefer the Apostles before other Teachers of the church.

Moreover, we may gather out of this place, that they made no small account of
James: forasmuch as he does with his voice and consent so confirm the words
of Peter, Cha. 21.18.
that they are all of his mind. And we shall see afterward how great his
authority was at Jerusalem. The old writers think that this was because he
was bishop of the place, but it is not to be thought that the faithful did at
their pleasure change the order which Christ had appointed, Wherefore I do not
doubt but that he was son to Alpheus, and Christ's consin: in which sense he
is also called his brother. Whether he were bishop of Jerusalem or no, I leave
it indifferent, neither does it greatly make for the matter, save only because
the impudency of the pope is hereby refuted, because the decree of the
counsel is set down rather at the appointment, and according to the authority
of James then of Peter. And assuredly Eusebius in the beginning of his second
book, is not afraid to call James whosoever he were, the Bishop of the Apostles.
Let the men of Rome go now and boast that their Pope is head of the universal
church, because he is Peter's successor, who suffered another to rule him, if
we believe Eusebius.

Men and brethren, hear me. James his oration consists upon two principal
members, For first he confirms and proves the calling of the gentiles by the
testimony of the prophet Amos, secondly he shows what is best to be don, to
nourish peace and concord among the faithful, yet so that the liberty of the
gentiles may continue safe and sound, and that the grace of Christ may not be
darkened. Whereas Peter is in this place called Simeon, it may be that this name
was diversely pronounced then. Whereas he says that God did visit to take a
people of the Gentiles, it is referred unto the mercy of God, whereby he
vouchsafed to receive strangers into his family. It is in deed a harsh phrase,
yet such as contains a profitable doctrine, because he makes God the
author of the calling of the Gentiles, and pronounces that it is through his
goodness, that they began to be reckoned among his people, when he says that
they were taken by him: but he proceeds further, when he says that he did
visit that he might take. For this is his meaning, that, at such time as the
Gentiles were turned away from God, he did mercifully look upon them: because
we can do nothing but depart farther and farther from him, until such time as
his fatherly look prevent us, of his own accord.

In his name. The old interpreter has, To his name, which is almost all one:
though the preposition epi may be otherwise translated: to wit: For his name,
or upon his name. Neither shall the sense disagree, that the salvation of the
Gentiles is grounded in the power or name of god, and that God did respect no
other thing in calling them, but his own glory: yet did I retain that which is
more usual: to wit, that in numbering them among his people, he would have them
counted in his name, like as it shall be said shortly after, that his name is
called upon by all those, whom he gathers together into his church. The
aduerbe of time proton, may be expounded two ways: if you read it: first, as
the old interpreter and Erasmus have it, the sense shall be that Cornelius and
others, were as it were the first fruits, at who^ God began the calling of the
Gentiles: but it may be taken also comparitiuely, because there was already
some token of the adoption of the Gentiles showed in Cornelius and his cosins
before that Barnabas and Paul preached the gospel to the Gentiles. And I do
better like this latter sense.

15 Heereto agree the words of the prophets. We see now, how the Apostles
took nothing to themselves imperiously, but did reverently follow that which
was prescribed in the word of God. Neither did it grieve them, neither did they
count it any disgrace to them to profess themselves to be the scholars of the
scripture. Also we must here note that the use of the doctrine of the prophets
is yet in force, which some brainsicke men would banish out of the church. By
citing the prophets in the plural number, to be witnesses, whereas he does
allege one place only, he signifies that there is such an agreement among
them, that that which is spoken by one, is the common testimony of them all,
because they speak all with one mouth, and every one speaks as in the person
of all, or rather the spirit of God speaks in them all. Moreover the Oracles
of all the prophets were gathered together, that they might make one body.
Wherefore that might worthily and fitly be ascribed to all the prophets in
general, which was taken out of some one part of the general book.

16 After these things I will return. Because the place is not cited word for
word as it is in the prophet, we must see what difference there is: though it be
not necessary to examine straightly what diversity there is in the words, so it
appear that the prophecy does fitly agree with the matter which is in hand.
After that God has promised the restoring of the tabernacle of David, he says
also, that he will bring to pas, that the Jews shall possess the remnants of
Edom. In all that text there appears nothing as yet, whence the calling of
the gentiles can be fet or gathered: but that which follows immediately after
in the prophet, concerning the remnant of the Gentiles, which shall call upon
the name of the Lord, does plainly show that the Jews and Gentiles shall
make one church, because that which was then proper to the Jews alone, is
given to both in general. For God places the Gentiles in like degree of honor
with the Jews, when he will have them to call upon his name. Those of Idumea
and the people there about were in times past under David, subject to the
Jews, but though they were tributaries to the people of God, yet were they
nevertheless strangers from the church. Therefore this was news and a strange
thing, in that God reckons them up with the holy people, that he may be
called the God of the^ al. Seeing that it is certain that they are all made
equal in honor among themselves by this means. Whereby it does plainly
appear how well the testimony of the prophet agrees with the present
purpose. For God promises to restore the decayed Tabernacle, wherein the
Gentiles shall obey the kingdom of David, not only that they may pay tribute,
or take weapon at the kings commandment: but that they may have one god, and
that they may be one family to him: yet there may a question be moved, why he
had rather cite this prophecy, then many other, which contain more plentiful
proof of the matter which he has in hand, of which sort Paul cites many. Rom,
15.9.10.11.
I answer first that the apostles were not ambitious in heaping up places of
scripture: but they did simply aim at this, which was sufficient for them: to
wit, that they might prove that their doctrine was taken out of the word of
god, Secondly, I say that this prophecy of Amos is more plain then it is
commonly taken to be. The prophet entreats of the restoring of an house which
was decayed, he describes the miserable ruin thereof. Therefore the promise,
which is added immediately that the seat and throne shall be set up again,
from of which, kings of the posterity of David shall rule over the Gentiles,
does properly appertain unto Christ. Therefore so sone as the kingdom of
Christ is set up, that must needs follow which the prophet says also, that the
Gentiles shall call upon the name of God. Now we see that James did not
unadvisedly make choice of this place. For if the kingdom of Christ cannot be
otherwise established, unless god be called upon every where throughout the
whole world, and the Gentiles grew together to be one with his holy people, it
is an absurd thing that they should be driven from hope of salvation, and the
middle wall must fall to the ground, wherewith the one was separate from the other
under the law. The first word, I will return, is not in the prophet: Ephe.
2.14.
but the change of the state which he denounces, is very well expressed by
this means.

The tabernacle of David which was decayed. It is not without cause that that
evil favored wastnes and ruin of the kings house is set before our eyes by
the prophet. For unless the godly should have been persuaded, that Christ
should notwithstanding come, though the kingdom of David were brought to
naught, who should not only restore to their old order, things which were
decayed: but should exalt even unto the heavens the glory of his kingdom with
incomparable success, they should have dispayred and hundredth times in a day.
After they were returned from the exile wherein they lived at Babylon, they were
brought by continual destructions almost unto utter destruction. Afterward
that which remained was consumed by little and little with civil discord, yea
when God did relieve their miseries, that kind of help which they had, was a
certain matter of despair: for that rule which the Machabees took upon the^,
was then taken away from the tribe of Judah. For these causes the Spirit of god
does diligently beat in this by the prophet, that Christ shall not come, until
the kingdom of David shall perish: that they may not despayr of salvation even
amidst greatest miseries. So Isaias says, that there shall a branch arise out
of the contemptible and base stock: and lot us also remember, Isai. 1^* 1.
that God does observe this wonderful way in restoring the church, that he
does build it up when it is decayed. Furthermore this place teaches, when the
church is best ordered and what is the true and right constitution thereof: to
wit, when the throne of David is set up, and Christ alone has the
pre-eminence, that all may meet together in his obedience.

Though the Pope have oppressed the Church with his sacrilegious tyranny, yet
does he make boast of the title of the church: yea he deceives men under the
vain title of the church, that he may put out the clear light of sound
doctrine. But if we shall come thoroughly to examine the matter, we may easily
refute such a gross mock: because he alone bears rule having deposed Christ.
He does in word confess that he is Christ's vicar: but in very deed after that
he has by a beautiful banishment sent Christ into the heavens, he takes to
himself al his power. For Christ reigns by the doctrine of his gospel alone,
which is wickedly trodden underfoot by this abominable idol. But let us remember
that this shall be the lawful estate of the church among us, if we do all in
general obey Christ the king of kings, Ioh. 10.16,
that there may be one sheepfold and one shepherd.

17 That those which remain may seek. James added this word seek* by way of
exposition, which is not found nor read in the prophet: and yet it is not
superfluous: because to the end we may be numbered among the people of god, and
that he may take us for his own, we must on the otherside be encouraged to
seek him. And it is to be thought that Luke did summarily comprehend those
things whereof James did dispute in his own language among the Jews: whereby it
came to pass that the exposition of the matter was mixed with the words of the
prophet. In steed of the relics of the Gentiles which Amos uses, Luke out of
the Greek translation (which was more familiar) puts the rest of the men in
the same sense: to wit, that there must go before the purging of the filthiness
of the world, a cutting, pruning, or paring as it came to pass. And this
doctrine must be also applied unto our time. For because the corruption of the
world is worse, the^ that it can be wholly brought to obey Christ, he blows
away with diverse fannes of tribulations the chaff and weeds, that he may at
length gather unto himself that which shall remain.

18. Known from the beginning. This is a prevention to put away the hatred
which might have risen upon the novelty. For the sudden change might have
been suspected: and therefore did it trouble weak minds. Therefore James
preuenteth, showing that this was no new thing with god, though it fell out
suddenly otherwise then me^ thought. Because god saw before the world was
created, what he would do, and the calling of the Gentiles was hidden in his
secret counsel. Whereupon it follows that it must not be esteemed according
to the sense of man. Furthermore James has respect unto the words of the
prophet, when he affirms that God who should do all these things, was also
the author of the prophecy. Therefore his meaning is, that seeing god
speaks by his prophet: he saw then, yea from the very beginning, that neither
uncircumcision nor any thing else should let him, but that he would chose the
Gentiles into his family. Nevertheless there is comprehended under this a general
exhortation, that men do not take upon them to measure with the small measure
of their wit, Romans 11.33
the works of God, the reason whereof is oftentimes known to none but to
himself. But rather let them cry being astonished, that his ways are past
finding out, and that his judgments are too deep a deapth.

19 Wherefore I think that we ought not to trouble those who of the Gentiles
are turned to God.

20 But that we must write unto them that they abstain from the filthiness of
Images, and from fornication, and from strangled and from blood,

21 For Moses of old time, has those in every city which preach him, when
he^ is read in the Synagogues every Sabbath day.

19 That we must not trouble. He denies that the Gentiles must be driven from
the Church through the disagreement about ceremonies seeing they were admitted
by God: yet it seems contrary to himself, when he denies that they ought to
be troubled, and yet prescribes certain rites. The answer is easy, which I
will hereafter more at large prosecute. First, he requires nothing at their
hands, but that which they were bound to do by brotherly concord: secondly,
these precepts could no whit trouble or disquiet their consciences, after that
they knew that they were free before God, and that false and peruers religion
was taken away, which the false Apostles sought to bring in. The question is
now, why James does inioyne the Gentiles these four things alone. Some say
that this was fet from the ancient custom of the fathers, who did not make any
covenant with any people, which they could enforce to obey the^, but upon this
condition. But because there is no fit author of that thing brought to light,
I leave it in doubt and undecided. But here appears a manifest reason why
they gave particular co^ma^dement concerning things offered to Idols, blood, and
that which was strangled. They were in deed of themselves things indifferent:
yet such as had some special thing in the^, more tha^ other rites of the law. We
know how straightly the Lord commands to eschew those things which are contrary
to the external profession of faith, and wherein there is any appearance or
suspision of Idolatry. Therefore least there should any blot of superstition
remain in the gentiles, and least the Jews should see any thing in the^ which
did not agree with the pure worship of god, no marvel if to avoid offense they
be commanded to abstain from things offered to Idols. The word alisgema
which Luke uses does signify all manner of profanation: therefore I have not
changed the common translation, which has pollution or filthiness. Yet it is
sometime taken for sacrifices: which sense should not disagree with James his
purpose, and peradventure it shall be more plain and natural so to expound
it in this place: because where Luke does shortly after repeat the same
decree, he will put Idolothyta, or things sacrificed to Idols. As concerning
blood and that which was strangled not only the Jews were forbidden by the law
of Moses to eat them: Deuteronomy. 12.23* Genesis 9.4.
but this law was given to all the world after the flood, whereby it came to
pass that those which were not quite grown out of kind, did loath blood. I
do not only speak of the Jews but of many of the Gentiles. I confess in deed
that even that commandment was but temporal: yet notwithstanding it was
exte^ded farther then unto one people. No marvel therefore if there might arise
greater offense thereupo^, which to cure seemed good to the apostles. But there
arises a harder question concerning fornication: because James seems to
reckon the same among things indifferent, whereof they must beware only in
respect of offense. But there was another cause for which he placed fornication
among those things which were not of themselves unlawful. It is well known
what unbridled liberty to run a whoring did reign and rage every where: and
this disease had gotten the upper hand principally among the men of the East
country: as they be more given to lust: assuredly the faith and chastity of
wedlock was never less observed and kept any where then among them. Moreover,
he does not entreat indifferently in my judgment in this place, of all manner
fornication or whoredom, as of adultery and wandering and unbridled lusts,
whereby all chastity is violate and corrupt: but I think he speaks of
concubineship as they call it: which was so common among the Gentiles, that it
was almost like to a law. Therefore whereas James reckons up a common
corruption among things which are of themselves not corrupt, there is therein
no inconvenience: so that we know that it was not his meaning to place those
things in one order which are very far unlike among themselves, For whereas
unclean men do thereby color and cloak their filthiness, they may easily be
refuted. James says, they coupled eating of blood with whoredom: but does he
compare them together as things that are like, at least which disagree not in
any point. Yea he does only respect the wicked and corrupt custom of men,
which was fallen away from the first law and order of nature appointed by God.
As concerning the judgment of god the knowledge thereof must be fet out of the
continual doctrine of the scripture: and it is nothing doutful what the
scripture says: to wit, that whoredom is accursed before God, and that the
soul and body are thereby defiled that the holy temple of God is polluted, and
Christ is rent in pieces: that God does daily punish whoremongers, and that he
will once pay them home. The filthiness of whooredome which the heavenly judge
does so sore condemn, can be covered with no cloakes by the patrons of
whoredom, how witty and eloquent soever they be.

21 For Moses has. This place in my judgment has been badlie expounded, and
drawn into a contrary sense. For interpreters think that James added this,
because it were superfluous to prescribe any thing to the Jews, who were well
acquainted with the doctrine of the law, and to who^ it was read every Sabbath
day: and they pick out this meaning, Let us be content to require these few
things at the hands of the Gentiles, which are not accustomed to bear the yoke
of the law: as touching the Jews, they have Moses out of whom they may learn
more. Some do also gather out of this place, that circumcision with his
appurtenances ought to be observed even at this day among the Jews. But they
reason unfitly and unskillfully, though that exposition which I have set down
were true. But James had a far other meaning; to wit, he teaches that it
cannot be, that ceremonies ca^ be abolished so quickly as it were at the first
dash: because the Jews had now a long time been acquainted with the doctrine
of the law, and Moses had his preachers: therefore it stood them upon to
redeem concord for a short time, until such time as the liberty gotten by
Christ, might by little and little appear more plainly: this is that which is
said in the common proverb, that it was meet that the old ceremonies should be
buried with some honor. Those who are skillful in the Greek tongue shall know
that that last member, When he is read every Sabbath day in the Synagogues, was
by me changed not without cause, for avoiding of doubtfulnes.

22 Then it seemed good to the apostles and Elders with the whole church, to
send chosen men of them to Antioch with Paul and Barnabas, Judas surnamed
Barsabas, and Silas, chief men among the brethren.

23 Sending letters by their hands after this form: The Apostles and Elders
and Brethren, to those brethren which are at Antioch, and in Syria, and Cilicia
which are of the Gentiles, greeting,

24 Because we have heard that certain which went out from us have troubled
you with words, subuerting your souls, commanding you to be circumcised, and
to keep the law, to whom we gave no commandment,

25 It seemed good to us being gathered together with one mind, to send chosen
men to you, with our beloved Barnabas and Paul:

26 Men which have ve^tured their souls for the name of our Lord Jesus Christ.

27 Therefore we have sent Judas and Silas, who shall also tell you the same
things by word of mouth.

28 For it seemed good to the holy ghost and us, to lay no greater burden
upon you then these necessary things.

29 That ye abstain from those things which are sacrificed to Images, and from
blood, and from that which is strangled; and from fornication: from which
things if you shall keep your selves, ye shall do well. Fare ye well.

22 It pleased the Apostles. That tempest was made calm not without the
singular grace of god, so that after the matter was thoroughly discussed, they
did all agree together in sound doctrine. Also the modesty of the common
people is gathered by this, because after that they had referred the matter to
the judgment of the apostles and the rest of teachers, they do now also
subscribe to their decree: and on the other side, the apostles did show some
token of their equity, in that they set down nothing concerning the common
cause of all the godly, without admitting the people. For assuredly this
tyranny did spring from the pride of the pastors, that those things which
appertain unto the common state of the whole church, are subject (the people
being excluded) to the will, I will not say lust, of a few. We know what a hard
matter it is to suppress the slanders of the wicked, to satisfy most men who
are churlish and froward, to keep under the light and unskillful, to wipe away
errors conceived, to heal up hatred, to appease co^te^tions, to abolish falls
reports. Peradventure the enemies of Paul and Barnabas might have said, that
they had gotten letters by fair and flattering speeches: they might have
invented some new cavil: the rude and weak might by and by have been
troubled. But when chief men come with the letters, that they may gravely
dispute the whole matter in presence, all sinister suspicion is taken away.

24 Certain which went out from us. We see that there was no respect of persons
among these holy men: which does always corrupt sound and right judgments.
They confess that there were knaves of their own company: and yet they do no whit
flatter the^, or through corrupt favor incline to cover their error, yea
rather in condemning them freely, they spare not even themselves. And first
they pluck from their faces that visure, which they had abused, to deceive
withal. They boasted that they were privy to the meaning of the apostles: the
apostles reprove them and condemn them of and for lying in that false pretense:
when they utterly deny that they did command any such thing: again, they
accuse them far more sharply, that they trobled the church, and subverted
souls. For by this means they bring them in contempt and detestation with the
godly, because they cannot be admitted but to their destruction. But false
teachers are said to subvert souls, because the truth of god does edify or
build them up, and so this speech contains a general doctrine, unless we
will willingly have our souls drawn headlong from being any longer temples of
the holy ghost, and unless we desire their ruin, we must beware of those,
which go about to lead us away from the pure gospel. That which they say
touching the keeping of the law, does only appertain unto ceremonies: though we
must always remember, that they did so entreat of ceremonies, that both the
salvation, and also the righteousness of men did therein consist. For the false
apostles did command that they should be kept, as if righteousness came by the
law, and salvation did depend upon works.

25 With our beloved Barnabas and Paul. They set these praises against the
slanders wherewith the false apostles had assayed to bring Paul and Barnabas out
of credit. And first to the end they may remove the opinion of disagreement
which had possessed the minds of many, they testify their consent: secondly,
they commend Paul and Barnabas for their feruentnes in zeal, and most manlike
courage, that they were not afraid to venture or lay down their souls for
Christ's sake. And this is an excellent virtue in a minister of the gospel, and
which deserves no small praise, if he shall not only be stout and courageous to
execute the office of teaching: but also be ready to enter danger which is
offered in defense of his doctrine. As the Lord does thus try the faith and
constancy of those which be his: so he does as it were make them noble with
the ensigns of virtue, that they may excel in his church. Therefore Paul
holds forth the marks of Christ which he did bear in his body, as a buckler
to drive back those knaves which did troble his doctrine. Gal. 6.17.
And though it do not so fall out with most stout and courageous teachers and
preachers of the gospel, that they strive for the Gospel until they come in
danger of life, because the matter does not so require: yet is this no let but
that Christ may purchase authority for his martyrs, so often as he brings
them into worthy and renowned co^flicts. Nevertheless, let eue^ those who are
not enforced to enter cumbat by any necessity, be ready to shead their blood if
god see it good at any time that it should be so. But the apostles commend the
fortitude of Paul and Barnabas only in a good cause, because if it were
sufficient to enter dangers manfully, the martyrs of Christ should nothing
differ from troublesome and frenzy men, from cutters and roysters. Therefore
Paul and Barnabas are commended, not because they laid open themselves simply
to dangers, but because they refuse not to die for Christ's sake. Peradventure
also the apostles meant to nip those knaves by the way, who having never
suffered any thing for Christ's sake, came out of their roust and dainties to
trouble the churches, which cost the courageous souldiars of Christ dearly.

28 It seemed good to the holy ghost and to us. Whereas the Apostles and Elders
match and ioyn themselves with the holy ghost, they attribute nothing to
themselves apart therein: but this speech imports as much as if they should
say, that the holy ghost was the captain, guide and governor: and that they
did set down and decreed that which they write as he did indite it to them.
For this manner of speech is used commonly in the scripture: to give the
ministers the second place after that the name of God is once expressed. When
it is said that the people believed God and his servant Moses, faith is not
rent in pieces, as if it did addict it self partly to God and partly to mortal
man. What then? to wit, whereas the people had God for the sole author of their
faith, they believed or gave credence to his minister from whom he could not be
separate. Neither could they otherwise believe god, then by believing the
doctrine set before the^ by Moses: Exo. 14.31.
as they did shake off the yoke of God, after that they had once rejected and
despised Moses. Whereby the wickedness of those me^ is also refuted, who making
boast of faith with full mouth, do no less wickedly then proudly contemn the
ministry. For as it were a sacrilegious partition, if faith should depend even
but a very little upon man: so those men do openly mock god, who feign that
they have him to be their teacher, when they set naught by the ministers by
whom he speaks. Therefore the apostles deny that they inverted that decree of
their own brain which they deliver to the Gentiles, but that they were only
ministers of the Spirit, that they may with the authority of god make them
commendable which (proceeding from him) they do faithfully deliver. So when
Paul makes mention of his gospel, he does not enforce upon the^ a new gospel,
which is of his own inuenting, but he preaches that which was committed to
him by Christ.

And the papists are doltish who go about out of these words to prove, that
the Church has some authority of her own: yea they are contrary to
themselves. For under what color do they avouch that the Church cannot err:
save only because it is grounded immediately by the holy spirit? Therefore
they cry out with open mouth that those things be the oracles of the spirit,
which we prove to be their own inventions. Therefore they do foolishly urge
this clause, It seemed good to us, because if the Apostles decreed any thing
apart from the Spirit, that principal maxim shall fall to ground, That
Councels decree nothing but that which is indicted by the Spirit.

Besides these necessary things. The Papists do frowardly triumph under
color of this word, as if it were lawful for men to make Laws which may lay
necessity upon the conscience. That (say they) which the church commands
must be kept under pain of mortal sin: because the Apostles say that that
must necessarily be observed which they decree. But such a vain cavil is
quickly answered. For this necessity reached no farther than there was any
danger least the unity should be cut a sunder. So that to speak properly,
this necessity was accidental or external: which was placed not in the thing
it self, but only in avoiding of the offense, which appears more plainly
by abolishing of the decree. For Laws made concerning things which are of
themselves necessary, must be continual. But we know that this Law was
foredone by Paul, so soon as the tumult and contention was once ended, Romans
14.14. 1. Cor. 10.25
when he teaches that nothing is unclean, and when he grants liberty to
eat all manner meats, yea even such as were sacrificed to Idols. Wherefore in
vain do they gather any cloak or color out of this word, to bind men's
consciences, seeing that the necessity spoken of in this place, did only
respect men in the external use, least there should any offense rise
thereupon: and that their liberty before God might stand whole and sound. Also
in vain do they gather out of all the whole place, and in vain do they go
about out of the same to prove that the church had power given to decree any
thing contrary to the word of God. The Pope has made such laws as seemed best
to him contrary to the word of God, whereby he meant to govern the Church: and
that not ten or twenty, but an infinite number: so that they do not only
tyrannously oppress souls: but are also cruel torments to vex and torment
the^. To the end the hired brablers of the Pope may excuse such cruelty, they
do object that even the Apostles did forbid the Gentiles that which was not
forbidden in the word of God. But I say flatly that the Apostles added nothing
unto the word of God. Which shall plainly appear, if we list to mark their
drift. I said of late that they meant nothing less then to set down a
perpetual law, whereby they might bind the faithful. What then? They use that
remedy which was fit for the nourishing of brotherly peace and concord among
the Churches: that the Gentiles may for a time apply themselves to the Jews.
But if we will grant any thing, we must assuredly confess that this is
according to the word of God, that love bear the sway in things indifferent:
that is, that the external use of those things which are of themselves free,
be bent unto the rule of charity. In sum, if love be the bond of perfection
and end of the Law, if God command that we study to preserve mutual unity
among our selves, and that every man serve his neighbor to edify: no man is
so ignorant which does not see that that is contained in the word of God,
which the Apostles command in this place: only they apply a general rule
to their time. Furthermore let us remember that which I said before, that it
was a politic Law, which could not ensnare the conscience, neither bring in
any feigned worship of God: which two vices the scripture condemns every
where in men's traditions. But admit we should grant (which is most false) that
that did not accord with the word of God which was decreed in that council:
yet that makes nothing for the Papists. Let the Councels decree any thing
contrary to the express word of God, according to the revelation of the
Spirit: Yet none but lawful Councels may have this authority given them.
Then let them prove that their Councels were godly and holy, to the decrees
whereof they will have us subject. But I will not any farther prosecute this
point, because it was handled in the beginning of the Chapter. Let the readers
know (which is sufficient for this present place) that the Apostles pass not
the bounds of the word of God, when they set down an external Law as time
requires, whereby they may reconcile the Churches among themselves.

30 Therefore when they were let go they came to Antioch, and when they had
assembled the multitude together, they delivered the Epistle.

31 Which when they had read, they rejoiced over the consolation.

32 And Judas and Silas, seeing they were also Prophets, did with many words or
they did comfort.
exhort the brethren, and strengthened them.

33 And they tarried there for a time, and then they were let go by the
brethren in peace unto the Apostles.

34 But it seemed good to Silas to stay there.

35 And Paul and Barnabas stayed at Antiochia, teaching and preaching with many
me the word of the Lord.

30 When the multitude was gathered. This was the most lawful kind of dealing
to admit the whole multitude unto the reading of the Epistle. For if there fall
out any controversy in the doctrine of faith, it is meet that the judgment
be referred over unto the learned and godly and to such as are exercised in
the Scripture: and chiefly to the pastors rightly ordained. Notwithstanding
because it belongs to all alike to know for a suertie what they must hold,
the godly and learned teachers must make known to the whole Church, what they
have set down out of the word of God. For there is nothing more unfitting for
holy and Christian order, than to drive away the body of the people from
common doctrine as if it were a heerd of swine: as they use to do under the
tyranny of popery. For because the Pope and the horned bishops did think that
the people would never be obedient enough, until they were brought into
gross ignorance, they imagined that this was the best summarie of faith, to
know nothing but to depend wholly upon their decrees. But on the contrary there
must be a mean observed, that lawful governments may continue, and that on
the otherside, the people may have that liberty which unto them belongs,
least they be oppressed like slaves.

31 They rejoiced over the consolation. Seeing that the Epistle is so short, and
contains nothing but a bare narration, what consolation could they have by
it? But we must note, that there was no small matter of consolation therein,
because when they knew the consent of the Apostles, they were all pacified,
and also whereas before there was variance among them, they are now reconciled
one to another. Seeing there went a false report about, that all the Apostles
were against Paul and Barnabas, this same had shaken some who were too light of
belief: many did stand in doubt: the wicked abused this occasion to speak
evil: othersome were pricked forward with love of noualty and with curiosity,
and one was set against another. But now after that they see that the judgment
of the first Church does agree with the doctrine of Paul and Barnabas, they
obtain that for which the children of God ought most to wish, that being
established in the right faith, and being of one mind among themselves, they
may with quiet minds have peace one with another.

32 Judas and Silas. These two brethren were sent for this cause, that they
might also testify the same thing by word which was contained in the letters,
and more also. Otherwise the Apostles would not have sent such short letters
concerning so great and weighty a matter: and they would have also spoken
somewhat touching the mysteries of faith, and would have made some long
exhortation, wherein they would have persuaded them unto the study of
godliness. Now Luke shows some farther thing by them done: to wit, that
being furnished with the gift of Prophecy, they edify the Church in general,
as if he should say, they did not only do their duty faithfully in the
cause which was now in hand: but they did also take good and profitable
pains in teaching and exhorting the Church. And we must note that he says
that they exhorted the Church because they were Prophets: for it is not a
thing common to all men to enter such an excellent function. Therefore we must
beware least any man pass his bounds: as Paul teaches 1. Cor. 7. and
Ephesians 4. 1. Cor. 7.20. Ephesians. 4.1.
that every one keep himself within the measure of grace received. Wherefore
it is not in vain that Luke says that the office of teaching is peculiar:
least any man through ambition being void of ability, or through rash zeal,
or through any other foolish desire coveting to put out his head, trouble the
order of the Church.

They were Prophets. Whereas the word has diverse significations, it is not
taken in this place for those prophets to whom it was granted to foretell
things to come: because this title should come in out of season when he
entreats of another matter: but Luke his meaning is that Judas and Silas were
endued with excellent knowledge and understanding of the mysteries of God, that
they might be good interpreters of God: as Paul in the forteenth of the first
to the Corinthians, when he entreats of the prophecy, 1. Cor. 14.3.
and prefers it before al other gifts, speaks not of foretelling of things
to come: but he commends it for this fruit, because it does edify the Church
by doctrine, exhortation, and consolation. After this manner does Luke assign
exhortation to the Prophets, as being the principal point of their office.

33 They were let go in peace. That is, when they departed, the brethren in
taking their leave of them, did wish them well, as friends use to do. And
there is Synecdoche in this member: because the one of the two did only
return to Jerusalem. And in the text there is a correction added immediately,
that it seemed good to Silas to tarry there: but when Luke joins them both
together, his meaning is only to declare that the Church was quiet before they
thought upon any returning. At length he adds that Paul and Barnabas so long
as they were at Antioch gave themselves to teaching, and did continue in this
work: and yet did they give place to many mo. Whereby it appears that they
had al one and the same desire without grudging, so that they joined hand in
hand to do good. Though it seems that he makes mention of many more of set
purpose, least we should think that after that Paul and Barnabas were
departed, that Church was destitute, which did flourish in abundance of
teachers. Moreover the blessing of God which began streightway to appear
again in that Church, is now again commended and extolled, which Church Satan
went about by his ministers miserably to scatter and lay wast.

36 And after a few days Paul said to Barnabas, Returning let us now visit our
brethren throughout all Cities wherein we have preached the word of the Lord,
and see how they do.

37 And Barnabas counseled to take Ihon whose syrname was Mark:

38 But Paul besought him that he which slid back from them in Pamphilia, and
had not gone with them to the work, might not be taken to their company.

39 And the contention waxed so hot between them, that they parted company:
and Barnabas having taken to him Mark, sailed to Cyprus.

40 But Paul having chosen Silas iorneyed, being committed to the grace of god
by the brethren.

41 And he went through Syria and Cilicia, establishing the Churches.

36 Let us visit our brethren. In this history we must first note how careful
Paul was for the Churches which he had ordained. He labors in deed at
Antiochia profitablie: but because he remembered that he was an Apostle
ordained of God, and not the pastor of one particular place, he keeps the
course of his calling. Secondly, as it did not become him to be tied to one
place, so he thinks with himself that he was bound to all whom he begat in
the Lord: therefore he will not suffer them to want his help. Moreover the
work that was begun in those places could not be neglected, but it would
shortly after decay. Yet it is to be thought that Paul stayed still in the
Church of Antiochia, until he saw the estate thereof well ordered, and concord
established. For we know and try what great force principal Churches have to
keep other lesser Churches in order. If there arise any tumult in an obscure
street, or if there fall out any offense, the rumor goes not so far, neither
are the neighbors so much moved. But if any place be excellent, it cannot
quail without great ruin: or at least but that the lesser buildings shall be
therewith sore shaken both far and wide. Therefore Paul in staying a time at
Antioch did provide for other Churches: and so we must no less look unto his
wisdom than his diligence in this example: because oftentimes the immoderate
heat of the Pastors in going about matters, does no less hurt than their
sluggishnes.

How they do. Paul knew that amidst so great lightness and inconstancy of
men, and as their nature is inclined to vice, if there be any thing well
ordered among them it does seldom continue stable and for any long time: and
especially that Churches do easily decay or grow out of kind unless they be
looked too continually. There ought nothing under heaven to be more firm,
than the spiritual building of faith, whose stabilitie is grounded in the very
heaven, yet there be but few in whose minds the word of the Lord does
thoroughly take lively root: therefore firmnes is rare in men. Again, even
those who have their anchor firmly fixed in the truth of God, do not cease
notwithstanding to be subject to diverse tossings: whereby though their faith be
not ouerturned yet has it need of strengthening that it may be underpropped
and stayed. Moreover we see how satan does assault, and with what subtle
shifts he goes about privily to pull down sometimes whole Churches,
sometimes every one of the faithful particularly. Therefore it is not without
cause that Paul is so careful for his scholars, least they behave themselves
otherwise, then is to be wished: and therefore is he desirous in time to
prevent, if there be any inconvenience risen: which cannot be until he have
taken view.

37 And Barnabas gave counsel. Luke does here set down that doleful
disagreement, which ought to make all the godly afraid for just causes. The
society of Paul and Barnabas was consecrated by the heavenly oracle. They had
long time labored being of one mind, under this yoke whereunto the Lord had
tied them: they had by many e^^eriences tried the excellent favor of God. Yea
that wonderful success mentioned heretofore by Luke, was a manifest blessing
of God. Though they had bin almost drowned so often in so many tempests of
persecution, and were set upon so sore by infinite enemies: though domestical
sedition were every where kindled against them, yet they were so far from
being pulled in sunder, that their agreement was then most of al tried. But now
for a light matter, and which might easily have bin ended, they break that
holy bond of Gods calling. This could not fall out without great perturbance to
all the godly. Seeing that the heat of the contention was so great and vehement
in these holy men, who had long time accustomed themselves to suffer all
things: what shall befall us, whose affections being not as yet so brought to
obey God, do oftentimes rage without modesty? Seeing that a light occasion did
separate them, who had long time amidst so great trials retained unity holily,
how easily may satan cause those to be divided, who have either none or at
least a cold desire to foster peace? What great pride was it for Barnabas, who
had no more honorable thing than to be Paul his companion, that he might behave
himself like a son toward his father, so stubbernely to refuse his counsel?
Peradventure also some might think that Paul was not very courteous in that
he did not forgive a faithful helper this fault. Therefore we be admonished
by this example, that unless the servants of Christ take great heed, there be
many chinkes through which Satan will creep in, to disturb that concord
which is among them. But now we must examine the cause it self. For some
there be who lay the blame of the disagreement upon Paul: and at the first
hearing, the reasons which they bring seem probable. John Mark is rejected,
because he withdrew himself from Paul's company: but he fell not away from
Christ. A young man being as yet unacquainted with bearing the cross, returned
home from his journey. He was somewhat to be born with for his age: being a
freshwater soldiar he fainted in troubles even at the first dash: he was not
therefore about to be a slothful soldiar during his whole life. Now forasmuch
as his returning to Paul is an excellent testimony of repentance, it seems to
be a point of discourtesie to reject him. For those must be handled more
courteously, who punish themselves for their own offenses of their own accord.
There were also other causes which ought to have made Paul more courteous. The
house of John Mark was a famous Inn: Sup. 12.12.
his mother had entertained the faithful in most grievous persecution: when
Herod and all the people were in a rage, they were wont to have their secreat
meetings there: as Luke reported before. Surely he ought to have borne with
such a holy and courageous woman, least immoderate rigor should alienate her:
she was desirous to have her son addicted to preach the gospel, now what a
great grief might it have bin to her, that his pains and industry should be
refused for one light fault? and now whereas John Mark does not only bewail his
fault, but in very deed amend the same: Barnabas has a fair color why he
should pardon him. Yet we may gather out of the text, that the Church did allow
Paul's counsel. For Barnabas departs and with his companion he saileth into
Cyprus. There is no mention made of the brethren: as if he had departed privily
without taking his leave. But the Brethren commend Paul in their prayers to the
grace of God: whereby appears thar the Church stood on his side. Secondly
whereas God shows forth the power of his Spirit in blessing Paul, and does
bless his labors with happy success of his grace, and leaves Barnabas as it
were buried, there may a probable reason be drawn thence, that it pleased him
that such an example of severity should be showed. And surely the offense of
Ihon Mark was greater then it is commonly taken for. He slid not back in deed
from the faith of Christ: yet did he forsake his calling, and was a revolt from
the same: therefore it was a matter which might have given evil example, if he
had bin streightway received again into the calling, from which he was slid
back. He had given himself over to serve Christ upon this condition, that he
should be free no longer. It was no more lawful for him to break his promise
made in this behalf, than it is for a husband to leave his wife, or for a son
to forsake his father. Neither does infirmity excuse his unfaithfulness,
whereby the holiness of the calling was violate. And we must note that he was
not altogether rejected of Paul: he counted him as a brother, so he would be
content with the common order: he refused to admit him unto the common function
of teaching: from whence he fell filthily through his own fault. And there is
no great difference between these two, whether he which has offended be quite
excluded from pardon: or he have only public honor denied him: though it may
be that they did both exceed measure, as accidents do oftentimes mar a matter
which is otherwise good. It was well done of Paul and according to the right of
discipline profitably, not to admit him to be his companion, whose inconstancy
he had once tried: but when he saw Barnabas so importunate, he might have
yielded to his desire. We ought to make more account of the truth than of the
favor of all the whole world: but it is convenient that we ponder wisely, what
great weight there is in the matter which is in hand. For if in a matter of no
weight or edification a man vant of his constancy, prepare himself for the
conflict, and cease not to defend that until the end, wherein he did once take
delight: it shall be but foolish and perverse obstinacy. There was also some
middle way and means whereby Paul might have granted somewhat to the
importunatnesse of his fellow in office: and yet have not revolted from the
truth. It was not for him to flatter Mark, or to cloak his offense: yet was
he not let by religion but that after he had freely professed what he
thought, he might suffer himself to be overcome in that matter, which did
neither indamage true doctrine, nor endanger man's salvation: which I say for
this cause, that we may learn to moderate our desire even in the best causes,
least it pass measure and be too fervent.

CHAP. XVI.
1 AND he came to Derbe and Lystra: and behold there was there a certain
disciple named Timotheus, the son of a certain faithful woman a Iewesse,
and his father was a Grecian.

2 He was well reported of by the brethren, which were at Lystra and Iconium.

3 Paul would have him to go with him: and when he had taken him he circumcised
him because of those Jews which were in those places. For they all knew that
his father was a Grecian.

4 And as they passed through the Cities, they delivered to them to be kept
the decrees, which were decreed by the Apostles and Elders, which were at
Jerusalem.

5 And so the Churches were confirmed in the faith, and abounded in number
daily.

1 Luke does now now begin to declare what were the proceedings of Paul after
that Barnabas and he were separate. And first he shows that he took to his
company at Lystra, Timothy to be his companion. But to the end we may know
that Paul did nothing rashly or without good consideration, Luke says plainly
that Timothy was such a man as the brethren did well like of, and that they
gave testimony of his godliness: for thus does he speak word for word. And so
Paul himself observes the like choice, which he elsewhere commands to be
made in choosing ministers. Neither is it to be thought, that those prophecies
did even then come to light wherewith Timothy was set forth, 1. Tim. 1.18.
and adorned by the spirit, as Paul does testify elsewhere. But there seems
to be some disagreement in that, 1. Tim. 3.7.
in that Luke says that Timotheus was well reported off amongst the brethren:
and Paul will have him to have a good report of those who are without, who is
chosen to be a Bishop. I answer, that we must principally look unto the
judgment of the godly: as they be sole meet witnesses, and do alone rightly
discern well and wisely according to the Spirit of God: and that we ought to
attribute no more to the wicked than to blind men. Therefore it appears that
godliness and holiness of life must be judged according to the will and consent
of godly men: that he be counted worthy to be a Bishop, whom they commend.
Notwithstanding I confess that even this also is required in the second
place, that the very infidels be enforced to commend him: least the Church of
God come in danger of their slanders and evil speaking, if it commit it
self to be governed by men of evil report.

3 He Circumcised him because of the Jews. Luke does plainly express that
Timothy was not circumcised, because it was necessary it should be so: or
because the religion of that sign did continue as yet: but that Paul might
avoid an offense. Therefore there was respect had of men, whereas the matter
was free before God. Wherefore the circumcising of Timotheus was no sacrament,
as was that which was given to Abraham and his posterie: but an indifferent
Ceremony, which served only for nourishing of love, and not for any exercise
of godliness. Now the question is, Genesis 17.13.
whether it were lawful for Paul to use a vain sign, whose signification
and force was abolished: for it seems a vain thing when there is a departure
made from the institution of God. But Circumcision was commanded by God to
continue only until the coming of Christ. To this question I answer, that
Circumcision did so cease at the coming of Christ, that notwithstanding the
use thereof was not quite abolished by and by: but it continued free, until
all men might know that Christ was the end of the Law, by the more manifest
revelation of the light of the Gospel. And here we must note three degrees. The
first is, that the ceremonies of the Law were so abolished by the coming of
Christ, that they did neither any longer appertain unto the worship of God,
neither were they figures of spiritual things, neither was there any necessity
to use them. The second is, that the use thereof was free, until the truth of
the Gospel might more plainly appear. The third, that it was not lawful for
the faithful to retain them, save only so far forth as the use thereof
served, for edification, neither was there any superstition thereby fostered.
Though that free power to use them, whereof I have spoken, be not without
exception: because there was a diverse respect to be had of ceremonies. For
circumcision was not in the same place, wherein the sacrifices were, which were
ordained for the purging of sins. Wherefore it was lawful for Paul to circumcise
Timotheus: it had not bin lawful for him to offer a sacrifice for sin. This is
in deed a general thing that all the worship of the Law, did cease at the
coming of Christ, (because it was to continue but for a time) as touching
faith and conscience: but concerning the use we must know this, that it is
indifferent and left in the liberty of the godly for a short time: so far as
it was not contrary to the confession of faith. We must note the shortness of
time whereof I speak, to wit until the plain manifestation of the Gospel:
because some learned men are grossly deceived in this point, who think that
circumcision does yet take place among the Jews: whereas Paul teaches that
it is superfluous when we are buried with Christ by baptism. It was better and
more truly said in the old proverb, that The synagogue was to be buried with
honor. Coll. 2.11.12.
Now it rests that we declare how far forth the use of circumcision was
indifferent. That shall easily appear by the manner of the liberty. Because
the calling of the Gentiles was not as yet generally known, Galat. 2.3.
it was meet that the Jews should have some prerogative granted them.
Therefore until it might be better known that the adoption was deducted from
the lynage and kindred of Abraham unto all the Gentiles: it was lawful so far
as edification did require, to retain the sign of difference. For seeing that
Paul would not circumcise Titus, and does avouch that the same was well done,
it follows that it was not lawful to use this ceremony always and without
choice. Therefore they were to have respect unto edification, and unto the
public commodity of the Church. Because he could not circumcise Titus,
unless he would betraie the doctrine of the Gospel, and lay himself open to
the slanders of the adversaries: he abstained from the free use of the
Ceremony, which he did use in Timotheus, when he saw that it was profitable
for the Church. Hereby it does easily appear what horrible confusion does
reign in popery. There is there an huge heap of Ceremonies, and to what end,
but that they may have in steed of one veil of the old temple an hundred: God
did abrogate those ceremonies which he had commanded, that the truth of the
Gospel might shine more clearly: men durst take upon them to bring in new, and
that without keeping any measure. After this came in a wicked surmise, that all
these serve for the worship of God: at length followed the devilish confidence
of Merit. Now, forasmuch as it is evident enough that such Ceremonies are
neither veyles nor sepulchers wherewith Christ is covered: but rather stinking
dunghils wherein faith and religion are chocked: those who make the use thereof
generally free, do ascribe more to the Pope, than the Lord grants to his
Law. It is to no end to speak of the Mass and of such filthiness which
contain in themselves manifest idolatry.

They all knew this. Luke tells us that this was Paul's drift, to make an
entrance for Timotheus unto the Jews, least they should abhor him as a
profane man. They knew all (says he) that his father was a Grecian.
Therefore because the mothers had no power over their children, they were fully
persuaded that he was uncircumcised. Let the readers note here by the way, how
miserable the bondage of the people of God was then. Eunicha mother to
Timotheus was one of the small remnaunt, which the very Jews themselves counted
a monster: and yet being married to a man which was an Infidel, she durst not
consecrate her children to God: no she durst not so much as give the^ the
external sign of grace: and yet she ceased not therefore to instruct her son
of a child holily in the fear of God: and in his true worship. An example
surely worthy to be followed of women, who^ their husbands affray with their
tyrannous government, from keeping and training up their children and families
chastely in true godliness. Grecian is taken in this place for a ge^tile, after
the old and common custom of the scripture.

4 They delivered them the decrees to keep. In these words Luke does
signify unto us how desirous Paul was of peace. The best and strongest bond
to keep and foster peace among the churches, was to keep that which was set
down by the Apostles. When Paul takes great pains about that, he takes
great heed least through his fault there arise any trouble. And let us
remember that that continued but for a time: because so soon as he sees the
danger of offense cease, he does quite unburden the churches, and setting
apart the decree, he makes that free which the Apostles had there forbidden.
And yet does not he ca^cel or violate by that abrogation that which the
Apostles had decreed, or contemn the authors themselves: because they were not
determined to establish a perpetual law: but only to mitigate for a short
time that which might hurt weak consciences: as I did more at large declare in
the former chapter: whereby the folly of the papists is sufficiently refuted,
who do grievously lay to our charge that we be far unlike Paul: because we
will have the consciences of the godly governed by the word of God alone,
setting light by the decrees of the church, as they call the^, and not to be
subject to the will of men. But as I have already said, Paul meant nothing
less, then to ensnare men's consciences in the snare of necessity, for he is
not contrary to himself, when he cries in other places, Tit. 1.15.
that all things are clean to the clean. And again, He which is clean
eats all things. And again, The kingdom of God is not meat and drink. Romans
14.2.17.
And again, Meat does not commend us to God. Again, Eat al things which are
sold in the shambles, asking no question for conscience sake. But in one word
he reconcileth those things which might otherwise seem to disagree, ^. Cor.
8.8.
when he commands to abstain from things sacrificed to idols, for another
man's conscience sake. Nevertheless he takes great heed that he bind not godly
souls with the laws of me^. Therefore we attempt nothing at this day which is
contrary to, or disagreeing with Paul. But the papists mock us too groslie
when they compare their laws with the decrees of the Apostles. The Apostles
invented no new worship of God, they had erected no new spiritual government:
but for the desire they had to maintain peace they exhorted the gentiles, that
they would yield a little to the Jews. Before the pope ca^ excuse his laws
under this color, he must first change them wholly. And as for us, seeing that
the papists do place the spiritual worship of God in man's inventions, and
translate the right which belongs to God alone unto men, that they may reign
as Lords over souls: we are enforced manfully to withstand them, unless
through treacherous silence, we will betray the grace gotten by the blood of
Christ. Now what likelihood can there be between three decrees set down for
the help and comfort of the weak, and an infinite heap of laws: which does
not only oppress miserable souls with the weight thereof, but also swallowe
up faith? We know the complaint of Augustine writing to Ianuarius: that the
Church was wickedly laden even then with too great a burden of traditions.
Could he, I pray you suffer the bondage of these times, which is almost an
hundredth times harder and heavier.

5 The Churches were confirmed. By this we gather, that that which Luke sets
down, or rather touches concerning the decrees of the apostles, was as it were
put in by the way, being not much appertinent unto the matter. For he
commends a far other fruit of Paul's doctrine, when he says that the
churches were confirmed in the faith. Therefore Paul did so order external
things, that he was principally careful for the kingdom of God, which
consists in the doctrine of the gospel, and does far surpass and surmount
external order. Therefore those decrees were mentioned, in as much as they
were expedient for mainteining concord, that we might know that the holy man
had a care thereof. But religion and godliness has the former place, whose sole
foundation is faith: which again does stay it self upon the pure word of
God, and does not depend upon men's laws. Now by this example Luke pricketh us
forward to proceed continually: least at the beginning sloth or neglect of
profiting come upon us. Also the way to increase faith is expressed, to wit
when the Lord does stir us up by the industry of his servants: as at that
time he used the labor and diligence of Paul and his companions. When he
adds immediately that they were also increased in number: he commends
another fruit of preaching: and yet he does therwithal signify unto us, that
the more those profit in faith, who are first called, the more do they bring
unto Christ: as if faith did creep abroad unto others by branches.

6 And when they had gone through Phrygia and the country if Galacia, they
were forbidden of the holy Ghost to speak the word in Asia.

7 And going into Mysia they assayed to go into Bithynia: and the spirit
suffered them not.

8 And when they had passed through Mysia, they came down to Troada.

9 And Paul saw a vision by night, There was a certain man of Macedonia,
standing and praying him, and saying, coming into Macedonia, help us.

10 And so soon as he saw the vision, we sought streightway to go into
Macedonia, being surely confirmed that the Lord had called us to preach the
Gospel to them.

6 When they had gone throughout. Luke shows here how diligent and careful
Paul and his companions were in the office of teaching: for he says that they
iorneyed through diverse regions of the lesser Asia, that they might preach the
gospel. But he recites one thing which is worth the remembering, that they were
forbidden by the Spirit of God to speak of Christ in some places, which
serves not a little to set forth the Apostleship of Paul: as undoubtedly he
was not a little encouraged to proceed, when he knew that the Spirit of God
was his guide in his way, and the governor of his actions. And whereas whither
soever they came they prepared themselves to teach, they did that according to
their calling, and according to the commandment of God. For they were sent to
preach and publish the Gospel to the Gentiles without exception: but the Lord
revealed his counsel in governing the course of their journey, which was before
unknown, even in a moment. Notwithstanding the question is, If Paul taught no
where but whither he was led by the Spirit, what certainetie shall the
ministers of the Church have at this day of their calling, who are certified by
no Oracles when they must speak or hold their peace? I answer, Seeing that
Paul's province and charge was so wide, he had need of the singular direction
of the Spirit. He was not made the Apostle of one particular place, or of a
few Cities: but he had received commandment to preach the Gospel through
Asia, and Europa: which was to sail in a most wide sea. Wherefore there is no
cause why we should wonder that in that confused wideness God beckened unto
him as it were by reaching forth his hand, how far he would have him go, or
whither.

But here arises an other harder question, why the Lord did forbid Paul to
speak in Asia, and suffered him not to come into Bithynia. For if answer be
made that these Gentiles were unworthy of the doctrine of salvation; we may
again demand why Macedonia was more worthy. Those who desire to be too
wise, do assign the causes of this difference in men: that the Lord
vouchsafes every man of his Gospel, as he sees him bent unto the obedience
of faith: but he himself says far otherwise, to wit, that he appeared
plainly to those which sought him not, and that he spoke to those who asked
not of him. For whence comes aptness to be taught and a mind to obey, but
from his Spirit? therefore it is certain that some are not preferred before
othersome by their merit, seeing that all men are naturally like backward and
waiwarde from faith. Therefore there is nothing better than to leave free power
to God to vouchsafe and deprive of his grace whom he will. And surely as his
eternal election is free, so his calling is also free which flows thence:
and is not grounded in men, seeing that he is not indebted to any.

Wherefore let us know that the Gospel springs and issues out to us out of
the sole fountain of mere grace. And yet God does not want a just reason,
why he offers his Gospel to some, and passes over othersome: But, I say,
that that reason lies hid in his secreat counsel. In the mean season let the
faithful know, that they were called freely, when other were set aside: least
they take that to themselves which is due to the mercy of God alone. And in the
rest whom God rejects for no manifest cause, let them learn to wonder at the
deep depth of his judgment, which they may not seek out. And here the word
Asia is taken for that part which is properly so called. When Luke says that
Paul and his companions assaied to come into Bithynia, until they were
forbidden of the spirit: he shows that they were not directed by Oracles,
save only when need required, as the Lord uses to be present with his in
doleful and uncertain matters.

9 A vision by night. The Lord would not that Paul should stay any longer in
Asia: because he would draw him into Macedonia. And Luke expresses the manner
of the drawing, that a man of Macedonia appeared to him by night. Where we must
note that the Lord did not always observe the same manner of revelation:
because diverse kinds are more convenient for confirmation. And it is not said
that this vision was offered in a dream: but only in the night season. For
there be certain night visions, which men see when they be awake.

Help us. This speech sets forth the ministry committed to Paul. For
seeing that the Gospel is the power of God to salvation, those which are the
ministers of God are said to help those who perish: that having delivered them
from death, they may bring them unto the inheritance of eternal life. Romans
1.16.
And this ought to be no small encouragement for godly teachers to stir up
the heat of their study and desire: when they hear that they call back
miserable souls from destruction, and that they help those who should
otherwise perish, that they may be saved. Again, all people unto whom the
Gospel is brought, are taught reverently to embrace the ministers thereof as
deliuerers: unless they will maliciously reject the grace of God: and yet this
commendation and title is not so translated unto men, that God is robbed even
of the least part of his praise: because though he by his ministers give
salvation, yet is he the only author thereof, as if he reached out his hands
to help.

10 Being fully persuaded. Hence we gather that it was no bare vision but that
it was also confirmed by the testimony of the Spirit. For Satan does
oftentimes abuse ghosts and visures to deceive with all, that he may mock and
cousin the unbelievers. Whereby it comes to pass that the bare vision leaves
man's mind in doubt: but such as are divine in deed, those does the Spirit
seal by a certain mark: that those may not doubt nor waver, whom the Lord
will have certainly addicted to himself, A wicked Spirit appeared to Brutus,
inuiting him to enter that unhappy cumbate and battle which he had at
Philippi, even in the very same place whereunto Paul was afterward called. But
as the cause was far unlike: so the Lord dealt far otherwise with his
servant, so that he put him out of doubt: and left him not astonished with fear.
Now in Paul and his companions the desire to obey insued immediately upon the
certainty: for so soon as they understand that the Lord called them, they
address themselves to their journey. The termination of the participle which is
here used is active: and though it have diverse significations, I do not doubt
but that Luke his meaning is, that Paul and the rest, after that they had
conferred this vision with the former Oracles, were fully persuaded that the
Lord had called them into Macedonia.

11 Therefore when we had loosed from Troas, we came with a straight course
into Samothracia, and the day following to Neapolis.

12 And from thence to Philippi, which is the chief City of the parties of
Macedonia, being a free City. And we stayed in the same City certain days.

13 And on the day of the Sabaoths we went out of the City besides a river,
where was wont to be prayer: and sitting, we spoke to the woman which came
together.

14 And a certain woman named Lydia, a seller of purples, of the City of the
Thyatirians, which worshipped God, heard: whose heart the Lord opened, that she
might take heed to those things which were spoken of Paul.

15 And when she was baptized and her house, she besought us, saying, If ye
judge me faithful to the Lord, enter into my house and tarry. And she
enforced us.

11 This history does as it were in a glass show, how sharply the Lord did
exercise the faith and patience of his, by bringing them in great straites,
which they could not have overcome unless they had been endued with singular
constancy. For the entrance of Paul into Macedonia is reported to be such, as
that it might have caused him to give but small credence to the vision. These
holy men leaving the work which they had in hand, did cross the seas with
great have, as if the whole nation of the Macedonians would have come to meet
them with earnest desire to be helped. Now the success is so far from being
answerable to their hope, that their mouths are almost quite stopped. When
they enter the chief City, they find none there with whom they may take any
pains, therefore they are enforced to go into the field that they may speak in
an obscure corner and wilderness. Yea even there they cannot have one man which
will harken to their doctrine, they can only have one woman to be a disciple
of Christ: and that one which was an aliant. Who would not have said that this
journey was taken in hand foolishly, which fell out so unhappily? But the Lord
does thus bring to pass his works under a base and weak kind: that his power
may shine more clearly at length, and it was most meet that the beginnings of
the kingdom of Christ should be so ordered, that they might taste of the
humility of the cross. But we must mark the constancy of Paul and his
companions, who being not dismayed with such unprosperous beginnings, try
whither any occasion will offer it self contrary to their expectation. And
assuredly the servants of Christ must wrestle with all lets, neither must they
be discouraged, but go forward to morrow, if this day there appear no ^^uite
of their labor, for there is no cause why they should desire to be more happy
than Paul. When Luke says that they abode in that City, some had rather have
it, that they conferred or disputed, but the other translation is more plain,
and the text persuades us to make choice thereof: because Luke will shortly
after declare, that Lydia was the first fruits of that Church, and we may
easily guess, that the Apostles went out of the City, because there was no
gate opened to them in it.

13 In the day of the Sabaoths. No doubt the Jews sought some place which was
solitary and by the way, when they were disposed to pray because their
religion was then every where most odious. And God by their example meant to
teach us, what great account we ought to make of the profession of faith: that
we do not forsake it either for fear of envy or of danger. They had in
deed in many places Synagogues: but it was not lawful for them to assemble
themselves publicly at Philippi which was a free City of Rome. Therefore they
withdraw themselves into a secreat corner, that they may pray to god where they
could not be espied: and yet there were those who did grudge even at this, so
that they might think that it might both cause trouble and danger, but they
prefer the worship of God before their own quietness and commodity. Furthermore
we may gather by this word Sabbath, that Luke speaks of the Jews. Secondly
forasmuch as he commends the godliness of Lydia, it must needs be that she was
a Iewesse: which matter needs no long disputation, forasmuch as we know that
it was an heinous offense for the grecians and Romans to celebrate the Sabbath,
or to take up Jewish rites. Now we understand that the Jews made choice of the
rivers bank that they might there pray, not for any superstitions sake, but
because they shunned the company of men, and the sight of the people. If any
man object, why did not every man pray in his house privately. The answer is
ready, that This was a solemn rite of praying to testify godliness: and that
being far from the superstitions of the Gentiles, they might one exhort another
to worship God alone, and that they might norish the religion received of the
fathers among themselves. As touching Paul and his fellows who were lately
come, it is to be thought that they came thither not only to pray, but also
because they hoped to do some good. For it was a fit place for them to teach
in, being far from noise: and it was meet that they should be more attentive to
hear the word who came thither to pray. Luke puts the day of the sabaoths,
in steed of the sabbath: where following Erasmus I have translated it, There
was wont to be prayer: the old interpreter has, did seem. And the word
nomizesthai has both significations among the Grecians. Yet this sense is more
fit for this present place, that they did commonly use to have prayer there.

We spoke to the women. Either that place was appointed for the assemblies of
women: or else religion was cold among men, so that they came more slowly.
Howsoever it be, we see that the holy men omit no occasion or opportunity:
because they vouchsafe to offer the Gospel even to women alone. Furthermore
forasmuch as it seems likely to me, that men and women made their prayers
there together, I suppose that Luke omitted the men, either because they would
not hear, or else because they profited nothing by hearing.

14 A woman named Lidia. If they had bin heard of a few women, yet this had
been but to enter in as it were by a strait chinke. But now whereas one only
hears attentively and with fruit, might it not have seemed that the way was
stopped before Christ? But afterward there sprunge a noble Church of that one
small graffe, which Paul sets out with many excellent commendations: yet it
may be that Lydia had some companions, whereof there is no mention made,
because she did far excel them all. And Luke does not assign that for the
cause why this one woman did show her self apt to be taught, because she was
more witty than the rest, or because she had some preparation of her self:
but he says that the Lord opened her heart that she might give ear and take
heed to the speech of Paul. He had of late commended her godliness: and yet
he shows that she could not comprehend the doctrine of the Gospel, save only
through the illumination of the Spirit. Wherefore we see that not faith alone,
but all understanding and knowledge of spiritual things is the peculiar gift
of God, and that the ministers do no good by teaching and speaking, unless the
inward calling of God be thereunto added. By the word heart, the Scripture
means sometimes the mind, as when Moses says, God has not given thee
hitherto a heart to understand. So likewise in this place Luke does not only
signify unto us that Lydia was brought by the inspiration of the Spirit, with
affection of heart to embrace the Gospel: but that her mind was lightened, that
she might understand it. By this let us learn that such is the blockishnesse,
such is the blindness of men, that in seeing they see not, in hearing they
hear not, until such time as God does give them new eyes and new ears. But
we must note the speech, that The heart of Lydia was opened, that she might
give ear to the external voice of the teacher. For as preaching alone is
nothing else but the dead letter: so we must beware least a false
imagination, or a show of secreat illumination lead us away from the word,
whereupon faith depends, and wherein it rests. For many, to the end they
may amplify the grace of the Spirit, feign to themselves certain inspired
persons, that they may leave no use of the external word. But the scripture
does not suffer any such divorce to be made, which joins the ministry of
men with the secreat inspiration of the Spirit. Unless the mind of Lydia had
been opened, Paul's preaching should have been only literal: and yet the Lord
does not inspire her with bare revelations only, but he gives her the
reverence of his word: so that the voice of man, which might otherwise have bin
uttered in vain, does pearce into a mind endued with heavenly light.
Therefore let those brainsicke fellows be packing, who under color of the
spirit, refuse external doctrine. For we must note the temperature or
moderation which Luke sets down here, that we can have or obtain nothing
by the hearing of the word alone without the grace of the Spirit and that the
spirit is given us, not that he may bring contempt of the word, but rather
that he may dip into our minds, and write in our hearts the faith thereof.

Now if the cause be demanded why the Lord opened one woman's heart alone, we
must return unto that principle, that so many believe as are ordained to life.
For the fear of God which went before the plain and manifest knowledge of
Christ in Lydia, was also a fruit of free election. The describers of
situations of places, say that Thyatira is a city of Lydia, situate upon the
side of the river called Hermus, and that it was sometimes called Pelopia, but
some there be who attribute it to Phrygia, some to Mysia.

15 When she was baptized. Hereby it appears how effectually God wrought in
Lydia even in a short moment. For it is not to be doubted but that she received
and embraced the faith of Christ sincerely, and gave him her name, before Paul
would admit her unto baptism, this was a token of mere readiness: also her
holy zeal and godliness do therein show themselves, in that she does also
consecrate her family to God. And surely all the godly ought to have this
desire, to have those who are under them to be partakers of the same faith. For
he is unworthy to be numbered among the children of God, and to be a ruler over
others, whosoever is desirous to reign and rule in his own house over his
wife, children, servant, and maids, and will cause them to give no place to
Christ. Therefore let every one of the faithful study to govern and order his
house so, that it may be an image of the church. I grant that Lydia had not in
her hand the hearts of all those which were of her household, that she might
turn unto Christ whomsoever she would: but the Lord did bless her godly
desire, so, that she had all her household obedient. The godly (as we have
already said) must endeavor with might and main to drive from their houses all
manner superstition. Secondlye, that they have not profane families: but that
they keep them under the fear of the Lord. So Abraham the father of the
faithful, was commanded to circumcise al his servants with him: and he is
commended for the care he had to govern his house, and to insttuct his family.
Furthermore if this duty be required at the hands of the householder, much more
of a prince, that he suffer not so much as in him lies, the name of God to be
profaned in his realm.

She besought them saying. This has the force of an admiration, when she
says, if ye have judged me faithful: as if she should say, I beseech you by
that faith which you have approved by baptism, that ye refuse not to lodge
with me. And Lydia did by such an earnest desire, testify, how entirely she
loved the Gospel. Nevertheless it is not to be doubted, but that the Lord
gave her such an affection, to the end Paul might be the more encouraged to
proceed: not only because he saw that he was liberally and courteously
entertained, but also because he might thereby judge of the fruit of his
doctrine. Therefore this was not the woman's inuiting only, but also Gods, to
keep Paul and his company there, to which end that tends also, that Lydia
enforced them: as if God did lay hand upon them and stay them in the woman's
person.

16 And it happened as we went to prayer, a certain maid having a spirit of
divination did meet us, which brought her masters much gain by divining.

17 She followed Paul and us, and cried, saying: These men are the servant of
the most high God, which preach to us the way of salvation.

18 And this she did many days. And Paul taking it greeuouslye, and turning
back said to the spirit: I command thee in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ,
that thou come out of her. And he came out the same hour.

19 And when her masters saw, that the hope of their gain was gone, having
taken Paul and Silas, they drew them into the market place to the rulers.

20 And when they had presented them to the Magistrates they said, These men
trouble our city seeing they be Jews:

21 And they preach ordinances, which we may not receive, nor keep, seeing we
are Romans.

22 And the multitude came together against them: and when the Magistrates had
rent their garments, they commanded them to be beaten with rods.

16 Luke prosecuteth the increase of the church: for though he do not
straightway in a word express that thing, yet is it easily gathered out of the
text, that many were brought unto the faith, or at lest that the church was
somewhat augmented, and Paul did not frequent the assemblies in time of prayer
in vain. Notwithstanding Luke does also report that Satan did interrupt this
course: to wit, because after that the Apostles were beaten with rods and cast
in prison, they were at length enforced to depart the city: yet we shall see
in the end of this chapter, that when Satan had done his worst, there was some
body of the church gathered before they did depart.

Having a spirit of Or of Python,
divination. The Poets do feign that the serpent called Python was slain with
the darts of Phoebus, Hereupon rose another invention; that they said, that
those who were possessed, were inspired with the spirit of Python, and
peradventure they were thereupon called Phoebades in honor of Apollo. But Luke
follows the common custom of speaking: because he shows the error of the
common people, and not through what inspiration the maid did prophecy. For it
is certain that the devil did deceive men under the visure of Apollo, as all
idolatry and subtlety was invented and forged in his shop. But some man may
marvel that the devil (through whose motion and persuasion the maid did cry)
was the author of such an honorable commendation, wherewith she adorned Paul
and Silas, and the rest. For seeing that he is the father of lying, how could
the truth proceed from him? Secondly, how is it that he gave place willingly to
the servants of Christ, by whom his kingdom was destroyed? how can this hang
together that he prepared the minds of the people to hear the gospel, whose
mortal enemy he is? Assuredly there is nothing more proper to him then to turn
away the minds of the people from the word of god, which he does now will and
wish the^ to hear: whence comes such a sudden change, or unwonted motion? But
the devil is the father of lying in such sort, that he covers himself under
the false and deceivable color of truth. There he played another person
through his crafty subtilty, tha^ was agreeable to his nature, that by creeping
in craftily he might do the more hurt: and therefore whereas he is called the
father of lies, we must not so take it, as if he did always lie manifestly and
without any color. Yea rather we must beware of his crafty subtlety, least
when he prete^deth the color of truth, he deceive us under a vain show. We see
also how he uses like subtlety daily. For what can bear a fayrer show then
the Pope his titles, wherein he does not boast himself to be the adversary of
Christ, but his vicar? What can be more plausible than that solemn preface, In
the name of the Lord, Amen? Notwithstanding we know that whiles the
hypocritical ministers of Satan do thus pretend the truth, they corrupt it
and with a deadly corruption infect it. Seeing that Satan has a double way to
resist the gospel: to wit, because he does sometimes rage openly, and sometimes
he creeps in craftily under lies, he has also two kinds of lying and
deceiving either when he overthrows the word of God with false doctrines and
gross superstitions, or else when he does craftily feign that he is a friend
of the word, and so does insinuate himself subtly, yea he does never hurt
more deadly, tha^ when he transfourmeth himself into an angel of light. Now
we perceive to what end that so gorgeous a title did tend, wherewith he did
extol Paul and his companions: name lie* because it was not so convenient for
him, to make open war against the gospel, he went about to overthrow the
credit thereof by secret shifts. For if Paul had admitted that testimony,
there should have been no longer any difference between the wholesome doctrine
of Christ, and the mockes of Satan. The light and brightness of the gospel
should have been entangled in the darkness of lying, and so quite put out.

But the question is why God does grant Satan so great liberty, as to suffer
him to deceive miserable men, and to bewitch them with true diuinations. For
omitting the disputations which some men move concerning his foresight, I take
this for a plain lease, that he does prophecy and foretell things to come,
and which ^re hidden only through Gods sufferance. But God seems by this
^eanes to lay open men who are retchles or careless, to his subtlety, so that
they cannot beware. For seeing that prophesies breath out divine power, men's
minds must needs be touched with reverence so often as they come abroad unless
they contemn God. I answer, that Satan has never so much liberty granted
him of god, save only that the unthankful world may he punished which is so
desirous of a lie, that it had rather be deceived, then obey the truth. For
that is a general evil, Romans 1.21.
whereof Paul complains in the first chapter to the Romans, That men do not
glorify God being known naturally by the creation of the world, and that they
suppress his truth unjustly.

It is a just reward for so great unthankfulness, that Satan has the bridle
given him, that through diverse iuglings he may work the ruin of those who
turn away maliciously from the light of God. Therefore so often as you read
the diuinations of Satan, think upon the just judgment of God.

Now if God so sharply punish the contempt of his light in the profane
gentiles, who have no other teachers but the heaven and earth, how much more
sharp punishment do those deserve who wittingly and willingly choke the pure
doctrine of salvation, revealed to them in the law and the gospel? No marvel
therefore if Satan have long bewitched the world so freely with his subtlety,
sithence that the truth of the Gospel has been wickedly contemned, which was
made most manifest. But it is objected again that no man is free from danger,
when false diuinations fly to and fro so fast. For even as well the good as
the evil seem to be subject to the cosonage of Satan, when the truth is
darkened and ouercast. The answer is ready, though Satan set snares for all
men in general, yet are the godly delivered by the grace of God, least they be
caught together with the wicked. There is also a more manifest distinction set
down in the scripture, because the Lord does by this means try the faith and
godliness of his: and does make blind the reprobate, that they may perish, as
they be worthy. 2. These. 2.11 12.
Therefore Paul says plainly, that Satan has not leave granted him to lead
any into error save those who will not obey God, and embrace the truth. Whereby
is also reproved their wicked ungodliness, who under this color excuse the
profane contempt of all doctrine: whither shall we turn our selves (say they)
seeing that Satan is so expert to deceive? Therefore it is better for us to
live without any religion at all, then throu^^ the desire of religion to run
headlong into destruction. Neither do they object and pretend this fear for
their excuse in earnest, but seeing they desire nothing more then to wander
carelessly like beasts without any fear of god: they can be content with any
excuse, so they be not tied to any religion. I confess indeed that Satan does
no less craftily then wickedly abuse the sacred name of God, and that that
proverb is too true, which papistrie has brought forth, that, In the name of
the Lord begins all evil: but seeing that the Lord does pronounce that he
will be the teacher of the humble, and has promised that he will be nigh to th^^
which are right in heart: seeing that Paul teaches that the word ^^ God is
the sword of the Spirit: seeing that he does testify that those who are
welgrounded in the faith of the gospel, are not in danger to be seduced by men:
seeing that Peter calls the scripture a light shining in a dark place:
seeing that courteous exhortation or inuiting of Christ can never deceive us:
Seek and ye shall find: knock and it shall be opened to you: let Satan do what
he can, and let the false prophets seek to darken the truth so much as they
are able, we need not be afraid least the spirit of wisdom and discretion
forsake us, who rules Satan at his pleasure, and makes us triumph over him by
the faith of his word.

18. Paul took it grievously. It may be that at the first Paul neglected and
did not greatly regard the crying of the maid, because he hoped that there
would be no account made thereof, and had rather that it should vanish away of
it self. But the continual repetition does at length make him weary: because
if he had any longer dissembled, Satan would have waxt more and more insolent
through his silence and patience. Secondly, he ought not to have broken out
into this prohibition rashly, until he knew for a certainty that he was
furnished with the power of God. For Paul his commandment had bin foolish and
vain, without the commandment of God. And this must be noted, least any man
condemn Paul of too great hastines, because he incou^tred so valiantly with the
unclean spirit. For he did not conceive any grief or indignation save only
because he saw that the subtlety of Satan would increase, unless he did
betimes prevent it: neither did he attempt any thing without the motion of the
spirit: neither did he enter the conflict until he was armed with power from
heaven. Notwithstanding he seems to be contrary to himself, seeing that he
says elsewhere that he rejoices upon what occasion soever he see the gospel
preached, even by wicked men, and such as did study of set purpose to bring
him in contempt. Phil. 1.18.
I answer that he had another more apter reason for himself in this place:
because all men would have thought that the Spirit of the maid had played with
Paul: so that by that means the doctrine of the gospel should not only have
come in suspicion, but should also have come into great contempt. To this end
was it that Christ also did command the devil to hold his peace, Mark. 1.25.
Luke. 4.35.
whereas notwithstanding he suffered his name to be extolled by unmeet and
unworthy men.

I command thee. We must note the form of speech. For as the miracle was
about to have a double use: namely, that the power of Christ might be known:
secondly that he might declare that he had no fellowship with Satan's iuglings:
so Paul in giving the authority and power to Christ alone, does declare that
he is only a minister, that done he does openly set Christ against the devil,
to the end that by the conflict all men may see that they be deadly enemies.
For it was profitable that many should be awaked, who had bin given to such
gross seducing, that being well purged they might come to the true faith.

19 But when her masters. The same devil who of late did flatter Paul by the
mouth of the maid, does now drive her masters into fury, that they may put him
to death: so that having changed his coat he does now play a tragedy: who
could not speed welbefore by his fair speech and flattery. And though the
heat of zeal wherewith Paul was provoked to anger did raise the whirlewinde of
persecution, yet is he not therefore to be blamed: neither did it any whit
repent Paul that he had wrought the miracle, so that he did wish that that
were undone which was done, because he knew full well through what motion he had
driven the devil out of the maid: whereby we are taught that we must not
rashly condemn things which are well done, and that which is taken in hand
at the commandment of God, though an unhappy success follow: because God
does then examine the constancy of those which be his, until a more joyful
and prosperous end drive away all sorrow. As touching the men, Luke
expresses the cause why they were so mad upon Paul: to wit, because their hope
of filthy gain was gone. But though they were pricked forward with covetousness
only to persecute the Gospel and the ministers thereof: yet they pretend a fair
color, that it greeueth them that the public state should be perverted, that
their ancient laws should be broken, and peace troubled. So though the
enemies of Christ behave themselves wickedly and unhonestly, yet they always
invent some cause for their sin. Yea though their wicked desire appear
plainly, yet with an impudent face they always bring in somewhat to cover their
filthiness withal. So at this day those Papists which are more zealous over
their law, have nothing else in their minds besides their gain and government.
Let them swear and forswear by all their Saints and sacrifices that they are
enforced only with a godly affection: yet the matter it self does plainly
show, that it is the coldness of their kitchins which makes their zeal so
whot, and that ambition is the fan thereof. For they be either hungry dogs
pricked forward with greediness: or furious Lions breathing out nothing but
cruelty.

20 These men trouble our city. This accusation was craftily composed, to
burden the servants of Christ. For on the one side they pretend the name of the
Romans, then which nothing was more favorable: on the other, they purchase
hatred and bring them in contempt by naming the^ Jews, which name was at that
time infamous: for as touching religion the Romans were more like to any, then
to the Jewish nation. For it was lawful for a man which was a Roman to do
sacrifice either in Asia or in Grecia, or in any other country where were Idols
and superstitions, I warrant you Satan did agree with himself very well, though
he put on diverse shapes, but that which was religion only, then which there was
no other in the world, was counted among the Romans detestable. They frame a
third accusation out of the crime of sedition: for they pretend that the
public peace is troubled by Paul and his company. In like sort was Christ
brought in contempt, and even at this day the paists have no more plausible
thing wherewith they may bring us to be hated, Luke 2^.5.
tha^ when they cry that our doctrine tends to no other end but to procure
tumults, that at length there may follow a filthy confusion of all things.
But we must valiantly contemn this filthy and false infamy as did Christ and
Paul, until the Lord bring to light the malice of our enemies, and refute
their impudency.

21 Ordinances which. They lean to a prejudice, least the cause should com to be
disputed: as the papists deal with us at this day, this was decreed in a
general council: it is a more ancient and common opinion, tha^ that it may be
called in question: custom has long time approved this: this has been
established by consent more then a thousand years ago. But to what end tend
all these things save only that they may rob the word of god of all authority.
They make boast of man's decrees, but in the mean season they leave no place at
all for the laws of God. We may see by this place what force these preiudices
ought to have. The laws of the Romans were excellent, but religion does
depend upon the word of God alone. Therefore in this matter we must take
great heed, that men being brought under, the authority of God alone do
prevail, and that he make all things which in the world are excellent, subject
to him.

22 The multitude came together. When Luke declares that there was great
concourse of the people made, after that a few men of no reputation, to wit,
such as did iuggle and cousin to get gain, and whose filthiness was well known,
had made some stir: he teaches with what fury the world rages against
Christ. Folishnes and inconstancy are in deed common vices among al people,
and almost continual, but the wonderful force of Satan does therein bewray it
self, in that those who are in other matters modest and quiet, are for a matter
of no importance in a heat, and become companions of most vile persons, when
the truth must be resisted. There was never a whit more modesty to be found in
the judges themselves: if we consider what was their duty. For they ought by
their gravity to have appeased the fury of the people, and to have set
themselves stoutly against their violence, they ought to have aided and
defended the giltles: but they lay hands on the^ outragiously, and renting
their garments, they command them to be stripped naked and whipped, before they
know the matter. Surely the malice of men is to be lamented: whereby it came to
pass, that almost all the judgment seats of the world which ought to have
bin sanctuaries of justice, have bin polluted with the wicked and sacrilegious
oppugning of the gospel. Notwithstanding the question is, why they were cast in
prison, seeing they were already punished: for the prison was ordained for the
keeping of men? They used this kind of correction, until they might know more:
and so we see the servants of Christ more sharply handled, than adulterers,
robbers, and other most vile persons. Whereby appears more plainly that
force of Satan in stirring up the minds of men, that they observe no show of
judgment in persecuting the gospel. But though the godly be more hardly handled
for defending the truth of Christ, than are the wicked for their wickedness: yet
it goes well with the godly, because they triumph gloriously before god and his
angels in all injuries which they suffer. They suffer reproach and slander: but
because they know that the marks of Christ are in greater price and more
esteemed in heaven, than the vain pompes of the earth, the more wickedly and
reprochfully the world does vex them, the greater cause have they to rejoice.
For if profane writers did so honor Themistocles, that they preferred his
prison before the seat and court of Judges: how much more honorably must we
think of the son of god, whose cause is in hand so often as the faithful suffer
persecution for the gospel? Therefore though the Lord suffered Paul and Silas to
be scourged and imprisoned by the wicked Judges: yet he did not suffer them to
be put to any shame, but that which turned to their greater renown. For seeing
that those persecutions which we must suffer for the testimony of the Gospel,
are remnants of the sufferings of Christ: like as our Prince turned the cross
which was accursed into a triumphant charret, so he shall in like sort adorn the
prisons and gibbets of his, that they may there triumph over Satan and all the
wicked.

Renting their garments. Because the old interpreter had truly translated this,
it was evil done of Erasmus to change it, that The Magistrates did rent their
own garments. For this was Luke his meaning only, that the holy men were
outragiously beaten, the lawefull order of judgment being neglected, and that
they laid hands on them with such violence that their garments were rent. And
this had been too far disagreing with the custom of the Romans, for the
judges to cut their own garments publicly in the market place: especially
seeing the question was concerning an unknown religion, for which they did not
greatly care, but I will not long stand about a plain matter.

23 And when they had given them many stripes, they did cast them into prison,
commanding the keeper of the prison to keep them safe.

24 Who seeing he had received such commandment, did put them in the inner
prison, and made fast their feet in the stocks.

25 And at midnight Paul and Silas praying did praise god. And those which lay
bound heard them.

26 And suddenly there was a great earthquake, so that the foundations of the
prison were shaken. And by and by all the doors were opened, and all their hands
were loosed.

27 And when the keeper of the prison awaked, and saw all the prison doors open,
drawing out his sword he was about to slay himself, thinking that those which
lay bound were fled.

28 And Paul cried with a loud voice, saying: do thy self no harm: for we be
al here.

23 That he should keep them safe. Whereas the Magistrates command that Paul
and Silas should be kept so diligently, it was done to this end, that they
might know more of the matter. For they had already beaten them with rods to
appease the tumult. And this is that which I said of late, that the world
does rage with such blind fury against the ministers of the gospel, that it
does keep no mean in severity. But as it is very profitable for us for
examples sake, to know how discourteously and vncomlie the witnesses of Christ
were entertained in times past: so it is no less profitable to know that which
Luke adds immediately concerning their fortitude, and patience. For even when
they lay bound with fetters, he says that in prayer they lauded god, whereby it
appears that neither the reproach which they suffered, nor the stripes which
made their flesh smart: nor the stink of the deep dungeon, nor the danger of
death, which was hard at hand, could hinder them from giving thanks to the
Lord joyfully and with glad hearts. We must note this general rule, that we
cannot pray as we ought, but we must also praise God. For though the desire to
pray, arise of the feeling of our want and miseries, and therefore it is for the
most part joined with sorrow and carfulness: yet the faithful must so bridle
their affections, that they mumur not against God: so that the right form of
prayer does join two affections together, to look too contrary: carfulness,
and sorrow, by reason of the present necessity which does keep us down, and
ioyfulnesse, by reason of the obedience whereby we submit our selves to God,
and by reason of the hope which showing us the haven nigh at hand does refresh
us even in the midst of shipwreck. Such a form does Paul prescribe to us.
Phil. 4.6.
Let your prayers (says he) be made known to God with thanksgiving. But in
this history we must note the circumstances. For though the pain of the
stripes were grievous, though the prison were troublesome, though the danger
were great: seeing that Paul and Silas cease not to praise GOD, we gather by
this how greatly they were encouraged to bear the cross. Chap. 5.41.
So Luke reported before that the Apostles rejoiced because they were counted
worthy to suffer reproach for the name of the Lord.

And those which lay bound. We must know that Paul and Silas prayed aloud,
that they might make the boldness of a good conscience known to others, who
were shut up in the same prison: for they might have made their prayer with
secret groaning and sighing of heart as they were wont, or they might have
prayed unto the Lord quietly and softly. Why do they then exalt their voice?
Assuredly they do not that for any ambition: but that they may profess, that
trusting to the goodness of their cause they fly without fear unto God.
Therefore in their prayers was included a confession of faith, which did
appertain unto a common example, and prepared as well the malefactors as the
Iailers house to consider the miracle.

26 There was an earthquake. The Lord in showing this visible sign, meant
chiefly to provide for his servants, that they might more manifestlye know that
their prayers were heard: yet he had respect also of the rest. He could have
loosed the fetters of Paul and Silas without an earthquake, and also have
opened the gates. But that addition served not a little to confirm them,
seeing that the Lord for their sakes did shake both the air and also the
earth: again it was requisite that the keeper of the prison and the rest
should feel the presence of God, least they should think that the miracle
came by chance, Neither is it to be doubted but that the Lord did then show a
token of his power, which should be profitable for all ages, so that the
faithful may fully assure themselves that he will be nigh unto them, so often
as they are to enter cumbats and dangers for the defense of the Gospel.
Nevertheless he does neither always keep the same course, to testify his
pretense by manifest signs, neither is it lawful for us to prescribe him a
law. For he did help his by manifest miracles then, for this cause, that we
may be content with his hidden grace at this day: concerning which matter we
have spoken more upon the second chapter.

27 when the keeper of the prison was awaked. He would have slain himself,
that he might prevent punishment, For it had been a foolish answer to have said
that the doors were opened of their own accord. But this question may be
asked. Seeing that Paul sees that they might have some hope to escape if he
should slay himself, why does he hinder him: for he seems by this means to
refuse the diliuera^ce which was offered by god: yea it seems to have bin a
mere toy, in that the Lord would have the Iailer awaked, least there should be
any use of the miracle. I answer, that we must in this place have respect unto
his counsel and purpose. For he did not loose Paul and Silas, and the rest
from their fetters, neither did he therefore open the doors, that he might
straight way let them go free: but that by showing the power of his hand, he
might seal up the faith of Paul and Silas: and might make the name of Christ
glorious among others. Therefore he does so yield to the petitions of Paul and
Silas, that he shows that he is able enough to deliver them so often as he
shall think it good: and that nothing can hinder him, but that he is able to
enter not only into prisons: but also into graves, that he may deliver those
that be his. He opened the gates of the prison to Peter to another end as we
saw chap. 12. But now forasmuch as he had another way in readiness to deliver
Paul and Silas, he meant not so much to deliver them for the present time by
miracle, as to co^firm the^ against the time to come. Again, we must call that
to mind which I said of late, that the opening of the prison appertained unto
others, that it might be known to many witnesses, that God did favor the
doctrine, which was now burdened with an unjust prejudice. Undoubtedly Paul
perceived this: and therefore though his bands were loosed, he did not once wag
from his place. He might have gone away if he had been so disposed: why does
he not? Was it because he contemned the grace of God? or because through his
slothfulness he will make the miracle frustrate? None of all these is
probable: whence we gather that he was holden by God: as the Lord uses to
direct the minds of those which be his in doubtful matters, that they may
follow sometimes ignorantly, sometimes wittingly, that which is expedient to be
done, and not pass their bounds.

29 And calling for a light he sprang in, and trembling he fell down at the
feet of Paul and Silas.

30 And when he had brought them forth he says, Sirs, what must I do to be
saved?

31 And they said, believe in the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shall be saved
and thy household.

32 And they spoke to him the word, and to all that were in his house,

33 And taking them at the same hour of the night he washed their stripes: and
was himself baptized and all his household forthwith.

34 And when he had brought them into his house, he set meat before them: and
he rejoiced that he and all his whole house believed in God.

29 Being astonished he fell down. This keeper was no less brought under with
fear to show obedience to god then with the miracle prepared, Heerby it
appears what a good thing it is for men to be thrown down from their pride,
that they may learn to submit themselves to god. He was hardened in his
superstitions: therefore he might with a lofty stomach have despiced
whatsoever Paul and Silas should have said, whom he had also reprochfully
thrust into the inermost part of the prison. Now fear makes him apt to be
taught and gentle. Therefore so often as the Lord shall strike us, or cast us
down: let us know that this is done that we may be brought in order from our
too much hautinesse.

But it is a wonder that he was not reproved for falling down at their feet.
For why did Paul wink at that, Cha. 10.26.
which (as Luke records) Peter would not suffer in Cornelius? I aunsweare
that Paul does therefore bear with the keeper: because he knows that he was
not moved with superstition but with fear of Gods judgment so to humble
himself. It was a kind of worship common enough: but chiefly among the Romans
it was a solemn thing, when they would humbly crave any thing, or crave pardon,
they fell down at their knees, to who^ they put up their supplication. Therefore
there was no cause why Paul should be displeased with a man whom he saw simply
humbled of God. For if there had bin any thing committed contrary to the glory
of God, he had not forgotten that zeal which he showed before among the men of
Licaonia. Therefore by his silence we gather that in this kind of worship there
was nothing contrary to godliness or the glory of God.

30 Sirs what must I do. He does so ask counsel tha the shows there withal
that he will be obedient. By this we see that he was thoroughly touched, so that
he was ready to do what they should command him, who^ not many hours before
he had bound discourteously. The wicked oftentimes when they see wonders, though
they tremble for a time, Ex. 8.8.32.
yet are they streightway made more obstinate, as it befell Pharao at least they
are not so tamed, that they give over themselves to God. But in this place the
keeper (acknowledging the power of God) was not only a little afraid, so that he
returned streightway unto his former cruelty: but he shows himself obedient
to God, and desirous of sound and wholesome doctrine He demands how he may
obtain salvation: whereby it appears more plainly, that he was not suddenly
taken with some light fear of God only: but truly humbled to offer himself to
be a scholar to his ministers. He knew that they were cast in prison for no
other cause, save only because they did overthrow the common estate of
religion. Now he is ready to hear their doctrine, which he had before
contemned.

31 Believe in the Lord Jesus. This is but a short and to look to, a cold and
hungry definition of salvation, and yet is it perfect, to believe in Christ.
For Christ alone has all the parts of blessedness and eternal life included in
him, which he offreth to us by the gospel: and by faith we receive the^ as I
have declared. Chapter 15. Chapter 15.9.
And here we must note 2. things, first that Christ is the mark whereat faith
must aim: and therefore men's minds do nothing else but wander, when they turn
aside from him. Therefore no meruel if all the divinity of popery be nothing else
but an huge lump and horrible labyrinth: because neglecting Christ they flatter
themselves in vain and frivolous speculatio^s. Secondly, we must note that
after we have embraced Christ by faith, that alone is sufficient to salvation.
But the latter member which Luke adds by and by, does better express the
nature of faith, Paul and Silas command the keeper of the prison to believe in
the son of god. Do they precisely stay in this voice only? Yea it follows in
Luke in the text, that they preached the word of the Lord. Therefore we see how
that faith is not a light or dry opinion concerning unknown things, but a
plain and distinct knowledge of Christ, conceived out of the gospel. Again if
the preaching of the Gospel be absent, there shall no faith remain any longer.
To conclude, Luke coupleth faith with preaching and doctrine, and after that he
has briefly spoken of faith, he does by way of exposition show the true and
lawful way of believing. Therefore in steed of that inue^tion of entangled faith,
whereof the papists babble, let us hold faith infolded in the word of God, that
it may unfold to us the power of Christ.

33 He was baptized and all his household. Luke does again commend the godly
zeal of the keeper, that he did consecrate all his whole house to the Lord:
wherein does also appear the grace of God, in that he brought al his whole
family unto a godly consent And we must also note the notable exchange: he was
of late about to murder himself, because he thought that Paul and the rest
were escaped: but now laying aside al fear, he brings them home. So that we
see how faith does animate and encourage those to behave themselves stoutly,
who before had no heart. And surely when we droupe through fear and
doubtfulnes, there is no better matter of boldness, then to be able to cast al
our cares into Gods bosom: that no danger may terrify us from doing our duty,
whiles that we look for an end at Gods hand, such as he shall see to be most
profitable.

34 He rejoiced that he believed. The external profession of faith was before
commended in the Iayler: now the inward fruit thereof is described. When he did
lodge the Apostles, and was not afraid of punishment, but did courteously
interteine them in his own house, otherwise then he was enjoined by the
magistrate, he did testify that his faith was not idle. And that joy whereof
Luke speaks in this place is a singular good thing, which every man has from
his faith. There is no greater torment then an evil conscience: for the
unbelievers, though they seek by all means to bring themselves into a certain
amasednes, yet because they have no peace with God, they must needs quake and
tremble. But admit they perceive not their present torments, yea they rage and
play the mad men, through mad and unbridled licentiousnes: yet are they never
quiet, neither do they enjoy quiet joy. Therefore sincere and quiet stable joy
proceeds from faith alone, when we perceive that God is merciful to us. In
this respect Zacharias says, Rejoice and be glad O daughter Sion, behold thy
king comes. Yea this effect is every where in the scripture attributed to
faith, that it makes the souls ioiful. Therefore let us know that faith is not
a vain or dead imagination: but a lively sealing of the grace of God, which
brings perfect joy by reason of the certainty of salvation whereof it is meet
that the wicked be void, who do both fly from the God of peace, and disturb
al righteousness.

35 And when it was day, the magistrates sent the apparitors, saying, Let these
men go.

36 And the keeper of the prison told these words to Paul, The magistrates
have sent to loose you. Now therefore going out, depart in peace.

37 And Paul said to them, After that they have beaten us openly before our
cause was known, seeing that we be Romans, they have cast us into prison:
and now they cast us out privily? No surely: but let them come themselves and
fetch us out.

38 And the apparitours told these words to the magistrates: who feared after
that they heard that they were Romans.

39 And they came and besought them: and when they had brought them out, they
requested them that they would depart out of the city.

40 And coming out of the prison, they entered in unto Lydia, and when they had
seen the brethren, they comforted them, and departed.

35 When it was day. The question is, how it came to pass that the Judges did
so suddenly change their purpose. The day before, they had commanded that Paul
and Silas should be bound with fetters, as if they meant to punish them
cruelly: now they let them go free. At least if they had heard them, it might
have bin that the knowledge of the cause had brought them to be more gentle and
better minded. But it appears that forasmuch as the matter stood as yet still
in one state, they were brought unto repentance of their own accord. I answer
that there is no other thing here set down, but that which falls out most
commonly, when sedition is once raised. For not only the minds of the common
people begin to rage, but also the tempest carries away the governors also,
no doubt peruersly: for we know that of Virgill, And as amidst a mighty route,
when discord often is bred,
And baser froward minded men, with furious rage are led,
Forthwith flies fire, and stones are floung, madness does tools supply,
Then if on the sudden they, do any one epsy,
Whom love to common wealth, and just deserts have reverent made,
They hush, and eeke attentive stand, to hear what will be said:
He gouerns both their will and rage,
With words their wrath he does aswage.


Therefore there can be nothing more unseemly, than that in a whot tumult, the
judges should be set on fire with the people: but it falls out so for the
most part. Therefore when those officers saw the people up, they thought there
was cause enough, why they should beat the apostles with rods. But now they are
caused with shame and infamy to suffer punishment for their lightness.
Peradventure also when they enquire of the beginning of the tumult, they find
those who had deceived the people, in the fault: therefore when they had found
out that Paul and Silas were innocent, they let them go, though too late. By
which example those which bear rule are taught to beware of too much have.
Again we see, how carelessly Magistrates f^^tter themselves in their own
offenses, which they know full well, they have committed, especially when they
have to do with unknown and base persons. When these men grant free liberty
to Paul and Silas to depart, they are not ignorant that they had before done
them injury: yet they think it will be sufficient if they do not continue to
do them injury still, and to be more cruel upon the^. The apparitors are
called Rabdouchoi, of the staves which they did bear: whereas the ensigns of
the Seargeants were hatchets bound about with rods.

After that they have beaten us openly. Their defense consists upon two
points, that they raged against, and cruelly entreated the body of a man that
was a Roman: secondly, that they did that contrary to the order of law. We
shall see afterward that Paul was a citizen of Rome. But it was straightly
provided by Portius law, by the laws of Sempronius, and also by many more,
that no man should have power of life or death over any citizen of Rome, but
the people. Notwithstanding it may seem to be a strange thing that Paul did
not maintain his right before he was beaten with rods: for the judges might
honestly excuse themselves by his silence: but it is to be thought that he was
not heard in the midst of the heat of the tumult. If any man object that he
does now seek remedy too late and out of season: yea that he does catch at
a vain and foolish comfort, when he requires that the magistrates come
themselves: we may readily answer: Paul was like to fare never a whit the
better therefore: but we must mark that he meant nothing less then to provide
for his own private commodity: but that he might ease the brethren, somewhat
afterward, that the magistrates might not be so bold as to rage so freely
against the good and innocent brethren. Because he had gotten their heads under
his girdle, he translated his right to help the brethren, that they might be
born with. This was the cause for which he did chide the^. And so Paul did
wisely use the opportunity offered him: as we must neglect nothing which may
make for the brideling of the enemies, that they take not to themselves so much
liberty to oppress or vex the innocent: forasmuch as the Lord brings to
our hands such helps not in vain: notwithstanding let us remember that if we
have been iniuried in any thing we must not repay injuries: but we must only
endeavor to stay their lust, least they hurt others in like sort.

38 They were afra^d because they were Romans. They are not once moved with
the other point because they had handled innocents cruelly, without
discretion: and yet that was the greater reproach. But because they did not
fear that any man would punish them: they were not moved with Gods judgment:
this is the cause that they do carelessly pass over that which was objected
concerning injury done by the^: only they are afraid of the officers of the
Romans, and least they should be beheaded for violating the liberty in the body
of a citizen. They knew that this was death if any of the chief governors
should commit it, then what should become of the officers of one free city?
Such is the fear of the wicked* because they have an amazed conscience before
God, they do long time flatter themselves in all sins, until the punishment
of men hang over their heads.

40 When they saw etc. They were desired to part presently: yet it became them
to regard the brethren, least the tender seed of the Gospel should perish,
and undoubtedly they would have tarried longer, if they had been suffered: but
the praieres and requests of the magistrates were imperious and armed, which
they are enforced to obey. Nevertheless they foreslow not their necessary duty,
but they exhort the brethren to be constant. And whereas they went straight to
Lydia, it is a token, that though the church were increased: yet that woman was
the chief eue^ of a great number, as touching diligence in duties of godliness:
and that appears more plainly thereby, because all the godly were assembled in
her house.

CHAP. XVII.
1 ANd when they had iourneyed through Amphipolis and Appolonia, they came to
Thessalonica, where was a Synagogue of the Jews.

2 And as his manner was, Paul entered in unto them, and three Sabbothes disputed
with them out of the scriptures,

3 Opening and alleging that Christ must have suffered and rise again from the
dead: and that this is Christ, whom, says he, I preach to you.

4 And certain of them believed, and were joined to Paul and Silas, and of
religious Grecians a great multitude, and of chief women not a few.

1 They came to Thessalonica. We know not why Paul attempted nothing at
Amphipolis and Apollonia, which were notwithstanding famous cities, as
appears by Pliny: save only because he followed the spirit of God as his
guide: and took occasion by the present matter, as occasion was offered, to
speak or hold his peace: and peradventure he did also assay to do some good
there, but because it was without any good success, therefore Luke passes over
it. And whereas being beaten at Philippos, and scarce escaping out of great
danger, he preaches Christ at Thessalonica, it appears thereby how coragious
he was to keep the course of his calling, and how bold he was ever now and then
to enter into new dangers. This so invincible fortitude of mind, and such
patient enduring of the cross, do sufficiently declare, that Paul labored
not after the manner of me^, but that he was furnished with the heavenly power
of the spirit. And this was also wonderful patience in him, in that entering in
unto the Jews whose unbridled frowardnes he had so often tried, he proceeds
to procure their salvation But because he knew that Christ was given to the
Jews for salvation, and that he himself was made an Apostle upon this
condition, that he should preach repentance and faith, first to the Jews and
then to the Gentiles, committing the success of his labor to the Lord, he
obeys his commandment (though he had no great hope to do good.) He seemed
before to have taken his last farewell of the Jews, when he said, It was
behoueful that the kingdom of god should be first preached to you: but because
ye receive it not, behold we turn to the Gentiles: but that harder sentence
must be restrained to that company, who had wickedly rejected the Gospel when
it was offered unto them, and made themselves unworthy the grace of God. And
toward the nation it self, Paul ceasseth not to do his embassage: by which
example we be taught, that we ought to make so great account of the calling of
God, that no unthankfulness of men may be able to hinder us, but that we proceed
to be careful for their salvation, so long as the Lord appoints us to be
their ministers. And it is to be thought that even now there were some who on
the first sabb^ refused sound doctrine, but their frowardnes did not hinder
him, but that he came again upon other Sabbothes.

2 He disputed. Luke sets down first, what was the sum of the dlsputatio^:
to wit, that Jesus the son of Mary is Christ, who was promised in times past in
the law and the prophets, who by the sacrifice of his death did make
satisfaction for the sins of the world, and brought righteousness, and life by
his resurrection: secondly how he proved that which he taught. Let us handle
this second member first. Luke says that he disputed out of the scriptures:
therefore the proofs of faith must be^fet from the mouth of god alone. If we
dispute about matters which co^cern me^ the^ let human reso^s take place: but
in the doctrine of faith, the authority of God alone must reign, and upon it
must we depend. All men confess that this is true, that we must stay our
selves upon God alone: yet there be but a few, which hear him speak in the
scriptures. But and if that maxim take place among us; that the scripture
comes of God: the rule either of teaching or of learning ought to be taken no
where else. Whereby it does also appear, with what diuelishe fury the papists
are driven, when they deny that there can any certainty be gathered out of
the scriptures: and therefore they hold that we must stand to the decrees of
men. For I demand of them whether Paul did observe a right order in disputing
or no? at least let them blush for shame, that the word of the Lord was more
reverenced in an unbelieving nation, then it is at this day among them. The
Jews admit Paul and suffer him when he disputes out of the scriptures: the
Pope and all his, count it a mere mock, when the scripture is cited: as if
God did speak doubtfully there, and did with vain boughts mock men. Hereunto
is added that because there is at this day much more light in the scripture,
and the truth of God shines there more clearly, then in the law and
prophets. For in the Gospel Christ, who is the son of righteousness does shed
out his beam with perfect brightness upon us, for which cause the blasphemy of
the papists is the more intolerable, whiles that they will make the word of God
as yet uncertain. But let us know, as faith can be grounded no where else then
in the word of the Lord, so we must only stand to the testimony thereof in all
controversies.

3 Opening. In this place he describes the sum or subject of the disputation:
and he puts down two members concerning Christ, that He must have died and
risen again, and that the son of Mary which was crucified is Christ. When the
question is concerning Christ, there come 3. things in question. Whether he be,
who he is, and what he is. If Paul had had to deal with the gentiles, he must
have fet his beginning farther: because they had heard nothing concerning
Christ: nether do profane me^ conceive that they need a mediator. But this
point was out of doubt among the Jews, to whom the mediator was promised:
wherefore Paul omitteth that as superfluous, which was received by common
consent of al men. But because there was nothing more hard then to bring the
Jews to confess that Jesus who was crucified was the redeemer, therefore Paul
begins with this, that it was meet that Christ should die: that he may
remove the stumbling block of the cross, and yet we must not think that he
recited the (...) history, but he takes an undoubted principle, that the
causes were showed why Christ must have suffered and rise again: to wit
because he preached of the ruin of mankind, of sin and of the punishment
thereof, of the judgment of God, and of the eternal curse wherein we be al
inwrapped. For even the scripture calls us hither, when it foretells the
death of Christ. As Isaias says not simply that Christ should die, Isa. 53.6.
Ib. 5.
but plainly expressing, because we have al erred, and every one has gone his
own way: he assigns the cause of his death, that God has laid upon him al
our iniquities: that the chastisement of our peace is upon him, that by his
stripes we may be healed: that by making satisfaction for us, he has
purchased righteousness for us. So does Daniel Dan. 9.24.
show the force and fruit of his death in his 9. chapter, when he says that
sin must be sealed up, that eternal righteousness may succeed And surely
there is no more apt or effectual way to prove the office of Christ, then when
men being humbled with the feeling of their miseries, see that there is no hope
left, unless they be reconciled by the sacrifice of Christ. The^ laying away
their pride, they humbly embrace his cross, whereof they were before both weary
and ashamed. Therefore we must come unto the same fountains at this day, from
which Paul fetteth the proof of the death and resurrection of Christ. And that
definition brought great light to the second chapter. It had not been so easy
a matter for Paul to prove, and certainly to gather, that the son of Mary
is Christ, unless the Jews had been taught before what manner redeemer they
were to hope for. And when that does once appear, it does only remain that
those things be applied to Christ, which the scripture does attribute to the
mediator. But this is the sum of our faith, that we know that the son of
Marie is that Christ and mediator, which God promised from the beginning, that
done, that we know and understand why he died and rose again: that we do not
feign to our selves any earthly king: but that we seek in him righteousness,
and all parts of our salvation. Both which things Paul is said to have proved
out of the scriptures: we must know that the Jews were not so blockish, nor so
impudent, as they be at this day. Paul might have drawn arguments from the
sacrifices and from all the worship of the law, whereat the Jews narre at this
day like dogs. It is well known how vnseemelily they rent and corrupt other
places of Scripture. At that day they had some curtefie in them: also they did
somewhat reverence the scripture: so that they were not altogether such as would
not be taught: at this day the veyle is laid over their hearts, so that they
can see no more in the clear light then moales.

4 Certain of them believed. We see here the fruit of Paul his disputation.
He proved flatly that Jesus was Christ, 2. Cor. 3.15.
who by his death did appease the fathers wrath for us, and whose resurrection
is the life of the world. Yet only certain of the Jews believe: the rest
are blind at noone day, and with deaf ears refuse the certain and plain
truth. This is also worth the noting, that whereas only a few Jews
believed, a great multitude of the Gretians who were far farther of, came
unto the faith. To what end can you say they weer noussed up in the doctrine of
the law from their childhood, save only that they might be more estranged
from God? Therefore the Lord does now begin to show some tokens of that
blindness in them which the prophets do oftentimes denounce unto the^^.
Notwithstanding he declares by this that his covenant was not in vain,
because he did at least gather some of that people unto himself, that the
sparkles of the election may shine in the remnaunt, which was saved freely.
Luke does moreover teach that they did not believe the sayings of Paul only
so far forth, that they subscribed unto them with a cold consent: but that
they did testify their earnest of affection, because they had joined
themselves to Paul and Silas as companions, and provoked against themselves the
hatred of their nation by the free profession of the Gospel. For what means
this adjoining, save only because they professed that they allowed that
doctrine which he delivered, and that they took his part? For there is nothing
more contrary to faith, then if when we know the truth of God, we stand
notwithstanding in doubt, and are loath to ioyn our selves to any side. If any
man had rather expound it, that they did join them selves to Paul and Silas,
because they were desirous to learn, that they might be better instructed at
home: thereby does also appear the lively heat of faith: and that does always
continue immovable, that, No man does truly believe in Christ, save only he
which does give over himself to him, and does freely and willingly fight under
his banner.

Of religious Grecians a multitude. Because these had learned the first
principles of Godliness, they were nearer to the kingdom of GOD than others
who had always laid in the filth of superstition, Notwithstanding the question
is how the Grecians came by religion, who being bewitched with wicked errors
and dotings, were without God: Ephesians. 2.12.
as Paul teaches. But we must know that whither soever the Jews were
exiled, there went with them some seed of godliness, and there was some smell
of pure doctrine spread abroad. For their miserable scattering abroad was so
turned unto a contrary end by the wonderful counsel of God, that it did
gather those unto the true faith who did wander in error. And though religion
were also corrupt among them with many wicked inventions: yet because most of
the Gentiles were weary of their madness, they were by this short sum
enticed unto Iudaisme, that, Nothing is more safe than the worship of one and
the true God. Therefore by religious Grecians understand those who had some
taste of the true and lawful worship of God, so that they were not any longer
given to gross Idolatry. Though as I have said, it is to be thought that it
was only a light and obscure taste, which was far from true instruction.
Wherefore Luke does improperly give them such an honorable title. But as the
Spirit of God does sometimes vouchsafe some rude beginning and first exercise
of faith, or the only preparation the name of faith: so they are called in
this place Religious, who having taken their leave of Idols, had begun to
acknowledge one God.

And though that confused or obscure persuasion does not deserve of it self to
be counted religion: yet because it is a step whereby we come nearer unto
God, it takes the name of the consequent, as they call it, or of that which
follows. Yea the blind and superstitious fear of God, is sometimes called
religion: not because it is so in deed, but improperly, to note the difference
between a mean worship of God, and gross and Epicurish contempt.
Nevertheless, let us know that the truth and the sound doctrine of the
word of God, is the rule of godliness, so that there can be no religion
without the true light of understanding.

5 And the unbelieving Jews being moved with envy, and taking to them
certain vacabonds, froward fellows, and having assembled the multitude, they
made a tumult in the city: and besetting the house of Jason, they sought to
bring them out unto the people.

6 And when they had not found them: the drew Jason and certain brethren unto
the governors of the city, crying, Those who have troubled the whole world,
are come hither also,

7 Whom Jason has received privily: and all these do contrary to the decrees
of Caesar, saying that there is another king, one Jesus.

8 And they troubled the multitude and the magistrates of the City when they
heard these things:

9 And when they had received sufficient assurance of Jason and the rest, they
let them go.

10 And forthwith the brethren sent forth Paul and Silas by night unto Berrhe^,
who when they were come they went into the Synagogue of the Jews.

5 And being moved with envy. We see how Paul could no where erect the
kingdom of Chtiste without some conflicte. For so soon as any fruit of
doctrine appeared, there arose persecution therewithal. But because he knew
that he was to war against Satan and the wickedness of the world, he was
not only hardened against all assaults: but he was more encouraged more
courageously to proceed. Therefore all the servants of Christ must be
content with this one example of him, if they see that their labor does
yield some fruit, they must recompense all manner persecutions with this
reward. And this place teaches that the zeal wherewith the unbelievers are
carried headlong and set on fire, is nothing else but furious force: because it
is not governed by the prudence of the spirit, neither yet with righteousness
or equity. And though they do always pretend the name of GOD for an excuse
of their disordered zeal: yet this history does plainly declare that mere
hypocrisy does reign inwardly, and that all corners of their hearts are
stuffed with poisoned malice. These enemies of Paul did boast that they were
defenders of the Law of God: and that they did hate Paul, and contend with
him only in defense thereof.

Why do they then arm the wicked, and conspire together with them to raise
tumult? Why then do they also before a profane Magistrate bring the Gospel in
that contempt, which might have redounded to the contempt of the Law? Such
sedition does plainly declare, that they were moved with nothing less than
with desire to please God, to be thus hot against Paul. For to what end do
they beset Iasons house, and strive disorderly to pluck out Paul thence,
save only that they may set him before the people to be stoned? Therefore
let us know that wicked zeal, which is hot in superstitious men, is always
infected with hypocrisy and malice. And this is the cause that it breaks out
into cruelty without keeping any measure.

Taking to them certain vacabounds. The Greek word which Luke uses does
signify sluggards and men whereof there ought no account to be made, who
having nothing wherewith they could keep themselves occupied at home, did run up
and down idle: or bold fellows and hungry, who are ready to forswere
themselves, to raise tumults and to be at one end of every wicked fact. Whereby
it does likewise appear that their own consciences told them that they did
amiss, seeing they gat wicked men to take their part and to give them their
consent. For seeing the magistrate did favor them, what did move them to raise
that tempest, save only because they had no hope to have any success unless
matters should be out of order and all should be in an uproar? And Luke
describes how such fannes did raise sedition: to wit, they gathered the people
together in troops, and spread abroad their poison here and there, until they
were strong enough to make an assault: which policy is too common among
seditious fellows, as those cities which are subject to this mischief do
fulwel know.

6 Those men who have troubled the whole world. This is the state of the
Gospel, to have those vprores which Satan raises, imputed to it. This is also
the maliciousnes of the enemies of Christ, to lay the blame of tumults upon
holy and modest teachers, which they themselves procure. Assuredly the Gospel
is not preached to this end that it may set men together by the cares: but
rather that it may keep them in peace being reconciled to God. When Christ
does meekely will us there, to come unto him, Satan and the wicked, rage.
Therefore Paul and Silas might easily have defended themselves: but it was
requisite for them to suffer this false slander for a time: and so long as they
were not heard, to put it up quietly. And the Lord meant by their example to
teach us, that we must not give place to slanders and false reports, but we
must stand stoutly in maintaining the truth, being ready to hear evil for
things done well. Wherefore away with the perverse wisdom of some, who to the
end they may escape false sla^ders, cease not to betray Christ and his gospel
through their treacherous moderation: as though their good name were more
precious than Paul's and such like: yea than the sacred name of God which is not
free from blasphemies.

7 All these men etc. The second point of the accusation is this, that they
violate the majesty of the Empire of Rome. A great and grievous crime: yet too
impudently forged. Paul and Silas sought to erect the kingdom of Christ which
is spiritual. The Jews knew well that this might be done without doing any
injury to the Roman empire. They knew that they meant nothing less, than to
overthrow the public estate, or to take from Caesar his authority. Therefore
the Jews catch at the pretense of treason, that they may oppress the innocent
with the envy of the crime alone. Neither does Satan cease at this day to
bleare men's eyes with such smokes and mysts. The Papists know fulwell, and they
be sufficiently convict before God, that that is more than false which they
lay to our charge, That we overthrow al civil government: that Laws and
judgments are quite taken away: that the authority of Kings is subverted by
us: and yet they be not ashamed to the end they may make all the whole world
offended with us, falsely to report that we be enemies to public order. For we
must note, that the Jews do not only allege that Caesar's commandments were
broken, because Paul and Silas durst presume to alter and innouate somewhat in
religion: but because they said there was another king. This crime was
altogether forged. But if at any time religion enforce us to resist tyrannical
edicts and commandments, which forbid us to give due honor to Christ, and
due worship to God: we may then justly say for our selves, that we are not
rebellious against kings: for they be not so exalted, that they may go about
like Giants to pull God out of his seat and throne. That excuse of Daniel was
true, that, He had not offended the king, whereas notwithstanding he had not
obeyed his wicked commandment: neither had he iniuried mortal man, because
he had preferred God before him. So let us faithfully pay to princes the
tributes which are due to them, let us be ready to give them all civil
obedience: but if being not content with their degree, they go about to pluck
out of our hands the fear and worship of god, there is no cause why any should
say that we despice them: because we make more account of the power and majesty
of God.

8 They raised the multitude. We see how unjustly the holy men were handled,
because they had no place granted them to defend themselves, it was an easy
matter to oppress them, though they were guiltless. We see likewise that it
is no new matter, for magistrates to be carried away with the rage of the
people as with a tempest, especially when the injury touches those who are
strangers and unknown, at whose hands they look for no reward: because they
will not come in danger for nothing. For then they care not for reason or
equity, neither do they hear the matter: but one drives forward an other
without any resistance, and all things are done out of order, as when they
run unto some great fire. But it came to pass by the singular goodness of
God, that so great heat was stayed by and by: for so soon as the magistrates
profess that they will know farther of the matter, the multitude is appeased:
assurance is taken: and at length the matter is ended.

10 They sent them out to Berrhea. Hereby it appears that Paul his labor
brought forth fruit in a small time: for though the brethren send forth him
and Silas: yet they adioine themselves as voluntary companions to their danger
and cross by this duty. But the constancy of Paul is incredible, because
having had such experience of their stubbernesse and malice of his nation: he
does never cease to try whether he can bring any to Christ: namely, seeing he
knew that he was bound both to Jews and Gentiles, no injury of men could
lead him away from his calling. So all the servants of Christ must so wrestle
with the malice of the world, that they shake not off Christ's yoke with what
injuries soever they be provoked.

11 And those were noble men among the Thessalonians, who had received the word
with all readiness of mind, daily searching the scriptures whether these things
were so.

12 And many of them believed, and honest women which were Grecians, and men
not a few:

13 But when the Jews of Thessalonica knew, that Paul did also preach the
word of God at Berrhea, they came thither also moving the multitudes.

14 And then streightway the brethren sent forth Paul, that he might go as it
were unto the sea: but Silas and Timotheus remained there.

15 Moreover those which guided Paul, brought him even unto Athens. And when
they had received commandment to Silas and Timotheus, that they should come to
him with speed, they departed.

11 Did excel in nobility. Luke returns again unto the men of
Thessalonica. The remembrance of Christ might have bin thought to have bin
buried by the departure of Paul, and surely it is a wonder that that small
light which began to shine, was not quite put out, and that the seed of sound
doctrine did not wither away, which had need continually to be watered that
it might spring up. But aftet Paul's departure, it appeared how effectual and
fruitful his preaching had been. For those who had only tasted of the first
principles of godliness, do nevertheless profit and go forward though he
be absent, and exercise themselves in the continual reading of the Scripture.
And first Luke says that they were of the chief families. For the nobility
whereof he makes mention, is referred not unto the mind, but unto the
nation. Some think that the men of Berrhea are compared with the men of
Thessalonica, because he says eugenesterous, and not in the superlatiue
degree eugenestatous. But I think that that manner of speech is usual and
common among the Grecians, which the Latins could not so well digest. Moreover
he had said a little before, that certain principal women believed at
Thessalonica, and it is not to be thought that the men of Berrhea were
preferred before those of this City. And there is a threefolde reason why Luke
makes mention of their excellency of birth. We know how hardly men come
down from their high degree, what a rare matter it is for those who are great
in the world, James 1.11.
to undertake the reproach of the cross laying away their pride, and to rejoice
in humility, as James commands.

Therefore Luke commends the rare efficacy and working of the Spirit of God,
when he says that these noble men were no whit hindered by the dignity of
the flesh, but that embracing the Gospel, they prepared themselves to bear the
cross, and preferred the reproach of Christ before the glory of the world.
Secondly Luk meant to make known unto us, that the grace of Christ stands
open for all orders and degrees. In which sense Paul says, that God would have
al men saved: least the poor and those who are base do shut the gate against
the rich (though Christ did vouchsafe the^ the former place). 1. Tim. 2.4.
Therefore we see that noble men and those who are of the common sort are
gathered together, that those who are men of honor and which are despised grow
together into one body of the church, that al men in general may humble
themselves, and extol the grace of God. Thirdly, Luke seems to note the
cause why there were so many added: and the kingdom of Christ was in such
short time so spread abroad and enlarged at Thessalonica. To wit, because that
was no small help, that chief men and men of honor did show other men the
way, because the common sort is for the most part moved by authority. And
though this were no meet stay for faith and godliness, yet is it no strange
thing for God to bring the unbelievers (who wonder as yet in error) to
himself, by crooked, and by ways.

Received the word. This is the first thing which he commends in the men of
Thessalonica, that with a willing and ready desire they received the Gospel.
Secondly, that they confirmed their faith by diligent inquisition. So that
their faith and godliness are commendod in the beginning for forwardness, and
in process they are praised for their constancy and fervent desire they had
to profit. And surely this is the first entrance into faith, that we be ready
to follow, and that abandoning the understanding and wisdom of the flesh, 1.
The. 2.13
we submit our selves to Christ, by him to be taught and to obey him. Also
Paul himself in adorning the Thessalonians with this title, does agree with
Saint Luke.

As touching the second member, this diligence is no small virtue whereunto Luke
says, the faithful were much given, for confirmation of their faith. For many
who at the first break out, give them selves straightway to idleness while that
they have no care to profit, and so loose that small seed, which they had at
the first. But two inconveniences may be in this place objected. For it
seems to be a point of arrogancy, in that they inquire that they may judge:
and it seems to be a thing altogether disagreeing with that readiness whereof
he spoke of late^: secondly for as much as inquisition is a sign of
doubtfulnes: it follows that they were before endued with no faith which has
always assurance and certainty joined and linked with it. Unto the first
objection I answer, that Luke his words ought not so to be understood, as if
the Thessalonians took upon them to judge, or as though they disputed whether
the truth of God were to be received: they did only examine Paul's doctrine by
the rule and square of the scripture, even as gold is tried in the fire. For
the Scripture is the true touchstone whereby all doctrines must be tried. If
any man say that this kind of trial is doubtful, forasmuch as the Scripture is
oftentimes doubtful, and is interpreted diverse ways: I say, that we must also
add the judgment of the Spirit, who is not without cause called the Spirit of
discretion. But the faithful must judge of every doctrine no otherwise than
out of, and according to the Scriptures, having the Spirit for their leader and
guide. And by this means is refuted that sacrilegious quippe of the Papists,
Because there can be nothing gathered certainly out of the Scriptures, faith
does depend only upon the determination of the Church.

For when the spirit of God does commend the men of Thessalonica, he
prescribes to us a rule in their example. And in vain should we search the
scriptures unless they have in the^ light enough to teach us. Therefore let this
remain as a most sure maxim, that, No doctrine is worthy to be believed, but
that which we find to be grounded in the scriptures. The pope will have all
that received without any more ado, whatsoever he does blunder out at his
pleasure: but shall he be preferred before Paul, concerning whose preachtng
it was lawful for the disciples to make inquisition? And let us note that this
is not spoken of any visured council, but of a small assembly of men: whereby
it does better appear that every man is called to read the scripture. So
likewise making of search does not disagree with the forwardness of faith: for
so soon as any man does harken, and being desirous to learn does show
himself attentive: he is now bent and apt to be taught, though he do not
fully give his consent. For examples sake, An unknown teacher shall profes
that he does bring true doctrine: I will come being ready to hear, and my
mind shall be framed unto the obedience of the truth: nevertheless I will weigh
with my self what manner doctrine it is which he brings, neither will I
embrace any thing but the certain truth, and that which I know to be the
truth. And this is the best moderation, when being fast bound with the
reverence of God, we hear that willingly and quietly which is set before us,
as proceeding from him. Nevertheless we beware of the seducing subtletie of men:
neither do our minds throw themselves headlong with a blind rage, to believe
every thing without aduisement. Therefore the searching mentioned by Luke, does
not tend to that end, that we may be slow and unwilling to believe: but rather
readiness with judgment is made the mean between lightness and stubbornness.
Now must we answer the second objection. Faith is contrary to doubtfulnes:
he which inquireth doubts: therefore it follows that for as much as the
Thessalonians inquire and make search touching the doctrine of Paul, they were
void of faith as yet. But the certainty of faith does not hinder the
confirmation thereof. I call that confirmation when the truth of God is more
and more sealed up in our hearts, whereof notwithstanding we did not doubt
before. For examples sake, I hear out of the Gospel that I am reconciled to
god through the grace of Christ, and that my sins are purged through his holy
blood: there shall be some testimony uttered which shall make me believe this.
If afterward I examine and search the scriptures more thoroughly, I shall find
other testimonies oftentimes, which shall not only help my faith, but also
increase it and establish it, that it may be more sure and settled. In like sort
as concerning understanding, faith is increased by reading the Scriptures. If
any man object again, that those men do attribute but small authority to
Paul's doctrine, who search the scriptures whither these things be so: I
answer, that such are the proceedings of faith, that they sometimes seek for
that in the Scripture, whereof they are already persuaded by God, and have the
inward testimony of the spirit. And Luke does not say that the faith of the
Thessalonians was in all points perfect: but he does only declare how they
were brought to Christ, and how they did profit in faith, until the absolute
building of godliness might he erected among them.

12 And many believed. This is not referred unto the sentence next going
before, as if those of whom he spoke began to believe, making choice of some
of them: for that were an absurd thing. But Luke his meaning is: because many
were added by their example, the Church was increased in that City. And
hitherto has Luke declared the first beginning of the Church of Thessalonica,
least any man should think that Paul's labors did perish through his sudden
and violent departure: for unless I be much deceived, he shows for this
purpose what fruit his preaching brought forth in the other City, before he
came to the exile of Berrhea.

13 And when the Jews. We see how the Jews were carried to and fro with such
hatred of the Gospel as could never be appeased. For they do not only expel
Christ suriously when he is offered unto them at home but when they hear that
he is preached elsewhere, they run thither like mad men. But we must not so
much in this place consider the fury of the nation, as the desperate malice of
Satan who pricketh forward those which be his to trouble the kingdom of
Christ, and to destroy man's salvation, and he uses them as fannes to raise
sedition. Wherefore let us know, that when at this day so many furious enemies
do set themselves against the faithful ministers of Christ, it is not men
which procure the war, but it is Satan the father of lying, who does go about
all these things, that he may overthrow the kingdom of Christ. And though
there be not always the same form in fighting and encountering: yet will
Satan never cease to make weary those whom he knows to serve Christ
faithfully either with open war, or secreat lying in wait, John 8.44.
or domestical cumbates.

16 And as Paul waited for them at Athens, his Spirit was sore grieved in him,
forasmuch as he saw the City given to idolatry.

17 Therefore he disputed in the Synagogue with the Jews and religious men,
and in the market daily with those which light upon him.

18 And certain Epicures, and Philosophers of the stoickes disputed with him,
and some said, What will this Babbler say? And othersome, He seems to be a
declarer of new or gods.
devils, because he preached to them Jesus and the resurrection.

19 And when they had caught him they led him, to Mars street, saying; May we
know what new doctrine this is which thou vtterest?

20 For thou bring certain new things to our ears. Therefore we will know
what these things mean.

21 And all the men of Athens and the strangers which were there, gave
themselves to nothing else but to speak or hear some new thing.

16 Was sore grieved. Though Paul whither soever he came did stoutly execute
that function of teaching which he knew was enjoined him: yet Luke shows
that he was more incensed and moved at Athens, because he saw idolatry reign
more there then in any other place for the most part. The whole world was then
full of Idols: the pure worship of God could be found no where: and there were
every where innumerable monsters of superstitions, but Satan had made the
City of Athens more mad than any other City, so that the people thereof were
carried headlong with greater madness unto their wicked and perverse rites. And
this example is worth the noting that the City which was the mansion house of
wisdom, the fountain of all arts, the mother of humanity, did exceed all
other in blindness and madness. We know with what commendations witty and
learned men did set forth the same, and she had conceived so great good liking
of her self that she counted those rude whom she had not pullished. But the
holy Ghost condemning the whole world of ignorance and blockishnes, says that
those masters of liberal sciences were bewitched with an unwonted madness.
Whence we gather what man's wit can do in matters which concern God. Neither
need we doubt of this but that the Lord suffered the men of Athens to fall into
extreme madness, that all the world might learn by them, and that they might
teach all ages that the foresight and wit of man's mind being helped with
learning and instruction does altogether dote and is mere foolishnes when it
comes to the kingdom of God. They had undoubtedly their cloakes and colors
wherewith they did excuse their worshippings how preposterous and corrupt so
ever they were. And yet notwithstanding it is certain that they did not only
deceive men with childish and frivolous toies, but that they themselves were
deluded shamefully with gross and filthy iugglings, as if they were deprived
of common sense and were altogether blockish and brutish. And as we learn what
manner religion proceeds from man's understanding, and that man's wisdom is
nothing else but a shop of all errors: so we may know that the men of Athens
being drunk with their own pride, did err more filthilie than the rest. The
antiquity, the pleasantness and beauty of the City did puff them up, so
that they did boast that the Gods, came thence. Therefore forasmuch as they did
pull down God from heaven that they might make him an inhabitant of their
city: it was meet that they should be thrust down into the nethermost hell.
Howsoever it be, the vanity of man's wisdom is here marked with eternal
infamy by the Spirit of God: because where it was principally resident, there
was the darkness more thick: idolatry did reign most of al there: and satan
carried men's minds too and fro more freely by his mockes and iugling. Now let
us come unto Paul. Luke says, forasmuch as he saw the City so given to
Idolatry, his Spirit waxed hot or was moved: where he does not attribute
unto him indignation only, neither does he only say that he was offended
with that spectacle, but he expresses the unwonted heat of holy anger, which
sharpened his zeal, so that he did address himself more fervently unto the
work. And here we must note two things. For in that Paul was wroth when he saw
the name of God wickedly profaned, and his pure worship corrupted: he did
thereby declare that nothing was to him more precious than the glory of God.
Which zeal ought to be of great force among us: as it is in the Psalm, Psalm.
69.10. 2. Pet. 2.8.
The zeal of thine house has eaten me up. For is is a common rule of all the
godly, that so soon as they see their heavenly father blasphemed, they be sore
vexed: as Peter teaches that the godly man Lot, because he could not cure most
filthy facts, did vex his heart. And teachers must above all other be fervent:
as Paul says, 2. Cor. 11.2.
that he is gealous that he may retain the church in true chastity. And those
who are not touched when they see and hear God blasphemed, and do not only
wink thereat, but also carelessly pass over it, are not worthy to be counted
the children of god, who at least do not give him so much honor as they do
to an earthly father. Secondly we must note that he was not so grieved, that
being cast down through despair, he was quite discouraged, as we see most
men to be far from waxing hot or being moved, when they see the glory of God
wickedly profaned, that in professing and uttering sorrow and sighing, they do
notwithstanding rather wax profane with others, then study to reform them.
Nevertheless they have a fair cloak for their sluggishnesse, that they will
not procure any tumult when they are like to do no good. For they think that
their attempts shall be in vain, if they strive against the wicked and
violent conspiracy of the people. But Paul is not only not discouraged with
wearisomnes, neither does he so faint by reason of the hardness of the matter,
that he does cast from him his office of teaching: but he is pricked forward
with a more sharp prick to maintain godliness.

17 With the Jews and religious men. It was an ordinary thing with Paul
wheresoever the Jews had Synagogues, there to begin, and to offer Christ to
his own nation. After that, he went to the Gentiles, who having tasted of the
doctrine of the law, though they were not as yet thoroughly nousled up in true
godliness, did notwithstanding worship the god of Israel, and being desirous to
learn did not refuse those things which they knew were taken out of Moses and
the prophets: and because such aptnes to be taught was an entrance unto faith,
yea was a certain beginning of faith, the spirit vouchsafes them an honorable
title, who being only lightly sprinkled with the first rudiments, drew nearer
unto the true God: for they be called religious. But let us remember that they
be distinguished from others by this mark, that all the religion of the world
may be brought to naught. Those are called worshippers of God spiritually, who
gave their name to the god of Israel: religion is attributed to them alone,
therefore there remains nothing else for the rest, but the reproach of
Atheism, howsoever they toil and moile in superstition. And that for good
cosiderations, for of whatsoever pomp the Idolaters make boast, if their
inward affection be examined, there shall be nothing found there but horrible
contempt of god: and it shall appear that it is a mere feigned color
wherewith they go about to excuse their Idols.

18 They reasoned with him. Luke adds now that Paul had a combat with the
Philosophers: not that he set upon them of set purpose, for as much as he knew
that they were even borne only to braule and cavil: but he was enforced to
enter such a conflict contrary to his purpose: as Paul himself commands
godly teachers to be furnished with spiritual weapons, wherewith they may
valiantly defend the truth, if any enemies set themselves against it. For it is
not always in our choice to make choice of those with whom we will deal: Tit.
1.9.
but the Lord does often suffer stubborn and importunate me^ to arise, to
exercise us, that by their gainsaying the truth may more plainly appear:
Neither is it to be doubted but that the Epicures, according to their wonted
frowardnes, did trouble the holy man: and that the Stoics trusting to their
sub till quips and cauils, did stubbornly deride him: yet the end shall show
that he did not dispute sophistically, neither was he carried away unto any
unprofitable and contentious disputation: but did observe that modesty which
he himself commands elsewhere: and thus must we do that by refuting
meekely and modestly vain cauellings, we may utter that which is sound and
true: and we must always avoid this danger, that ambition or desire to show
our wit, do not inwrap us in superfluous and vain contentions. Furthermore
Luke makes mention of two sects, which, though they were the one contrary to
the other, had notwithstanding their contrary vices. The Epicures did not only
despise liberal arts: but were also open enemies to them. Their philosophy was
to feign that the Sun was two foot broad, that the world was made ex atomis, or
of things which were so small that they could not be divided or made smaller:
and by deluding men thus, to blot out the wonderful workmanship which appears
in the creation of the world: if they were a thousand times convict, they were
as impudent as dogs. Though they did in a word confess that there be gods: yet
they did imagine that they were idle in heaven, and that they were wholly set
upon pleasure, and that they were blessed only because they were idle. As they
did deny that the world was created by God, as I have said of late: so they
thought that man's affairs were tossed to and fro without any governing, and
that they were not governed by the celestial providence. Pleasure was their
felicity, not that unbridled and filthy pleasure, yet such as did more and
more corrupt men by her enticements, being already of their own accord bent
to pa^per the flesh. They counted the immortality of their souls, but a fable,
whereby it came to pass that they gave them selves liberty to make much of
their bodies. As for the Stoics, though they said that the world was subject
to the providence of god, yet did they afterward through a most filthy surmise,
or rather doting, corrupt that point of their doctrine. For they did not grant
that God did govern the world by counsel, justice, and power, but they forged
a Labyrinth of the compass or agreement of the causes, that God himself being
bound with the necessity of fate or destiny, might be carried violently with
the frame of heaven: as the Poets do tie and fetter their Jupiter with golden
fetters: because the fates or destinies do govern when he is about something
else. Though they placed felicity in virtue, they knew not what true virtue
was, and they did puff up men with pride, so that they did deck themselves
with that which they took from God. For though they did al abase the grace of
the holy ghost, yet was there no sect more proud. They had no other fortitude,
but a certain rash and immoderate fierceness,

Therefore there was in Paul wonderful force of the Spirit, who standing amidst
such beasts, which sought to pull him too and fro, stood firm in the sound
synceritie of the Gospel: and did valiantly withstand and endure, as well the
dogged malapertnes of the former sect, as the pride and crafty cauillings of
the other. And hereby we see more plainly, what small agreement there is
between the heavenly wisdom and the wisdom of the flesh. For though the
whole multitude were offended with the gospel: yet the Philosophers were
captains and standerdbearers in assaulting the same. For that did principally
appear in them, which Paul himself speaks of the wisdom of the flesh,
that, 1. Cor. 1.11.
It is an enemy to the cross of Christ: so that no man can be fit to learn the
principles of the Gospel unless he first abandon the same.

Other some said. Luke sets before us two sorts of men: which both were
far from godliness: and yet the one sort is worse than the other. Those who
are desirous to hear that again which they call new, first they are moved
not with any right desire to learn, but with vain curiosity. Secondly they
think vnhonourablie of the word of God, in that they count it profane
noualtie. Yet because they give ear, and that being in doubt, until they may
know farther of the matter, they are not quite past hope. But the rest who
proudly refuse that which is offered, yea condemn it reprochfully, do shut the
gate of salvation against themselves. For this railing did proceed from
monstrous pride, what means this Babbler? Because they neither vouchsafe to
hear Paul, and also reprochfully refuse him, as if he were some common
iester. Moreover they do not loath his doctrine through rash zeal: but do
openly tread under foot that which is brought unto them concerning religion,
though as yet they know it not: because these are ashamed to learn any thing of
a base and obscure fellow, who had hitherto professed themselves to be
teachers of all the whole world.

A declarer of new devils. They do not take devils in evil part, as the
Scripture uses to do: but for the lesser gods or angels, who they thought were
in the midst between the highest God and men, whereof Plato makes mention
oftentimes. As touching the sum of the matter we must note that those things
which Paul spoke concerning Christ and the resurrection, seemed to them to be
new devils. Whence we gather that our faith is principally distinguished and
discerned from the superstitions of the Gentiles by these marks, because it
sets forth Christ to be the sole mediator: because it teaches us to seek
for salvation only at his hands: because it comma^deth us to seek remission of
our sins in his death, whereby we may be reconciled to God: because it teaches
that men are renewed and fashioned again by his spirit, who were before
profane, and slaves to sin, that they may begin to live righteously and
holilie. Again, because from such beginnings as do plainly declare that the
kingdom of God is spiritual, it lifts up our minds at length unto the hope
of the resurrection to come. For as concerning other things though the
Philosophers do not reason purely yet they say somewhat. Yea they speak much
concerning eternal life and the immortality of the soul: but as touching faith
which shows free reconciliation in Christ: and regeneration, whereby the
Spirit of God does restore in us the image of God: concerning calling upon God,
and the last resurrection not a word.

19 They brought him to Mars street. Though this were a place appointed for
judgment, yet Luke does not mean that Paul was brought before the seat of the
judges, that he might plead his cause before the judges of Mars street: But
that he was brought thither, where was most commonly a great asse^blie of
people, that the serious disputation might be had before a great and famous
audience. And admit we grant that he was brought before the judgment seat:
yet the end does declare that he was not presented to the judges, but that he
had free liberty to speak as before an audience. And that which follows
shortly after touching the nature and conditions of the men of Athens, does
sufficiently declare that their curiosity was the cause, that Paul had such
audience given him: that he had such a famous place granted him to preach
Christ in: that so many came together. For in any other place it had bin a
crime worthy of death, to speak in the market or in any other public place,
having gathered a company of people together, but there because those who did
carry about trifles, had liberty granted the^ to prate by reason of the
immoderate desire they had to hear news: Paul was permitted to entreat of the
mysteries of faith, being requested.

Gave themselves to nothing else. The two vices which Luke recites, do almost
always go together. For it falls out seldom, that those who are desirous of
noualties, are not also bablers. For that saying of Horace is most true, Fly a
demander of questions, for the same is also a blab. And surely we see that
curious men are like rent Barrels. Furthermore both vices came of idleness: not
only because the Philosophers spent whole days in disputing: but because the
common sort was too much set upon noualty: neither was there any crafts man so
base there, which would not thrust in himself to set in order the state of
Grecia. And surely that which Luk says here is witnessed by all writers both
Greek and Latin, that there was nothing more light, covetous, or froward than
that people. Wherefore there could never be any certain government set down
in that City, which was notwithstanding the mystres of sciences. Therefore in
principal power, they had notwithstanding no long liberty: neither did they
ever cease off from attempting things and making many hurliburlies, until they
brought themselves and al Grecia to utter ruin. For when their state was
decayed, yet did not they forsake their boldness. Therefore Cicero does laugh at
their folly, because they did no less fiercely set forth their decrees then,
than when they were lords over Grecia. Now though there were small hope to do
any good among curious me^: yet Paul did not neglect the opportunity, if
peradventure he might gain some of a great company to Christ. Neither was this
any small praise for the Gospel, in the most noble place of the City, and as
it were in a common Theater, to refute and openly to reprove, all forged and
false worshippings; which had reigned there even until this day.

22 And standing in the midst of Mars street, he says, Men of Athens, I see
you in all things as it were more superstitious.

23 For passing by and beholding your manner of worshippings, I found also an
altar wherein was written, To the unknown God. Therefore whom you worship
ignorantly, him do I preach unto you.

24 God who has made the world, and all things which are therein, seeing he
is Lord both of heaven and earth, dwells not in temples made with hands:

25 Neither is he worshipped with men's hands, needing any thing: seeing that he
gives to all life and breath through all things.

22 Men of Athens. We may divide this Sermon of Paul into five members. For
though Luke does only briefly touch those things which he set down in many
words: yet I do not doubt but that he did comprehend the sum: so that he did
omit none of the principal points. First Paul lays superstition to the
charge of the men of Athens, because they worship their gods at all a very
venture: secondly he shows by natural arguments, who and what God is, and
how he is rightly worshipped. Thirdly, he inueigheth against the blockishnesse
of men: who though they be created to this end, that they may know their
creator and maker, yet do they wander and err in darkness like blind men.
Fourthly, he shows that nothing is more absurd than to draw any purtrature
of God, seeing that the mind of man is his true image: in the first place he
descends at length unto Christ and the resurrection of the dead. For it was
requisite to handle those four points generally, before he did descend unto the
faith of the Gospel.

As it were more superstitious. The Grecians do oftentimes take deisidaimonia^
in good part: notwithstanding it does sometimes signify immoderate fear,
wherewith superstitious men do carefully torment themselves, whiles that they
forge to themselves vain douts. And this seems to be the meaning of this
place, that the men of Athens pass all measure in worshipping god, or that
they do not perceive what manner work moderation should be: as if he should
say, that they deal very indiscreetly in that they weary them selves in going
by ways, thus much touching the words: now to the matter. He proves by this
one reason that all the worshippings of the men of Athens are corrupt: because
they be uncertain what gods they ought to worship, because they take in hand
rashly and unadvisedly diverse rites, and that without measure. For in that
they had set up an altar to the unknown God, it was a token that they knew no
certainty, they had in deed a great company of gods whereof they spoke much: but
when as they mix them with unknown gods, they confess by this that they know
nothing of the true divinity. Furthermore, whosoever does worship god without
any certainty, he worshippeth his own inventions in steed of God. Howsoever
credulous me^ do flatter themselves: yet neither does god allow any religion
without knowledge and truth, neither ought it to be counted holy and lawful.
Yea how proud soever they be, yet because they doubt in their consciences, they
must needs be convict by their own judgment. For superstition is always
fearful, and does ever now and then coin some new thing* therefore we see how
miserable their co^ditio^ is, who have not the certain light of the truth,
because they do both always dout in themselves, and loose their labor before
God. Notwithstanding we must note that the unbelievers whiles that they
sometimes make themselves blind through voluntary stubornnes, and are sometimes
amid diverse and manifold douts, strive and fight with themselves: oftentimes
they do not only flatter themselves: but if any man dare mutter against their
folly, they rage cruelly against him: the devil does so bewitch them, that
they think nothing to be better, than that which pleases them. Nevertheless
if there arise any doubt, if any seducer put up his head, if any new folly
begin to appear, they do not only waver being in dout, but also of their own
accord offer themselves to be carried hither and thither. Whereby it appears
that neither in judgment, neither in quiet state of mind, they stay and rest
in the common custom of worshipping God: but that they droup like drunken men.
But carefulnes and doutfulnes which does not suffer the unbelievers to flatter
and please themselves, is better the^ such amasednes. Finally though
superstition be not always fearful: yet forasmuch as it is inwrapt in diverse
errors, it disquieteth men's minds, and does prick them with diverse blind
torments. This was the cause that the men of Athens did mix their domestical
Gods (whom they thought they knew because in their vain opinion they had
invented them) with unknown gods. For thereby appears their unquietness,
because they confess that they have not as yet done as they ought, when they
have done sacrifice to the familiar Gods, which they had received of their
fathers, and who^ they called their country gods. Therefore to the end Paul may
pluck out of their minds all vain and false perswasio^s, he takes this
maxim, that they know not what they worship, neither have they any certain
divine power. For if they had known any god at al, being content with him, they
would never have fallen away unto unknown gods, forasmuch as the knowledge of the
true God alone is sufficient for the abolishing of all idols.

23 To the unknown god. I can well grant that this altar was dedicated to all
strange gods: yet I cannot yield to that which Jerome says, that Paul did by
a certain holy wilines attribute that to one God which was written of many. For
seeing the superscriptio^ was common in every man's mouth, there was no place for
subtlety: why did he then change the plural number? surely, not that he might
deceive the men of Athens: but because the matter did so require, he said, that
he brought doctrine concerning an unknown god. And after he has showed that
they are deceived, because they knew not what god they ought to worship, and
had no certain Godhead in a great heap of gods: he does now insinuat himself,
and does purchase favor for his doctrine: because it was an unjust thing to
reject that which was uttered concerning a new god, to who^ they had already
given over themselves: and it was far better first to know him, then rashly to
worship him who^ they knew not. Thus does Paul return again to that principle,
that god cannot be worshipped rightly, unless he be first made known. But
here may a question be moved: How he says that god was worshipped at Athens,
who does refuse al worshippings which are not agreeable to the prescript of his
law: yea he pronounces that all that is idolatry, which men invent without his
word? If God allow no woorship, but that which is agreeable to his word,
how does Paul give this praise to men, who did dote without measure, that
they woorshipped God? For Christ in condemning the Samaritanes is content with
this one principle in that they woorshippe GOD without knowledge: Ioh. 4.22.
and yet they did boast that they worshipped the God of Abraham. Then what
shall we say of the men of Athens, who having buried and quite put out the
remembrance of the true God, had put in place of him Jupiter, Mercury, Pallas
and all that filthierable? I aunsweare that Paul does not in this place commend
that which the men of Athens had done: but takes from their affection though
it were corrupt, free mattet for teaching.

24 God who has made the world. Paul his drift is to teach, what God is.
Furthermore because he has to deal with profane men, he draws proofs from
nature it self: for in vain should he have cited testimonies of Scripture. I
said that this was the holy man's purpose to bring the men of Athens unto the
true God. For they were persuaded that there was some divinity: only their
preposterous religion was to be reformed. Whence we gather that the world
does go astray through bending crooks and boughts, yea that it is in a mere
labyrinth, so long as there remains a confused opinion concerning the nature
of God. For this is the true rule of godliness, distinctly and plainly to know
who that God who^ we worship, is. If any man will entreat generally of religion,
this must be the first point, that there is some divine power or godhead which
men ought to worship. But because that was out of question, Paul descends
unto the second point, that The true God must be distinguished from all vain
inventions. So that he begins with the definition of God, that he may thence
prove how he ought to be worshipped: because the one depends upon the other.
For whence came so many false worshippings, and such rashness to increase the
same often times, save only because al men forged to themselves a God at their
pleasure? And nothing is more easy then to corrupt the pure worship of God,
when men esteem God after their sense and wit. Wherefore there is nothing more
fit to destroy all corrupt worshippings, then to make this beginning and to
show, of what sort the nature of God is. Also our Savior Christ reasons
thus. Ioh. 4. Ioh. 4.24.
God is a spirit. Therefore he allows no other worshippers, but such as
worship him spiritually. And surely he does not subtly dispute of the secret
substance of God: but by his works he declares, which is the profitable
knowledge of him. And what does Paul gather thence, because God is the creator,
framer and Lord of the world? to wit, that he dwells not in temples made
with hands. For seeing that it appears plainly by the creation of the world,
that the righteousness, wisdom, goodness and power of God, does reach beyond
the bounds of heaven and earth: it follows that he can be included and shut
up within no space of place.

Notwithstanding this demonstration seems to have been in vayn, because they
might readily have said, that images and pictures were placed in temples to
testify gods presence: and that none was so gross but that he knew that GOD
did fulfill all things. I aunsweare that that is true which I said a little
before, that idolatry is contrary to it self. The unbelievers said that they
worshipped the gods before their images: but unless they had tied the godhead
and power of God to Images, and had hoped to be helped thereby, would they
have directed their prayers thither? Hereby it came also to pass that one
temple was more holy then another. They ran to Delphos that they might fet the
oracles of Apollo thence: Minerua had her seat and mansion at Athe^s. Now we
see that Paul does touch that false opinion, whereby men have always bin
deceived: because they feined to themselves a carnal God. This is the first
entrance into the true knowledge of god, if we go without our selves, and do
not measure him by the capacity of our mind. Yea if we imagine nothing of him
according to the understanding of our flesh, but place him above the world, and
distinguish him from creatures. From which sobriety the whole world was always
far: because this wickedness is in men naturally to deforme Gods glory with
their inventions. For as they be carnal and earthie, they will have one that
shall be aunswerable to their nature. Secondly after their boldness they
fashion him so as they may comprehend him. By such inventions is the sincere
and plain knowledge of God corrupt: Romans 1.29.
yea his truth as says Paul is turned into a lie. For who soever does not
ascend high above the world, he apprehe^deth vain shadows and ghosts instead
of God. Again unless we be carried up into heaven with the wings of faith, we
must needs vanish away in our own cogitations. And no marvel if the gentiles
were so grossly deluded and deceived, to include God in the elements of the
world, after that they had pulled him out of his heavenly throne: seeing that
the same befell the Jews, to whom notwithstanding the Lord had showed his
spiritual glory. Isai. 66.1.
For it is not without cause that Isaias does chide the^ for including God
within the walls of the temple. And we gather out of Steue^ his sermon, Cha.
7.46.
that this vice was common to al ages, which sermon is set down by Luke in
the 7. chapter. If any man asked the Jews whose grosnes the holy ghost
reprooueth, if they thought that God was included in their temple: they would
stoutly have denied that they were in any such gross error. But because they
did only behold the Temple and did rise no higher in their minds, and
trusting to the temple, did boast that God was as it were bound to them: the
spirit does for good causes reprehend them, for tying him to the temple as if
he were a mortal man. For that is true which I said even now, that
superstition is contrary to it self, and that it does vanish away into diverse
imaginations. Neither have the papists at this day any defense saving that
wherewith the gentiles went about in times past to paint or cover their errors
after a sort. In sum, superstition does feign that God dwells in temples
made with hands, not that it will shut him up as it were in a prison: but
because it does dream of a carnal or fleshly God, and does attribute a
certain power to idols, and does translate the glory of God unto external
shows.

But if God do not dwell in Temples made with hands: why does he testify in
so many places of Scripture, that he sits between the Cherubines, and that
the Temple is his eternal rest? I answer, As he was not tied to any place, so
he meant nothing less than to tie his people to earthly signs, but rather he
comes down to them that he might lift them up unto himself. Therefore those
men did wickedly abuse the Temple and the arc, 2. Reg. 19.15. Psalm. 80.2.
Psalm. 132.14.
who did so behold those things that they stayed still upon earth, and did
depart from the spiritual worship of God. Hereby we see that there was great
difference between those tokens of Gods presense which men indented to
themselves unadvisedly, and those which were ordained by God: because men do
always incline dounward, that they may lay hold upon God after a carnal
manner: but God by the leading of his word does lift them upward. Only he
uses middle signs and tokens, whereby he does insinuate himself with slow
men, until they may ascend into heaven by degrees and steps.

25 Neither is he worshipped with man's hands. The same question which was
answered of late concerning the temple, may now be objected touching
ceremonies. For it seems that that may be translated unto the worshippings of
the law of Moses, which Paul condemns in the ceremonies of the Gentiles. But
we may readily answer that the faithful did never properly place the worship
of God in ceremonies: but they did only count them helps wherewith they might
exercise themselves according to their infirmity. When they did slay beasts,
offered bread and drink offereringes, light torches and other lights, they knew
that godliness was not placed in these things, but being helped by these,
they did always look unto the spiritual worship of God, and they made
account of it alone. And God himself says plainly in many places that he
does not pass for any external or visible thing, that ceremonies are of
themselves of no importance, and that he is worshipped no other wise but by
faith, a pure conscience, by prayer and thankfulness. What did the Gentiles
then? To wit, when they erected images, they offered incense, they set forth
plays, and laid their coushins before their idols, they thought they had
fulfilled the offices of godliness excellent well. Not only the philosophers,
but also the poets do sometimes deride the folly of the common people,
because they did disorderedly place the worship of God in the pomp and
gorgeousnes of ceremonies. That I may omit infinite testimonies, that of
Persius is well known, Tell me ye Priests to sacred rites, what profit gold
does bring?
The same which Venus puppets fine, Certes no other thing.
Why give not we to Gods, that which the bleare eyde issue could,
Of great Messala never give, from out their dish of gold?
Right justly deemde a conscience clear, and heavenly thoughts of mind.
A breast with mildnes such adornde, as virtue has assingde.
Let me in temples offer these,
Then sacrifice the Gods shall please.
And undoubtedly the Lord caused profane men to utter such speeches, that they
might take away all color of ignorance. But it does plainly appear that
those who spoke thus, did straightway slide back again unto common madness: yea
that they did never thoroughly understand what this meant. For though those who
pass the common people in wit, be enforced to confess that bare ceremonies
are in no estimation: yet it is impossible to pull from them this persuasio^,
but that they will think that they be a part of the divine worship. Therefore
the more diligently they give themselves to such vanities, they do not doubt
but that they do the duties of godliness well. Therefore because all mortal
men from the highest to the lowest do think that GOD is pacified with
external things, and they will with their own works fulfill their duty
toward him, that does Paul refute. There is also a reason added, because
seeing he is Lord of heaven and earth, he needs nothing because seeing that
he gives breath and life to men, he can receive nothing of them again. For
what can they bring of their own, who being destitute of all good things,
have nothing but of his free goodness? yea who are nothing but by his mere
grace: who shall forthwith be brought to naught, if he withdraw the Spirit
whereby they live. Whereupon it follows that they are not only dull but too
proud if they thrust in themselves to worship God with the works of their
own hands. For whereas he says that alms and the duties of love are sweet
smelling sacrifices, that must be distinguished from the matter which we have
now in hand, where Paul does only entreat of the ceremonies, which the
unbelievers put in place of the spiritual worship of God. By life and breath
is mean the life which men live so long as the soul and body are joined
together. Touching the end of the sentence though some Greek books agree in
this reading, cata panta Through all things: yet that seems to me more
agreeable which the old interpreter has; ca^ta panta, And all things: because
it is both plainer, and does also contain a more perfect and full doctrine. For
thence we do better gather that men have nothing of their own. And also
certain Greek coppies agree thereto.

26 And has made of one blood all mankind, to dwell upon all the face of the
earth, and has appointed the times before determined, and the bounds of their
habitation.

27 That they might seek God if peradventure they may grope him and find
him: though he be not far from every one of us.

28 For in him we live, move, and have our being: as certain of your Poets
said. For we be also his generation.

29 Therefore seeing we be the generation of God, we must not think that the
Godhead is like to gold, or silver, or to stone graven by the cunning
cogitation of man.

26 And he has made of one blood. Paul does now show unto the men of Athens to
what end mankind was created, that he may by this means inuit and exhort them
to consider the end of their life. This is surely filthy unthankfulness of men,
seeing they all enjoy the common life, not to consider to what end God has
given them life. And yet this beastly blockishnes does possess the more part,
so that they do not consider to what end they be placed in the world, neither
do they remember the creator of heaven and earth, whose good things they do
devour. Therefore after that Paul has entreated of the nature of God, he
puts in this admonition in due season, that men must be very careful to
know God: because they be created for the same end, and borne for that
purpose. For he does briefly assign unto them this cause of life, to seek
God. Again for as much as there was not one kind of religion only in the
world, but the gentiles were distract into diverse sects, he tells them that
this variety came from corruption. For to this end in my judgment, tends
that, when he says, that all were created of one blood. For consanguinitie
and the same original ought to have bin a bo^d of mutual consent among the^.
But it is religion which does most of all join men together, or cause them to
fly one another company: whervppon it follows, that they be revolted from
nature, who disagree so much in religion and the worship of god. Because
whersoeuer they be born, and whatsoever place of the world they inhabit, they
have al one maker and father, who must be sought of al men with one consent.
And surely neither distaunce of places, nor bounds of countries, nor
diversity of manners, neither any cause of separation among men does make God
unlike to himself. In sum, he meant to teach that the order of nature was
broken, when as religion was pulled in pieces among them: and that that
diversity which is among them, is a testimony that godliness is quite
overthrown: because they are fallen away from God the father of al, upon whom
al kindred depends.

To dwell upon the face of the earth. Luke does briefly gather as he uses to
do, the sum of Paul his sermon. And it is not to be doubted, but that Paul
did first show that men are set here as upon a Theater, to behold the works
of God, and secondly, that he spoke of the providence of God, which does show
forth it self in the whole government of the world. For when he says that
god appoints the times ordained before, and the bounds of men's habitations,
his meaning is, that this world is governed by his hand and counsel, and that
men's affairs fall not out by chance, as profane men dream. And so we gather
out of a few words of Luke, that Paul did handle most weighty matters. For
when he says that the times were ordained before by him: he does testify that
he had determined before men were created, what their condition and estate
should be. When we see diverse changes in the world, when we see realms come to
ruin, lands altered, cities destroyed, nations laid wast, we foolishly
imagine, that either fate or fortune bears the swinge in these matters. But
God does testify in this place by the mouth of Paul, that it was appointed
before in his counsel, how long he would have the state of every people to
continue, and within what bounds he would have them contained. But and if he
have appointed the^ a certain time, and appointed the bounds of countries,
undoubtedly he has also set in order the whole course of their life. And we
must note that Paul does attribute to God not only a bare foreknowledge and
cold speculatio^, as some men do indiscreetly: but he places the cause of
those things which fall out in his counsel and beck. For he says not that the
times were only foreseen, but that they were appointed and set in such order
as pleased him best. And when he adds also that God had appointed from the
beginning those things which he had ordained before, his meaning is, that he
executes by the power of his spirit, those things which he has decreed in
his counsel, according to that: Our God is in heaven, Psalm. 115.3.
he has done whatsoever he would. Now we see, as in a camp every troop and
band has his appointed place, so men are placed upon earth, that every people
may be content with their bounds, and that among these people every particular
person may have his mansion. But though ambition have oftentimes raged, and
many being incensed with wicked lust, have past their bounds: yet the lust of
men has never brought to pass, but that God has governed al events from out
his holy sanctuary. For though men by raging upon earth do seem to assault
heaven, that they may overthrow Gods providence: yet they are enforced whether
they will or no, rather to establish the same. Therefore let us know that the
world is so turned over through diverse tumults that God does at length bring al
things unto the end which he has appointed.

27 That they might seek God. This sentence has two members: to wit, that it
is man's duty to seek God: Secondly, that God himself comes forth to meet
us, and does show himself by such manifest tokens, that we can have no excuse
for our ignorance. Therefore let us remember that those men do wickedly abuse
this life, and that they be unworthy to dwell upon earth, which do not apply
their studies to seek him. As if every kind of brute beasts should fall from
that inclination which they have naturally, which should for good causes be
called monstrous. And surely nothing is more absurd, then that men should be
ignorant of their Author, who are endued with understanding principally for
this use. And we must especially note the goodness of God, in that he does so
familiarly insinuate himself, that even the blind may grope, after him. For
which cause the blindness of men is more shameful and intolerable, who in
so manifest and evident a manifestation, are touched with no feeling of Gods
presence. Whithersoeuer they cast their eyes upward or downward, they must
needs light upon lively and also infinite images of Gods power, wisdom, and
goodness. For God has not darkly shadowed his glory in the creation of the
world: but he has every where engraven such manifest marks, that even blind
men may know them by groping. Whence we gather that men are not only blind,
but blockish when being helped by such excellent testimonies they profit
nothing. Yet here arises a question, whether men can naturally come unto the
true and merciful knowledge of GOD. For Paul does give us to understand, that
their own sluggishnes is the cause that they cannot perceive that God is
present: because though the shut their eyes, yet may they grope after him. I
answer that their ignorance and blockishnesse is mixed with such frowardnes,
that being void of right judgment, they pass over without understanding al
such signs of Gods glory as appear manifestly both in heaven and earth. Yea
seeing that the true knowledge of god is a singular gift of his: and faith (by
which alone he is rightly known) comes only from the illumination of the
Spirit: it follows that our minds cannot pearce so far having nature only
for our guide. Neither does Paul entreat in this place of the ability of
men: but he does only show that they be without excuse, when as they be so
blind in such clear light, as he says in the first Chapter to the Romans.
Therefore though men's senses fail the^ in seeking out God, yet have they no
cloak for their fault, Romans 1.20. Cap. 14.17
because though he offer himself to be handled and groped, they continue
notwithstanding in a quandarie: Concerning which thing we have spoken more in
the fouerteenth Chapter.

Though he be not far from every one of us. To the end he may the more touch
the frowardness of men, he says that God is not to be sought through many
crookes, neither need we make any long journey to find him: because every man
shall find him in himself, if so be it he will take any heed. By which experience
we are convict that our dullness is not with out fault, which we had from the
fault of Adam. For though no corner of the world be void of the testimony of
gods glory: yet we need not go without our selves, to lay hold upon him. For
he does affect and move every one of us inwardly with his power in such sort,
that our blockishnesse is like to a monster, in that in feeling him we feel
him not. In this respect certain of the Philosophers called man the little
world: because he is above all other creatures a token of gods glory,
replenished with infinite miracles.

28 For in him. I grant that the Apostles according to the Hebrew phrase do
oftentimes take this preposition in, for per, or by or through: but because
this speech, that we live in God, has greater force, and does express more.
I thought I would not change it. For I do not doubt but that Paul his meaning
is that we be after a sort contained in God, because he dwells in us by his
power. And therefore God himself does separate him self from all creatures by
this word Jehovah, that we may know that in speaking properly he is alone: and
that we have our being in him, in as much as by his spirit he keeps us in
life and vpholdeth us. For the power of the spirit, is spread abroad
throughout all parts of the world, that it may preserve them in their state:
that he may minister unto the heaven and earth that force and vigor, which
we see, and motion to all living creatures. Not as brainesicke men do
trifle, that all things are full of Gods, yea that stones are Gods: but
because GOD does by the wonderful power and inspiration of his spirit,
preserve those things which he has created of nothing. But mention is made
in this place properly of men, because Paul said, that they needed not to
seek GOD far, whom they have within them.

Furthermore forasmuch as the life of man is more excellent than motion, and
motion does excel essence. Paul puts that in the highest place which was
the chiefest, that he might go down by steps unto essence or Being, thus, We
have not only no life but in God, but not so much as moving: yea no being,
which is inferior to both. I say that life has the pre-eminence in men:
because they have not only sense and motion as brute beasts have, but they be
endued with reason and understanding. Wherefore the Scripture does for good
causes give that singular gift which God has given us, a title and
commendation by it self, So in John when mention is made of the creation of
all things, it is added apart not without cause, John 1.4.
that life was the light of men. Now we see that all those who know not God,
know not themselves: because they have God present with them not only in the
excellent gifts of the mind, but in their very essence: because it belongs
to God alone to Be, all other things have their being in him. Also we learn
out of this place that God did not so create the world once, that he did
afterward depart from his work: but that it stands by his power, and that
the same God is the governor thereof who was the Creator. We must well think
upon this continual comforting and strengthening, that we may remember God
every minute.

Certain of your Poets. He cites half a verse out of Aratus, not so much for
authorities sake, as that he may make the men of Athens ashamed: for such
sayings of the Poets came from no other fountain save only from nature and
common reason. Neither is it any marvel if Paul who spoke unto men who were
infidels and ignorant of true godliness, do use the testimony of a Poet,
wherein was extant a confession of that knowledge which is naturally engraven
in men's minds. The Papists take another course, for they so lean to the
testimonies of men, that they set them against the oracles of God: and they do
not only make Jerome, or Ambrose, and the residue of the holy fathers, masters
of faith: but they will no less tie us to the stinking answers of their Popes,
the^ if God himself should speak. Yea that which more is, they have not been
afraid to give so great authority to Aristotle, that the Apostles and
prophets were silent in their schools rather then he. Now that I may return
unto this sentence, which I have in hand, it is not to be doubted, but that
Aratus spoke of Jupiter: neither does Paul, in applying that unto the true God,
which he spoke unskillfully of his Jupiter, wrest it unto a contrary sense. For
because men have naturally some perseverance of god, they draw true principles
from that fountain. And though so soon as they begin to think upon GOD, they
vanishe away in wicked inventions: and so the pure seed does degenerate into
corruptions: yet the first general knowledge of god does nevertheless remain
still in them. After this sort no man of a sound mind can doubt to apply that
unto the true god, which we read in Virgil touching the feigned and false love,
that All things are full of love. Yea when Virgill meant to express the power
of GOD, through error he put in a wrong name. As touching the meaning of the
words, it may be that Aratus did imagine that there was some parcel of the
divinity in men's minds as the Manichees did say, that the souls of men are
of the nature of God. So when Virgil says concerning the world, The spirit
does nourish within, and the mind being dispersed through all the joints;
does move your whole huge weight. He does rather play the philosopher and
subtly dispute after the manner of Plato, then purely mean, that the world
is supported by the secret inspiration of God. But this invention ought not to
have hindered Paul from retayning a true maxim, though it were corrupt with
men's fables, that men are the generation of God, because by the excellency of
nature they resemble some divine thing: this is that which the scripture
teaches that we are created after the Image and similitude of GOD. Genesis 1.27.
Gal. 3.26.
The same scripture teaches also in many places, that we be made the sons of
God by faith and free adoption, when we are ingrafted into the body of
Christ, and being regenerate by the spirit, we begin to be new
creatures. But as it gives the same spirit diverse names because of his
manifold graces: so no marvel if the word Sons be diversely taken. All
mortal men are called Sons in general, because they draw near to God in
mind and understanding: but because the Image of God is almost blotted out in
them, so that there appear scarce any slenderlinesse: this name is by good
right restrained unto the faithful, who having the spirit of adoption given
them, resemble their heavenly father in the light of reason, in righteousness
and holiness.

29 Therefore seeing that. He gathers that God cannot be figured, or
resembled by any graven image: for as much as he would have his image extant in
us. For the soul wherein the image of GOD is properly engraven, cannot be
painted: Therefore it is a thing more absurd to go about to paint God. Now we
see what great injury they do to GOD, which give him a bodily shape: when as
man's soul which does scarce resemble a small sparkle of the infinite glory
of God, cannot be expressed in any bodily shape.

Furthermore, for as much as it is certain that Paul does in this place
inueigh against the common superstition of all the gentiles, because they would
woorshippe God under bodily shapes: we must hold this general doctrine, that
God is falsely and wickedly transfigured, and that his truth is turned into a
lie, so often as his majesty is represented by any visible shape: Romans 1.23.
as the same Paul teaches in the first chapter to the Romans. And though the
Idolaters of all times wanted not their cloakes and colors: yet that was not
without cause always objected to them by the Prophets, which Paul does now
object, that God is made like to wood or stone, or gold, when there is any
image made to him of dead and corruptible matter. The Gentiles used images that
according to their rudeness, they might better conceive that God was nigh unto
them. But seeing that God does far surpass the capacity of our mind,
whosoever attempteth with his mind to comprehend him, he deformeth and
disfigureth his glory with a wicked and false imagination. Wherefore it is
wickedness to imagine any thing of him according to our own sense. Again,
that which worse is, it appears plainly, that men erect pictures and images
to God for no other cause, save only because they conceive some carnal thing
of him: wherein he is blasphemed. The Papists also are at this day no whit
more excusable. For what colors soever they invent to paint and color those
images, whereby they go about to express GOD, yet because they be inwrapped in
the same error, wherein the men of old time were entangled, they be urged
with the testimonies of the prophets. And that the Heathen did use the same
excuses in times past, wherewith the papists go about to cover them selves at
this day, it is w^ll known out of their own books. Therefore the prophets,
do not escape the mockes of certain, as if they laid too great grosnesse to
their charge, yea burden them with false accusations: but when all things are
well weighed, those who will judge rightly shall find, that whatsoever
starting hoales, even the most witty men have sought, yet were they taken
with this madness, that God is well pleased with the sacrifice done before
images. Whereas we with Erasmus translate it Numen, Luke puts Theion in the
neuter gender for divinity or godhead. When Paul denies, that GOD is like to
gold or silver, or stone, and adds afterward Graven by cunning or invention
of man, he excludes both matter and form, and does also condemn al
inventions of men, which disfigure the true nature of God.

30 And though God have winked at the times of this ignorance hitherto: he
wills al men every where to repent now.

31 Because he has appointed a day, wherein he will judge the world in
righteousness, by that man whom he has appointed, having fulfilled his promise
to al men, when he raised him up from the dead,

32 And when they had heard the resurrection of the dead, some mocked: and
other some said, we will hear thee of this again.

33 So Paul went out from among them: yet certain joining themselves to him
believed: among whom was both Dionisius, Areopagita, and a woman named Damaris,
and others with them.

30 And the times of this ignorance. Because that is commonly thought to be
good, which has been used of long time, and is approved by the common consent
of all men: it might have been objected to Paul, why do thou disanul those
things which have been received, and used continually since the beginning of
the world? and who^ can thou persuade that the whole world has bin deceived
so long? as there is no kind of abomination so filthy, which the papists do
not think to be well fortified with this buckler. Paul preuenteth this
question: showing that men went astray so long therefore, because God did not
reach out his hand from heaven, that he might bring them back again into
the way. It may seem an inconvenient thing, that men endued with reason and
judgment should err so grossly and filthily in a most weighty matter. But
Paul his meaning is that men do never make an end of erring, until God do
help them. And now he assigns no other cause why he did not redress this
any sooner, save only his good pleasure. And assuredly we be not able to
comprehend the reason why god did at a sudden set up the light of his
doctrine, when he suffered men to walk in darkness four thousand years: at
least seeing the scripture does conceal it, let us here make more account of
sobriety, than of preposterous wisdom. For they go about to bring God
within bounds: which is a most unseemly thing and contrary to nature her self,
whosoever they be that will not suffer him to speak or hold his peace at his
pleasure. Again those that will not be content with his wisdom and secreat
counsel, must needs murmr against Paul, who teaches manifestly that
ignorance did reign in the world so long as it pleased God to wink at it.
Othersome interpret it otherwise, that God did spare ignorance, as if he did
wink, being unwilling to punish it: but that surmise is altogether contrary
to Paul his meaning and purpose: who meant not to lessen man's fault, but to
magnify the grace of God which did appear at a sudden, and it is proved to
be false out of other places: because those who have sinned without Law, Romans
2.12.
shall notwithstanding perish without Law. In sum, Paul his words carry
with them this meaning only, that men were set upon blindness, until God
did reveal himself unto them: and that we ought not too curiously and boldly
to demand and require the cause why he put away darkness no sooner: but that
whatsoever pleased him ought to seem to us right and equal without making any
more ado. For though this be a hard speech that men were miserably deceived
long time, whiles that God made as though he saw it not: yet must we be
content with, and stay our selves upon his providence. And if at any time there
come upon us a vain and perverse desire to know more than is meet for us,
let us streightway call to mind that which Paul teaches in many places, that,
Romans 16.25. Ephesians. 3.9.
It was a mystery hid since the beginning of the world, in that the light of
the Gospel did appear to the Gentiles at a sudden: and that this is a token
of the manifold wisdom of God, which swalloweth up all the senses of men.
Again let us remember that it does not lessen the fault of men, because God
would not heal their erroures: forasmuch as their own conscience shall
always hold them convict, that they cannot escape just damnation. And Paul
(not that he might lay the fault and blame upon God, but that he might cut
off occasion of curious and hurtful questions) said that the world did err
whiles God did wink. And hereby we learn how reverently we ought to think
of Gods providence: least any man should be so bold, as man's nature is
proud, to demand a reason of God of his works. Furthermore this admonition
is no less profitable for us, than for the men of that time. The enemies of
the Gospel when it begins to spring again, count it a great absurdity that
God did suffer men to go astray so long under the apostacy of the Pope: as if
(though there appear no reason) it were not as lawful for him now to wink
at men's ignorance, as in times past. And we must principally note to what end
he says this, to wit, that the ignorance of former time may not hinder us
from obeying God without delay, when he speaks. Most men think that they
have a fair color for their error, so they have their fathers to keep them
company, or so they get some patronage or defense by long custom: yea they
would willingly creep out here, that they may not obey the word of God. But
Paul says that we must not set an excuse from our fathers ignorance, when god
speaks unto us: because though they be not giltlesse before God, yet our
sluggishnes is more intolerable, if we be blind at noone day: and lie as
deaf, or as if we were a sleep, when the trumpet of the Gospel does sound.

Now he wills all men. In these words Paul teaches that we must give ear
to God so soon as he speaks, as it is written, To day if ye will hear his
voice harden not your hearts, For the stubbernes of those men is without
excuse, who forslow this opportunity when God does gently call them unto him.
Also we gather out of this place to what end the Gospel is preached: Psalm.
95.7.8. Heb. 3.7.8.
to wit, that God may gather us to himself from the former errors of our life.
Therefore so often as the voice of the gospel does sound in our ears, let us
know that God does exhort us unto repentance. We must also note that he
attributes to God the person of the speaker, though he do it by man. For
otherwise the Gospel has not so full authority as the heavenly truth
deserves, save only when our faith does look unto him who is the governor of
the prophetical function, and does depend upon his mouth.

31 Because he has appointed a day. He makes mention of the last judgment
that he may awake them out of their dream. For we know how hard a matter it
is for men to deny themselves. Therefore they must be violently enforced unto
repentance, which cannot be done better then when they be cited to appear
before gods judgment seat, and that fearful judgment is set before them,
which they may neither despice nor escape. Therefore let us remember that the
doctrine of repentance does than take place, when me^ who would naturally
desire to flatter themselves, are awaked with fear of Gods judgment, and that
none are fit teachers of the gospel but those who are the criers or apparitors
of the highest judge, who bring those who are to come before the judge, to
plead their cause, and denou^ce the judgment hanging over their heads, even as
if it were in their own hand. Neither is this added in vain in righteousness,
or righteouslie. For though all men in the word confess that God is a just
judge: yet we see how they for the most part, pamper and flatter themselves:
for they will not suffer God to demand an account farther than their knowledge
and understanding does reach. Therefore Paul his meaning is that men do profit
themselves nothing by vain flattery: because they shall not prejudice gods
justice by this means, which shows that all that is an abomination before
God which seems goodly in the sight of men: because he will not follow the
decrees of men, but that form which himself has appointed.

By the man who^ he has appointed. It is not to be doubted but that Paul
spoke more largely concerning Christ, that the Athenienses might know that
he is the son of God, by whom salvation was brought to the world, and who
had all power given him in heaven and earth. Otherwise this speech which we
read here, should have had but small force to persuade. But Luke thought it
sufficient to gather the sum of the Sermon briefly. Yet is it to be thought
that Paul spoke first concerning the grace of Christ, and that he did first
preach him to be the Redeemer of men, before he made him a judge. But because
Christ is oftentimes contemned, when he offers himself to be a Redeemer:
Paul denounces that he will once sharply punish such wicked contempt,
because the whole world must be judged by him. The word orizein may be
referred, as well unto the secret counsel of God, as unto external
manifestation. Yet because the former exposition is more common, I do
willingly embrace the same, to wit, that God by his eternal decree, has
ordained his son to be the judge of the world: and that to the end the
reprobate who refuse to be ruled by Christ, may learn that they strive but in
vain against the decree of GOD which cannot be broken. But because nothing
seems more strange to men, then that God shall judge in the person of man,
Paul adds afterward, that this dignity of Christ, which were hard to be
believed, was approved by his resurrection.

The will of God alone ought to be so reverenced among us, that every man for
himself subscribe to his decrees without delay: because the cloak and color
of ignorance uses oftentimes to be objected, therefore Paul says
plainly, that Christ was by his resurrection openly showed to be the judge of
the world, and that that was revealed to the eyes of men, which GOD had before
determined with himself, concerning him. For that point of doctrine which Luke
touches briefly in few words, was handeled by Paul at large. He said not
only in a word that Christ rose from death: but he did also entreat of the
power of his resurrection, as was meet. For to what end did Christ rise, but
that he might be the first fruits of those which rise again? And to what
end shall we rise again, 1. Cor. 15.23.
but either to life or death? Whereupon it follows, that Christ by his
resurrection is declared and proved to be the Judge of the world.

32 Some mocked. By this we see how great the carelessness of men is whom
neither the tribunal seat of God, Cha. 26.23.
nor the majesty of the highest judge does make afraid. We have said that this
is a most sharp prick, wherewith men's minds are pricked forward to fear GOD,
when his judgment is set before their eyes: but there is such unspeakable
hardness in the contemners, that they are not afraid to count that a fable or
lie, which is spoken concerning the giving of an account of our life once.

Notwithstanding there is no cause why the ministers of the Gospel should
omit the preaching of the judgment which is enjoined them. Though the wicked
do laugh and mock: yet this doctrine which they go about to make of none
effect shall so gird them, that they shall at length perceive that they have
striuen in vain with their snare. And no marvel if this point of Paul his
doctrine were derided at Athens. For it is a mystery hid from men's minds,
whereon the chiefest Philosophers did never think, neither can we otherwise
comprehend it, then when we lift up the eyes of faith unto the infinite power
of God. And yet Paul his sermon was not altogether without fruit: because
there were some of the hearers which were desirous to profit and go forward.
For when they say that they will hear him again, their meaning is that though
they were not as yet thoroughly persuaded, yet had they some taste, which did
provoke them to be desirous to profit. Surely this desire was contrary to
lothsomnes.

34 Among whom was also Dionisius. Seeing that Luke does name one man and one
woman only, it appears that there was but a small number of those which
believed at the first. For those other of whom he makes mention remained
indifferent. Because they did neither wholly despise Paul his doctrine: neither
were they so thoroughly touched, that they joined them selves unto him that they
might be his scholars. Luke makes mention of Dionisius above the rest,
because he was in no small authority among his Citizens. Therefore it is
likely that Damaris was also a woman of some renown.

Furthermore, it is ridiculous in that the papists made of a Judge, an
Astrologer. But this is to be imputed partly to their ignorance, partly to
their boldness, who seeing, they knew not what Areopagus or Mars street
meant, took to themselves liberty to feign whatsoever they would. And their
rudeness is too gross, who ascribe the books of the heavenly and
ecclesiastical Hierarchy, and of the names of God, to this Dionysius. For the
heavenly Hierarchy is stuffed not only with many doltish and moonkish
trifles, but also with many absurd inventions, and wicked speculations. And the
books of the Ecclesiastical Hierarchy, do themselves declare, that they
were made many years after: when as the purity of christianity was corrupt
with an huge heap of ceremonies. As for the Book of the names of GOD, though
it have in it some things which are not altogether to be despised, yet it
does rather breath out subtilties, then sound godliness.

CHAP. XVIII.
1 AFter this Paul departed from Athens, and came to Corinthus.

2 And having gotten a certain Jew called Aquila, borne in Pontus, who came
lately from Italy, and Priscilla his wife (because Claudius had commanded al
Jews to depart from Rome) he came unto them.

3 And because he was of the same craft, he abode with them, and wrought: and
they were tent makers.

4 And he disputed in the Synagogue every Sabbath day, and persuaded both Jews
and Greeks.

5 And when Silas and Timotheus were come from Macedonia, Paul was forced in
the Spirit, testifying to the Jews that Jesus was Christ.

1 This history is worthy to be remembered even for this one cause, because it
contains the first beginning of the Church of Corinthus, which, as it was
famous for good causes, both because of the multitude of men, and also because
of the excellent gifts bestowed upon them, so there were in it gross and
shameful vices. Furthermore Luke shows in this place with what great labor,
and how hardly Paul did win the same to Christ. It is well known what a rich
City Corinthus was by reason of the noble mart, how populous, how greatly
given to pleasure. And the old proverb does testify that it was sumptuous and
full of riot: All men cannot go to Corinthus. When Paul enters the same, what
hope I pray you can he conceive? He is a simple man unknown, having no
eloquence or pomp, showing no wealth or power. In that that huge gulf does not
swallow up his confidence and desire which he had to spread abroad the Gospel,
by this we gather that he was furnished with wonderful power of the Spirit
of God: and also that God wrought by his hand after a heavenly manner and not
after any humane manner. Wherefore he boasts not without cause that the
Corinthians are the seal of his Apostleship. For they be twice blind, 1. Cor.
9.2.
who do not acknowledge that the glory of God did more plainly appear in
such a simple and base kind of dealing: and he himself showed no small token of
invincible constancy, when being vexed with the mockes of all men (as the
proud did contemn him) he did notwithstanding stay himself upon Gods help
alone. But it is worth the labor to note all the circumstances, as Luke
sets down the same in order.

2 A Jew called Aquila. This was no small trial in that Paul finds none at
Corinthus to lodge him, save Aquila who had bin twice exiled. For being borne
in Pontus, he forsook his country and sailed over the sea that he might dwell
at Rome. He was compelled to depart thence again by the commandment of
Claudius Caesar. Though the commodiousnes of the City was such, the plenty so
great, the situation so pleasant, and there were also so many Jews there: yet
Paul found no more fit host than a man that had bin banished out of his own
country and also out of another soil. If we compare the great fruit which
ensued immediately upon his preaching, with such a base entrance, the power of
the Spirit of God shall plainly appear. Also we may see how the Lord by his
singular counsel turns those things to his glory and the salvation of the
godly, which seem contrary to the flesh, and unhappy. Nothing is more
miserable than exile according to the sense of the flesh. But it was far
better for Aquila to be Paul his companion, than to be in the highest office
either at Rome or in his country. Therefore this happy calamity of Aquila
does teach us, that the Lord does often better provide for us, when he does
sharply punish us, than if he should most gently entreat us: and when he
tosseth us to and fro in most extreme exile, that he may bring us unto the
heavenly rest.

All Jews to depart from Rome. The estate of that nation was then very
miserable, so that it is a wonder that they did not almost all depart from the
worship of God. But this is a greater wonder that the religion wherein they had
bin brought up prevailed against Caesar's tyranny, and that so soon as Christ
the sun of righteousness did arise, few were turned unto him.
Notwithstanding I do not doubt but that the Lord suffered the^ to pass through
many troubles, that they might the more willingly, yea the more greedily
receive the grace of redemption offered them: but the more part became dull in
their misery, few did submit themselves to be taught when the Lord did punish
them, as did Aquila and Priscilla. Yet if Suetonius say the truth, they were
expelled through hatred of the name of Christ, and so calamity might have more
provoked and angered a great part because they were wrongfully accused for that
religion which they did detest.

3 They were of the same trade. This place teaches that Paul before he came to
Corinthus was wont to work with his hands: and that not upon pleasure, but
that he might get his living with his handyworke. It is not known where he
first learned his occupation: notwithstanding it appears by his own
testimony that he wrought principally at Corinthus. 1. Co. 9.12.15.
And he shows a reason, because the false Apostles taught freely without
taking any thing, that they might craftily creep in, therefore the holy man
would not give place to them in that point, least he should cause the Gospel of
Christ to be evil spoken off. But we may easily gather out of this place, that
whithersoeuer he came,) until he was occupied in the continual labor of
teaching) he wrought of his occupation, that he might get his living. When
Chrysostom says that Paul was a cordiner, he does no whit dissent from Luke,
because they were wont at that time to make tents of skins.

4 He disputed in the synagogue. It is a wonder how that crope in which is in
the Latin books, that Paul put in the name of Christ: unless it were because
some reader would supply the want of the general sentence. For Luke sets
down two things in this place: to wit, that Paul disputed among the Jews:
secondly that he began more plainly to profess Christ after that Silas and
Timotheus were come. And though it be likely that he began to speak of Christ
even at the first entrance, because he could not omit the principal point of
the heavenly doctrine: yet that does not hinder but that he might use some
other manner of disputation. Therefore I take pithein, that is to persuade, for
to induce by little and little. For in my judgment Luke does signify, that
forasmuch as the Jews did handle the Law coldly and foolishly, Paul spoke of
the corrupt and wicked nature of man, of the necessity of grace, of the
redeemer which was promised, of the means to obtain salvation, that he might
awake them: for this is a fit and brief preparation unto Christ. Again when
he says that he was forced in spirit to teach that Jesus was Christ, his
meaning is, that he was enforced with greater veheme^cy, to entreat and speak
of Christ freely and openly. So that we see that Paul did not utter al things
at one time: but he tempered his doctrine, as occasion did serve. And because
like moderation is profitable at this day, it is convenient for faithful
teachers wisely to consider where to begin, least a preposterous and confused
order do hinder the proceeding of doctrine. Furthermore though there were
feruentnesse enough in Paul, yet is it no inconvenient thing that he was made
more courageous by some new help: not that he was encouraged by shame or the
hope which he reposed in his fellows, but because he considered that this
help was sent him, as it were from heaven. But this forcing in the Spirit is
not taken for a violent or external impulsion (as they say) as those which
were called Phaebades and frantike men were wont to be carried away with
devilish madness: but there was more feruentnesse added unto the wonted
inspiration of the Spirit, which was in Paul, so that he was moved with new
power of God, and yet did he of his own accord follow the Spirit as his
guide. Whereas Paul did testify that Jesus is Christ, I expound it thus:
when he had thoroughly taught the Jews concerning the office of the Redeemer,
he declared by testimonies of scripture that this is he which was to be hoped
for: because all those things agree to him, which the law and the prophets
attribute to Christ. Therefore he did not simply affirm, but using a solemn
testification, he proved Jesus the son of Mary to be that Christ, who should
be the mediator between God and men, that he might restore the world from
destruction to life.

6 And when they gainsaid him, and railed upon him, shaking his garments, he
said unto them, Your blood be upon your own head, I will go henceforth clean
unto the Gentiles.

7 And going thence, he entered into the house of a certain man named Iustus, a
worshipper of God, whose house joined to the Synagogue.

8 And Crispus the chief ruler of the Synagogue believed in the Lord with all
his household: and many of the Corinthians which heard, believed, and were
baptized.

9 And the Lord said by night by a vision to Paul, Fear not: but speak, and
hold not thy peace.

10 Because I am wit thee, and no man shall lay hand on thee to hurt thee:
because I have much people in this city.

11 And he remained there a year and six months, teaching them the word
of the Lord.

6 When they gainsaid. The Jews suffered Paul after a sort until he came unto
the manifest preaching of Christ. And here brake out their rage. And we must
note the speech: that they go from gainsaying unto blaspheming and railing.
For it falls out thus for the most part, when men take to themselves such
liberty, that the devil does inflame them by little and little unto greater
madness. For which cause we must take good heed, that no wicked lust or
desire, provoke us to resist the truth: and above all let that horrible
judgment terrify us, which the Spirit of god thundereth out by the mouth of
Paul against al rebels, For undoubtedly in that Paul by shaking his garments
gave some token of detestation, it was no humane or private indignation, but
zeal kindled by God in his heart: yea God raised him up to be a preacher and
setter forth of his vengeance, to the end the enemies of the word might know
that they should not escape scotfree for their stubbornness. We spoke somewhat
touching this sign of execration or cursing in the 13. chapter. Let the
Readers repair thither. The sum is, that God is sorer displeased with
contempt of his word, Chapter 13.51.
then with any wickedness. And surely men be quite past hope, when they tread
under foot, or drive from them the only remedy of all evils and maladies. Now
as the Lord cannot abide rebellion against his word, so it ought to sting and
netle us fulsore. My meaning is this, that when the wicked enter combat with
God, and as it were arm themselves to resist, we are called as it were by the
heavenly trumpet, unto the conflict: because there is nothing more filthy then
that the wicked should mock God to his face, whiles we say nothing, and that
they should even break out into reproaches and blasphemies.

Your blood. He denounces to them vengeance: because they be with out excuse.
For they can shift no part of their fault from themselves after that despising
the calling of God, they have endeavored to put out the light of life. Therefore
seeing they bear the blame of their own destruction, he does also affirm
that they shall be punished. And in saying that he is clean, he testifies
that he has done his duty: it is well known what the Lord gives all his
ministers in charge in Ezechiel. If thou show not unto the wicked that he may
convert, Eze. 3.18.
I will require his blood at thy hand. Therefore Paul (because he did what he
could to bring the Jews to repentance) does acquit himself of all giltines.
And by these words teachers are warned that unless they will be guilty of
blood before the Lord, they must do what in the^ lies to bring those which
go astray into the way, and that they suffer nothing to perish through
ignorance.

I will go unto the Gentiles. Though the Jews had showed themselves to be most
ready to be taught, yet ought Paul to have employed himself to teach the
Gentiles, whose apostle and minister he was made: but here he expresses the
passage whereby he withdrew himself from the stubborn Jews, for all. For he
observed this course in teaching, that beginning with the Jews, he might
couple the Gentiles with them in the society of faith: and so might make of
both together one body of the church. When there remained no hope to do any
good among the Jews, then the Gentiles only remained. Therefore the sense is
this, that they must be deprived of their own inheritance, that it may be
given to the Gentiles: and so be wounded, partly, that being strike^ with
fear, yea, being cast down, they might come to soundnes of mind: partly that
the emulation or striving of the Gentiles might prick them forward unto
repentance. But because they were incurable, reproach and shame served for this
purpose only to bring them into despair.

7 Departing thence. Paul did not change his lodging, which he had with
Priscilla and Aquila, because he was weary of their company: but that he
might more familiarly insinuate himself and come in favor with the gentiles.
For I suspect that this Iustus, of whom Luke makes mention, was rather a
gentile then a Jew. Neither does the nighnes of the Sinagogue any whit hinder:
for the Jews were scattered abroad, so that they had no certain place of the
City to dwell in. Yea it seems that Paul did make choice of the house which
did join to the Synagogue, that he might the more nettle the Jews. The title
and commendation ascribed to lustus, confirms this opinion, for it is said
that he was a worshipper of God. For though the Jews had not sincere religion:
yet because they did al profess the worship of God, it might have seemed that
godliness took place commonly in all the whole nation. But because it was a rare
matter among the gentiles to worship God: if any drew near unto true
godliness, he has this singular testimony given him, which is set against
idolatry. Also I think that the Corinthians, of who^ Luke speaks shortly
after, were gentiles. Nevertheless least we should think that Paul his labor
was altogether fruitless, which he bestowed among the Jews, Luke reckons up
two of them which believed, Crispus and Sosthenes. Of whom Paul himself
speaks in the first Chapt. of the first Epist. to the Corinths. 1. Cor. 1.14.
For in his salutation he makes Sosthenes his fellow in office: after that he
says that he baptized Crispus. I take it that he is called the Ruler of the
Synagogue, not as if he alone did bear rule and had the government, because
Sosthenes has the same title given him shortly after: but because he was one
of the chief men.

9 And the Lord said. Though the fruit of Paul's doctrine (in that he gained
some daily to Christ) might have encouraged him to go forward, yet is the
heavenly Oracle added for his farther confirmation. Whence we gather that there
were great cumbates set before him, and that he was sore tossed diverse ways.
For the Lord did never without cause power out his oracles: neither was it an
ordinary thing with Paul to have visions: but the Lord used this kind of
remedy, when necessity did so require: and the thing it self does show, that
there laid upon the holy man a great weight of business, under which he
might not only sweat, but almost faint, unless he had been set on foot again
and refreshed with some new help. And it is not without cause that he says
that his coming was base and contemptible, and that he was conuersaunt there
in fear and trembling. For mine own part I think thus, 1. Cor. 2.3. Numb. 12.6
that the wonderful power of the Spirit wherewith Paul was endued before, was
helped with the oracle. Furthermore for as much as the Scripture distinguishes
visions from dreams as it appears by the twelft chapter of the book of
Numbers: Luke means by this word vision, that when Paul was in a trance he
saw a certain shape or form, whereby he knew that God was present with him,
Assuredly it is not to be doubted but that God appeared by some sign.

Fear not. This exhortation shows that Paul had cause of fear ministered
unto him: for it had been a superfluous thing to correct fear, or to will him
not to fear w^ all was well and quiet: and especially in a man so willing and
ready.

Furthermore when the Lord (to the end he may have his servant to do his
duty faithfully and stoutly) begins with restraining fear: by this we
gather that nothing is more contrary to the pure and free preaching of the
gospel, then the straites of a faint heart. And surely experience does show
that none are faithful and courageous ministers of the word, whom this fault
does hinder: and that those only are rightly prepared and addressed to teach,
to whom it is granted with boldness and courage of heart to overcome all manner
danger. In which respect he writes to Timothy, that the spirit of fear is
not given to the preachers of the Gospel: but of power, and love, and
sobriety. Therefore we must note the connection of words, Fear not but speak,
which is all one, 2. Tim. 1.7.
as if he should have said, Let not fear let thee to speak. And because fear
does not only make us altogether without tongue, but does so bind us that we
cannot purely and freely speak that which is needful. Christ touched both
briefly: Speak (says he) and hold not thy peace: that is, speak not with
half thy mouth, as it is in the common proverb. But in these words there is
prescribed to the ministers of the word of God a common rule that they expound
and lay open plainly and without color or dissimulation, whatsoever the Lord
will have made known to his Church: yea let them keep back nothing which may
make for the edifying or increase of Gods Church.

10 Because I am. This is the former reason why Paul having subdued fear, must
manfully and stoutly do his duty, because he has God on his side. Psalm. 23.4.
Whereto answers the rejoicing of David, If I shall walk in the midst of the
shadow of death I shall fear none ill: because thou art with me. Psalm. 27.3.
Again, If tents be pitched about me etc. The question is whether he did not
perceive that God was present with him elsewhere: as he had had experience of
his help in diverse places. For the promise is general, Mat. 28.20.
I am with you until the end of the world. Neither is it lawful for us to
mistrust, so often as we obey his calling, but that he will be present with us.
But it is an usual thing with the Lord to apply that unto certain kinds,
when the matter so requires, which he has promised to do in all affairs, and
we know that when we come to the push, then are we most desirous of help.
Moreover, these two members are joined together, I am with thee, and no man
shall hurt thee. For it falls out sometimes that God does help us, and yet
does he, to look too, suffer us to be oppressed: as he forsook not Paull even
in the midst of death, and here he promises the peculiar defense of his hand,
whereby he shall be preserved from the violence of his enemies. But the
question is, whether Paul needed any such confirmation, who ought to have been
willing to enter all manner dangers. For what if he had been to suffer death:
should he therefore have fainted through fear? I answer, that if at any time
God pronounce that his servant shall be safe for a time, that does no whit
hinder, but that they may prepare themselves to suffer death valiantly: but as
we distinguish between profitable and necessary: so we must note that there
be some promises, ^^ch if the faithful want, they must needs faint and sink
down: and that other some are added when it is expedient so to be: which
though they be taken away (because the grace of God does nevertheless remain
firm and sure) the faith of the godly does not fail. After this sort Paul is
commanded not to fear because his enemies shall not touch him, and if so be he
should have bin oppressed, eue^ then with their violence, yet would he not have
bin afraid: but god would have his boldness and courage to increase even by
this, because he should be without danger, If at any time the Lord bear with us
so far forth, we are not to despice such a comfort of our infirmity, in the
mean season let this be sufficient for us to tread under foot all corrupt
fear of the flesh: that so long as we fight under his banner, we cannot be
forsaken of him. And when it is said, No man shall gainstande thee to do thee
hurt, the Lord does not mean that he shall be free from violence and tumult,
whom the Jews did afterward deadlilie invade: but his meaning is that their
attempts shall be frustrate: because the Lord had determined to deliver him
out of their hands. Therefore we must fight stoutly that we may win the field.

Because I have much people. The second reason why he should take a good heart,
is, because the Lord will raise up a great and populous church there, though it
be to be douted whether this member depend upon that which goes next before:
for the text will run fitly thus, because the Lord determined by the hand of
Paul to gather together a great church, he would not suffer the enemies to
interrupt the course of his labors, as if he should have said, I will help
thee, that thou may not fail my people whose minister I have appointed thee
to be. I do willingly embrace this exposition, that diverse reasons are not
inferred which are to be read apart: but that they be so distinguished that
they agree together. Furthermore the Lord calls those his people, who though
they might then for good causes be counted strangers: yet because they were
written in the book of life, and were forthwith to be admitted into his
family, they have this title given them not improperly. For we know that many
sheep wa^der without the flock for a time, as the sheep have many wolves among
them. Therefore whom the Lord determined shortly after to gather to himself,
those does he take for his people in respect of their future faith. But let us
remember that those are ingraffed into the body of Christ, who appertain unto
the same by the eternal adoption of God: John. 17.6.
as it is written, Thine they were, and thou gave them me.

11 He continued there a year. We do not read that Paul stayed so long any
where else save there: and yet it appears by his two Epistles, that he was not
only like to suffer much troubles: but that he had suffered many unjust and
unmeet things by reason of the pride and unthankfulness of the people: so that
we see that there was no part of warfare wherein the Lord did not wonderfully
exercise him. Also we gather what a hard and laborous matter the edifiyng of
the church is: seeing that the most excellent workmaster spent so much time
about the laying of the foundation of one church only. Neither does he boast
that he had finished the work, but that the Lord had put other in his place,
that they might build upon his foundation: as he says afterward, that he had
planted, 1. Cor. 3.6.
and that Apollo had watered.

12 Now when Gallio was deputy of Achaia, the Jews rose with one accord
against Paul, and brought him before the judgment seat,

13 Saying, this man persuades men to worship god contrary to the law.

14 And when Paul was about to open his mouth, Gallio said unto them, If it
were any injury or wicked fact, O Jews, I would according to reason maintain
you.

15 But if it be a question of words and names, and your law, look ye to it
your selves for I will be no judge in these matters.

16 And he drove them from the judgment seat.

17 And when all the Greeks had caught Sosthenes the ruler of the Synagogue,
they smote him before the judgment seat: neither did Gallio care for any of
these things,

12 When Gallio. Either the change of the deputy did encourage the Jews, to
wax more proud and insolent: as froward men use to abuse new things, that they
may procure some tumult: or else hoping that the judge would favor them, they
brake the peace and silence at a sudden, which had continued one whole year.
And the sum of the accusation is, that Paul went about to bring in a false
kind of worship, contrary to the law. Now the question is, whether they spoke
of the law of Moses, or of the rites used in the empire of Rome. Because this
latter thing seems to me to be cold, I do rather receive that, that they
burdened Paul with this crime, that he brake and altered the worship prescribed
in the law of God, and that to the end they might hit him in the teeth with
novelty or innovation. And surely Paul had bin worthy to have bin condemned,
if he had gone about any such thing: but for as much as it is most certain that
they did trecherously and wickedly slander the holy man, they endeavored to
cover an evil cause with an honest excuse. We know how straightly the Lord
commands in the law, how he will have his servants to worship him. Therefore
to depart from that rule is sacrilege. But forasmuch as, Paul never meant to
add too, or take away any thing from the law, he is unjustly accused of this
fault. Whence we gather, that though the faith full behave themselves never so
uprightly and blamelesly, yet can they not escape false and slanderous reports
until they be admitted to purge them selves. But Paul was not only unworthily
and falsely slandered by the adversaries: but when he would have refuted their
impudency and false reports, his mouth was stopped by the deputy. Therefore he
was enforced to depart from the judgment seat without defending himself. And
Gallio refuses to hear the cause, not for any evil will he bare to Paul,
but because it was not agreeable to the office of the deputy to give judgment
concerning the religion of every province. For though the Romans could not
enforce the nations which were subject to the^ to observe their rites: yet
least they should seem to allow that which they did tolerate, they forbade
their magistrates to meddle with this part of jurisdiction. Here we see what
the ignorance of true godliness does, in setting in order the state of every
commonwealth and dominion. All men confess, that this is the principal
thing, that true religion be in force and florishe. Now when the true God is
known, and the certain and sure rule of worshipping him is understood, there
is nothing more equal, then that which God commands in his law, to wit, that
those who bear rule with power, (having abolished contrary superstitions)
defend ^he pure worship of the true God. But seeing that the Romans did observe
their rites only through pride and stubbornnes, and seeing they had no
certainety where there was no truth, they thought that this was the best way
they could take, if they should grant liberty to those who dwelt in the
provinces to live as the^ lusted. But nothing is more absurd then to leave the
worship of God to men's choice. Wherefore it was not without cause that God
commanded by Moses, that the king should cause a book of the law to be written
out for himself to wit, that being well instructed, Deuteronomy. 17.18
and certain of his faith, he might with more courage take in hand to maintein
that which he knew certainly was right.

15 Of words and names. These words are not well packed together. Yet Gallio
speaks thus of the law of God by way of contempt, as if the Jewish religion
did consist only in words and superfluous questions. And surely (as the nation
was much given to conte^tion) it is not to be doubted but that many did troble
themselves and others with superfluous trifles. Yea we hear with what Paul
hitteth the^ in the teeth in many places, Cap. 1.14. and 3.9.
especially in the Epistle to Titus. Yet Galio is not worthy to be excused, who
does mock the holy law of god together with their curiosity. For as it behooved
him to cut off all occasion of vain contentions in words: so we must on the
other side know that when the worship of God is in hand, the strife is not
about words, but a matter of all other most serious, is handled.

17 All the Grecians having taken Sosthenes. This is that Sosthenes whom Paul
does honorably couple with himself as his companion, in the beginning of the
former Epistle to the Corinthians. And though there be no mention made of him
before among the faithful: yet it is to be thought that he was then one of
Paul his companions and advocates. And what fury did enforce the Grecians to
run headlong upon him, save only because it is allotted to all the children of
God to have the world set against them and offended with them and their cause,
though unknown? wherefore there is no cause why such unjust dealing should
trouble us at this day, when we see the miserable church oppugned on every
side.

Moreover, the frowardnes of man's naure is depainted out unto us as in a table:
admit we grant that the Jews were hated every where for good causes, yet why
are the Grecia^s rather displeased with Sosthenes a modest man, then with the
autors of the tumult, who troubled Paul without any cause namely, this is the
reason: because when men are not governed with the spirit of god, they are
carried headlong unto evil as it were by the secret inspiratio^ of nature:
notwithstanding it may be, that they bare Sosthenes such hatred, thinking he
had lodged wicked me^ to raise sedition.

Neither did Gallio care for any of these things, This looseness must be
imputed not so much to the sluggishnes of the deputy as to the hatred of the
Jewish religion. The Romans could have wished that the remembrance of the true
God had bin buried. And therefore when as it was lawful for them to vow their
vows, and to pay them to all the Idols of Asia and Grecia: it was a deadly
fact to do sacrifice to the god of Israel. Finally, in the common liberty of al
manner superstition, only true religion was accepted. This is the cause that
Gallio winketh at the injury done to Sosthenes. He professed of late that he
would punish injuries if any were done: now he suffers a guiltless man to
be beaten before the judgment seat. Whence comes this sufferance, save
only because he did in heart desire that the Jews might one slay another,
that their religion might be put out with them. But for as much as by the mouth
of Luke, the spirit condemns Gallio his carelesnes, because he did not aid
a man which was unjustly punished: let our magistrates know that they be far
more inexcusable, if they wink at injuries and wicked factes, if they bridle
not the wantonness of the wicked, if they reach not forth their hand to the
oppressed. But and if the sluggish are to look for just damnation, what
terrible judgment hangs over the heads of those who are unfaithful and
wicked, who by favoring evil causes, and bearing with wicked facts, set up as
it were a banner of want of punishment, and are fannes to kindle boldness to do
hurt?

18 And when Paul had tarried there many days, having taken his leave of the
brethren he sailed into Syria, Priscilla and Aquila accompanying him, when he
had shaven his head at Cenchrea: for he had a vow.

19 And he came to Ephesus, where he left them. And when he had entered into the
Synagogue, he disputed with the Jews.

20 And when they desired him that he would stay longer time with them, he did
not consent:

21 But took his leave, saying, I must needs keep the feast which is at hand
in Jerusalem: but I will return to you again Godwilling. And he loosed from
Ephesus.

22 And when he was come down to Cesaria, and was gone up and had saluted the
Church, he came down to Antioch.

23 And when he had tarried there some time, he departed, walking through the
country of Galacia and Phrygia in order, strengthening all the disciples.

18 And when he had tarried there many days. Paul his constancy appears in
this, in that he is not driven away with fear, least he should trouble the
disciples who were as yet ignorant and weak, with his sudden and untimely
departure. We read in many other places, that when persecution was raised
against him elsewhere, he fled forthwith. What is the cause then that he staieth
at Corinthus? to wit, when he saw that the enemies were provoked with his
presence to rage against the whole church he did not doubt but that the
faithful should have peace and rest by his departure: but now when he sees
their malice brideled, so that they can not hurt the flock of God, he had
rather sting and nettle them: then by departing to minister unto them any new
occasion of rage. Furthermore this was the third journey which Paul took to
Jerusalem. For going from Damascus he went once up that he might be made known
to the Apostles. And he was sent the second time with Barnabas that he might
handle and end the controversy about ceremonies. But Luke does not set down
for what cause he now took such a long and laborous journey, determining with
all speed to return.

When he had shorn his head. It is uncertain whether that be spoken of Aquila
or of Paul: neither skilleth it much. Though I interpret it willingly of Paul:
because it seems to me a likely thing, that he did this for because of the
Jews, unto whom he was about to com. Assuredly I think this to be a thing
which all men grant, that he made not any ceremonial vow for his own cause
only, that he might do some worship to god. He knew that that was to continue
only for a time which God commanded under the law to the old people: and we
know how diligently he teaches that the kingdom of God consists not in
these external elements, and how straightly he urges the abrogating thereof.
It had been an absurd thing for him to bind his own conscience with that
religion from which he had loosed al other men.

Therefore he did sheare his head for no other cause, save only that he might
apply himself to the Jews who were as yet ignorant, and not thoroughly taught:
as he does testify that he took upon him the voluntary observing of the law,
from which he was freed, that he might gain those who were under the law. If
any man object that it was not lawful for him to make semblance of a vow,
which he had not made from his heart: we may easily answer, 1. Cor. 9.20
that as touching the substance of purifiyng he did not dissemble: and that
he used the ceremony which was as yet free: not as if God did require such
worship, but that he might somewhat bear with the ignorant. Therefore the Papists
are ridiculous when they set from hence an example of making vows. Paul was
moved with no religion to make his vow: but these men place a feigned worship
of God in vows. Respect of time enforced Paul to keep the rites of the law:
these men do nothing else but entangle in superstition the church of Christ,
which was set free long ago. For it is one thing to bring in use again old
ceremonies used long ago, and another to tolerate the same being as yet used,
until such time as they may by little and little grow out of use. I omit that
the Papists in vain and foolishly compare the shauing of their Priests with
the sign of purifying, which God had allowed in the Law. But because we need
not stand any longer to refute them, let this one thing suffice us: that Paul
bound himself with a vow that he might bring those which were weak to
Christ, at least that he might not offend them, which vow he knew was of no
importance before God.

19 Entering into the Synagogue. In that he shook his garment at Corinthus, it
was done for that cause (as this place teaches) that he might cast off the
whole nation: but only such as he had already tried to be of desperate
obstinacy. Now he comes afresh unto the Ephesians, that he might try
whether he could find any more obedience among them. Furthermore, it is a
wonder, that seeing it appears by Luke his report, that he was heard more
patiently in this Synagogue then in any other place, and also that he was
requested to tarry, he did not grant their request. Hence we may easily gather
that which I said before, that he had some great cause to go up to Jerusalem in
have. Also he himself shows that he must make have, saying, I must keep the
feast which is at hand at Jerusalem. Neither is it to be doubted but that
after he had set things in good order there, he departed with their good leave:
and we may gather out of Luke his words that they did admit his excuse, least
the repulse should offend them. And this is worth the noting, that when better
hope to do good is offered us, then we were wont to have, we are drawn unto
diverse affairs as it were by the hand of God: that we may learn to give over
our selves to be governed at his pleasure.

The feast. That which I said of late touching the vow, does also appertain
unto the feast day. For Paul meant not to do thereby any duty of godliness to
God: but to be at the assembly, wherein he might do more good then at any other
time of the year. For the Epistle to the Galathians does sufficiently testify
what account he made of difference of days. And we must note that he makes no
promise touching his return, Gal. 4.10.
with out using this exception, if it please the Lord. We do all confess that
we be not able to stir one finger without his direction: but because there
reigns in men so great arrogancy every where, that they dare determine any
thing (passing over God) not only for the time to come, but also for many
years: we must oftentimes think upon this reverence and sobriety, that we
may learn to make our counsels subject to the will and providence of God:
least if we delyberate and take counsel as those use to do, who think that
they have fortune at their commandment, we be justly punished for our
rashness. And though there be not so great religion in words, but that we may
at our pleasure say that we will do this or that: yet is it good to accustom
our selves to use certain forms in our speeches, that they may put us in mind
that God does direct all our doings.

22 When he came down to Caesarea. Though Luke sath in a word that Paul saluted
the church at Jerusalem: yet is it certain that he was drawn thither with some
great necessity. And yet we may gather by this text, that he stayed not long
at Jerusalem: peradventure because things fell not out as he would. Moreover,
he declares that his journey in his return was not idle or barren, in that he
says that he strengthened all the disciples: undoubtedly not without great
pains taking, because he was enforced to go hither and thither, and often to
turn out of his way for this word cathexes does signify a continual course.
Now we have already declared in what respect those be called Disciples who
had given their names to Christ, Cha. 9.36,
and professed the name of Christ: to wit, because there is no godliness without
true instruction. They had in deed their pastors under whom they might profit:
yet the greater Paul his authority was, and the more excellent spirit he had
given him, so they were not a little strengthened by his passing by them:
especially seeing he was the chief workmaster in the founding of all these
churches.

24 And a certain Jew named Apollos, borne in Alexandria, an eloquent man,
came to Ephesus being mighty in the scriptures.

25 He was instructed in the way of the Lord, and being fervent in the spirit
he spoke and taught diligently those things which are the Lords: knowing only
the Baptism of John.

26 And he began to speak freely in the synagogue: whom when Priscilla and
Aquila had heard, they took him to their company, and showed him the way of
the Lord more perfectly.

27 And when he was determined to go into Achaia, the brethren exhorting him,
wrote to the disciples that they should receive him, who when he was come, he
helped them much who had believed through grace.

28 For he overcame the Jews mightily, and that openly, showing by the
Scriptures that Jesus was Christ.

24 A certain Jew. This ought for good causes to be ascribed to the providence
of God, in that whiles Paul is enforced to depart from Ephesus, Apollos comes
in his place, to supply his absence. And it is very expedient to know the
beginning of this man of what sort it was, for as much as he was also Paul his
successor among the Corinthians, and did behave himself so excellently, and
did his faithful endeavor, and took great pains, so that Paul commends him
honorably as a singular fellow in office. I have planted (says he) Apollo
has watered. 1. Cor. 3.6.4.6.
Also these things have I figuratively appointed unto my self and Apollos. Luke
gives him first two titles of commendatio^: that he was eloquent, and mighty
in the Scriptures: afterward he will add his zeal, faith and constancy. And
though Paul do truly deny that the kingdom of God consists in words, and
he himself was not commended for eloquence: yet dexterity in speaking and
reasoning, (such as Luke does here commend) is not to be despised: especially
when no pomp or vain bosting is sought after by using fine words and great
eloquence: but he which is to teach cou^teth it sufficient for him without
fraud or ambition, without lofty word^ and curious cunning, plainly to lay open
the matter he has in hand. Paul was without eloquence: the Lord would have the
chief Apostle to want this virtue, to the end the power of the spirit might
appear more excellent in his rude and homely speech. And yet was he furnished
with such eloquence as was sufficient to set forth the name of Christ, and to
maintain the doctrine of salvation. But as the distribution of the gifts of the
spirit is diverse and manifold, Paul his infa^cy, that I may so call it, did no
whit let but that the Lord might choose to himself eloquent ministers.
Furthermore, least any man should think that Apollo his eloquence was profane or
vain, Luke says that it was joined with great power: namely, that he was
mighty in the scriptures. Which I expound thus, that he was not only well and
soundly exercised in the scriptures: but that he had the force and efficacye
thereof, that being armed with them, he did in all conflictes get the upper
hand. And this (in my judgment) is rather the praise of the Scripture then of man, that it has sufficient force both to defend the truth, and also to
refute the subtlety of Satan.

25 He was instructed. That which Luke adds shortly after, seems not to
agree with this comme^dation, to wit, that he knew only the baptism of John.
But this later member is added by way of correction. Nevertheless these two
agree very well together: that he understood the doctrine of the Gospel,
because he both knew that the Redeemer was given to the world, and also was
well and sincerely instructed concerning the grace of reconciliation: and yet
had he been trained up only in the principles of the Gospel, so much as could
be had out of John his institution. Luke. 1.76. Ib. 16. and 17.
For we know that John was in the midst between Christ and the prophets:
and of his office does both his father Zacharias entreat in his songue, and
also the Angel out of the prophecye of Malachie. Surely seeing that he
carried the light before Christ, and did highly extol his power, his
Disciples are for good causes said to have had knowledge of Christ. Moreover,
the speech is worth the noting, that, He knew the Baptism of John. For
thence we gather the true use of the Sacraments: to wit, that they enter us in
some certain kind of doctrine, or that they establish that faith which we
have embraced. Surely it is wickedness and impious profanation to pull them
away from doctrine. Wherefore that the Sacraments may be rightly administered,
the voice of the heavenly doctrine must sound there. For what is the Baptism
of John? Luke comprehends all his ministerye under this word: not only
because doctrine is annexed unto Baptism, but also because it is the
foundation and head thereof, without which it should be a vain and dead
ceremony.

Being fervent in spirit he spoke. Apollos has another commendation given him
in these words, that he was inflamed with an holy zeal to teach. Doctrine
without zeal is either like a sword in the hand of a mad man, or else it
lies still as cold and without use, or else it serves ^or vain and wicked
bo^sting. For we see that some learned men become slouthful: othersome (which
is worse) become ambitious: othersome (which is of al, the worst) trouble the
church with contention and brawling. Therefore that doctrine shall be unsavory,
which is not joined with zeal. But let us remember that Luke puts the
knowledge of the Scripture in the first place, which must be the moderation of
zeal, for we know that many are fervent without consideration; as the Jews
did rage against the gospel, by reason of a perverse affection which they did
bear toward the law: and even at this day we see how whotte the papists be,
who are carried headlong with furious violence, being pricked forward with an
opinion unadvisedly conceived. Therefore let knowledge be present that it may
govern zeal. And now it is said that zeal was the cause of diligence, because
Apollos gave himself to teach diligently. But and if that man being not yet
thoroughly and perfectly taught in the Gospel, did preach Christ so diligently
and freely: what excuse do those men hope to have, who know that more
perfectly and fully, which he knew not as yet, if they do not endeavor so
much as in them lies, to further and advance the kingdom of Christ. Luke
does attribute zeal to the spirit therefore, because it is a rare and
peculiar gift: neither do I so expound it that Apollos was moved and pricked
forward with the instinct of his mind, but by motion of the holy Spirit.

26 Whom when Priscilla. By this it appears how far Priscilla and Aquila
were from the love themselves, and from envying another man's virtue, in that
they deliver those things familiarly and privately to an eloquent man, which he
may afterward utter publicly. They excelled not in the same grace, wherein he
did excel, and peradventure they might have been despised in the congregation.
Moreover they most diligently help him whom they see better furnished as well
with eloquence as the use of the scripture: so that they keep silence, and he
alone is heard.

Again, this was no small modesty which was in Apollos in that he does
suffer himself to be taught and instructed not only in an handicraftsman, but
also by a woman. He was mighty in the scripture, and did surpass them: but
as touching the acco^plishment of the kingdom of Christ, those do pollish and
trim him who might seem to be scarce fit ministers. Also we see that at that
time women were not so ignorant of the word of God as the Papists will have
them: forasmuch as we see that one of the chief teachers of the Church was
instructed by a woman. Notwithstanding we must remember that Priscilla did
execute this function of teaching at home in her own house, that she might
not overthrow the order prescribed by God and nature.

27 When he was determined. Luke does not express for what cause Apollos would
go to Achaia. Notwithstanding we gather out of the text that he was not
allured with any private commodity, but because more plentiful fruit in
spreading abroad the Gospel did show it self there: because the brethren
did more encourage him with their exhortation, and did spur him when he did
already run. Which they would not have done, unless it had been for the
common profit of the Church. For it had been an absurd thing to entreat a man
to depart to another place, whose faithful industry they already used, and
did know that they should have need of him afterward, unless there had been
some better recompense offered. And I take it that the brethren of Ephesus wrote
to those of Achaia, not only that they should provide lodging for the man,
but also that they should suffer him to teach. This is holy commendation in
deed, when we study to extol every good man with our testimony and
consent: least the gifts of the holy ghost, which he has given to every man
for the edifiyng of the church, lie buried.

When he came. The brethren forsawe this, who had already had experience
thereof, when they exhorted him to address himself to that journey, which he
had already in mind conceived. And whereas it is said that he helped the
faithful much, we may take it two ways: either that he helped those who were
not so well furnished, and that he did support them to beat down the pride of
their enemies: for every man was not able to have weapon in readiness, to
undertake a hard combat against old enemies, who would never have yielded
unless they had been enforced: or that he aided them least their faith
should fail being shaken with the gainsaying of the enemies: which thing does
oftentimes befall the weak. I take it that they were helped both ways: that
having a skillful and practiced captain, they gate the victory in the
conflict. Secondly, that their faith was fortified with a new prop, that it
might be without danger of wavering Furthermore Luke seems to note that the
brethren were helped with this stoutnesse and consta^cie, when as he says,
that he disputed publicly with the Jews. For this was a sign of zeal and
boldness, not to fly the light. Whereas in the end of the sentence, these
words are used, through grace: it does either agree with the word going
before, they believed: or else it must be referred unto the help wherewith he
helped the brethren. The former interpretation is nothing hard. For the meaning
thereof shall be this, that the faithful were illuminate by the grace of God,
that they might believe as if he had said: The brethren who were alredie called
by the benefit of God unto faith, were furthered. Yet the other text seems
to agree better, that Apollos in imparting that grace which he had received,
with the brethren, did help them. So that, through grace, shall import as
much, as according to the measure of the grace received.

28 He overcame the Jews. By this it appears to what use that ability
which Apollos had (in that he was mighty in the holy scriptures) did serve: to
wit, because he had a strong and forcible proof to reprove and overcome the
enemies withal. Also the state of the disputation is briefly set down, that
Jesus is Christ. For this was out of question among the Jews, that Christ
was promised to be the deliverer: but it was a hard matter to persuade the^,
that Jesus the son of Mary was this Christ through whom salvation was offered.
Therefore it was expedient for Apollos so to dispute concerning the office of
Christ that he might prove that the testimonies of the Scripture were
fulfilled in the son of Mary: and that he might thereby gather that he was
Christ.

Also this place does testify, that the scripture is profitable not only to
teach, but also to break the obstinacy of those, which do not obey and
follow willingly. For our faith should not otherwise be firm enough, unless
there were an evident demonstration extaunt there of those things, which are
necessary to be known for salvation. Surely if the law and the prophets had
so great light, that Apollos did thereby prove manifestly that Jesus is
Christ, as if he did point out the matter with his finger: the adding of the
Gospel must bring this to pass at least, that the perfect knowledge of
Christ may be fet from the whole scripture.

Wherefore it is detestable blasphemy against God in that the papists say, that
the scripture is dark and doubtful. For to what end should god have spoken
unless the plain and invincible truth should show it self in his words? And
whereas they infer, that we must stand to the authority of the church, and they
are not to dispute with heretics out of the scriptures: their cauil is
sufficiently refuted by Luke. For seeing there was nothing more stubborn then
the Jews, we need not to fear but that those weapons whereto Apollos trusted,
and overcame them, shall suffice us against all heretics! seeing that by them
we get the victory of the devil, the prince of all errors.

CHAP. XIX.
1 And it came to pass when Apollos was at Corinthus, that Paul having gone
through the upper parts came to Ephesus, and having found certain disciples
he said unto them:

2 Have ye received the holy ghost since ye believed? But they said unto him,
yea, we have not so much as heard whether there be any holy ghost.

3 And he said unto them, wherewith were ye then baptized? And they said,
with the Baptism of John.

4 And Paul said, John truly baptized with the baptism of repentance,
speaking to the people, that they should believe in him who should come after
him: that is, in Christ Jesus.

5 When they heard these things they were baptized in the name of the Lord
Jesus.

6 And when Paul had laid his hands upon them, the holy Ghost came upon
them, and they spoke with tongues and did prophecy.

7 And all the men were about twelve.

1 Luke shows here that the Church of Ephesus was not only confirmed and
increased by Paul his return, but also that there was a miracle wrought there,
because the visible graces of the spirit were given to certain rude and new
Disciples. Furthermore, it not known, whether they were inhabitauntes of the
city, or strangers, neither does it greatly skill. It is not to be doubted,
but that they were Jews; because they had received the Baptism of John: also
it is to be thought, that they dwelt at Ephesus, when Paul found them there.

2 Whether they had received the holy Ghost. The end of the history does show
that Paul does not speak in this place of the spirit of regeneration, but of
the special gifts, which God gave to diverse at the beginning of the Gospel, for
the common edifying of the Church. But now upon this interrogation of Paul
arises a question, whether the spirit were common to all every where at that
time. For if he were given only to a few, why does he join him with faith,
as if they were so linked together, that they could not be separate?
Peradventure, they were none of the common sort: or because they were an
indifferent number, that is twelve. Paul demands whether they were all
without the gifts of the spirit. Notwithstanding I think thus, that so many
Jews were offered in presence of the Gentiles, not by chance but by the
counsel of God, and that at one time being Disciples, that is, of the number
of the faithful, who did notwithstanding confess that they were ignorant of
the principal glory of the gospel, which was apparent in spiritual gifts that
by them Paul his ministry might be beautified, and set forth. For it is
unlike that Apollos left so few Disciples at Ephesus: and he might have taught
them better, sithence that he learned the way of the Lord perfectly of
Priscilla and Aquila.

Moreover, I do not doubt but that the brethren of whom Luke spoke before,
were other then these. In sum, when Paul sees that these men do profess
the name of Christ, to the end he may have a more certain trial of their
faith, he asks them whether they have received the holy Ghost. For it
appears by Paul himself that this was a sign and token of the grace of God
to establish the credit of doctrine: I would know of you whether ye received
the holy ghost by the works of the law, Gal. 3.2.
or by the hearing of faith.

We know not whether there be any holy Ghost. How could it be, that men
being Jews heard nothing of the spirit, concerning which the prophets speak
every where, and whose commendations and titles are extaunt in the whole
Scripture. Surely we gather by this that Paul did neither speak generally of
the Spirit: and that these men as they were asked, did deny that they knew
those visible graces, wherewith GOD had beautified the kingdom of his son.
Therefore they confess that they know not whether God give such gifts.
Therefore there is in the word Spirit the figure Metonymia. And this sense
does that confirm, that if they had altogether denied that they knew any thing
concerning the spirit of God, Paul would not have passed over with silence
such a gross error, yea an error altogether monstrous. When he demands to
what end, or ho^ they were baptized, he shows therewithal, that
wheresoever Christ had been soundly and thoroughly preached, the visible graces
did also appear, that such woorship might be common to all Churches.
Wherefore no marvel if Paul wonder that the faithful are ignorant of such
glory of Christ, which God would have to be apparent every where at that
time: and adding a correction immediately, he tells them, that they must not
stay in those rudiments which they had learned: because it was John his office
to prepare Disciples for Christ.

4 John truly. Paul his admonition tended to this end, that these me^ being
convict of their ignorance, might desire to go forward. He says that John
preached of Christ who was to come. Therefore he sent out his disciples, that
running in the course they might go toward Christ, who was not as yet
revealed. Wherefore to the end these me^ may not flatter themselves, and refuse
to go forward, he shows that they be yet far from the mark. For the feeling
of want does enforce men to desire that which is as yet lacking. The sum
comes to this end, as if Paul had said, Before Christ was glorified, this
power of his did not appear in the world: when he was ascended into heaven, he
would have his kingdom to flourish thus. Therefore the graces of the spirit were
much less shed out when John was as yet in the course of his embassage,
which do now declare that Christ sits at the right hand of his father.
Forasmuch as he had not as then openly showed himself to be the redeemer of the
world. Therefore know ye that you must go farther forward: because ye be
far from the mark. So that he does plainly show that the faith of the
godly who had been taught by John, ought to have looked unto Christ who was to
come, least these men should stand still being newly entered, without going any
farther. And even by this also are we taught that the Baptism of John was a
token of Repentance and remission of sins, and that our Baptism at this day
does not differ any thing from it, save only that Christ is already revealed,
and in his death and resurrection our salvation is made perfect: and so
Baptism was brought unto his effect: because out of that fountain of Christ's
death and resurrection whereof I have spoken, flows repentance, and thither
is faith referred again that it may thence fet free righteousness. In sum,
Paul shows plainly that that was the baptism of regeneration and
renouation as is ours. And because both purging and newness of life does flow
from Christ alone, he says that it was grounded in his faith, by which words
we be also taught, that hereupon depends all the force of Baptism, that we
lay hold upon by faith in Christ whatsoever Baptism does figure: so far off
is it that the vtward sign does derogate from, or diminish the grace of
Christ any jot.

5 When they heard these things. Because the men of old had conceived an
opinion that the Baptism of John and of Christ were diverse, it was no
inconvenient thing for them to be baptized again, who were only prepared with
the Baptism of John. But that that diversity was falsely and wickedly by them
believed, it appears by this, in that it was a pledge and token of the same
adoption, and of the same newness of life, which we have at this day in our
Baptism: and therefore we do not read that Christ did baptize those again,
who came from John unto him. Moreover Christ received Baptism in his own
flesh, that he might couple himself with us by that visible sign: but if that
feigned diversity be admitted, this singular benefit shall fall away and
perish, Mat. 3.15.
that baptism is common to the son of God and to us, or that we have all one
Baptism with him. But this opinion needs no long refutation, because to the
end they may persuade that these two Baptismes be diverse, they must needs show
first wherein the one differs from the other: but a most excellent likelihood
answers on both parts, and also, the agreement and conformity of the parts,
which causes us to confess that it is all one Baptism. Now the question is
whither it were lawful to repeat the same: and furious men in this our age
trusting to this testimony, went about to bring in Baptising again. Some take
Baptism for new institution or instruction: of whose mind I am not, because
as their exposition is too much racked, so it smells of a starting hole.

Othersome deny that Baptism was repeated: because they were baptized amiss
by some foolish enemy of John. But because their conjecture has no color,
yea the words of Paul do rather import that they were the true and natural
disciples of John, and Luke does honorably call them disciples of Christ: I
do not subscribe to this opinion: and yet I deny that the baptism of water
was repeated, because the words of Luke import no other thing save only that
they were baptized with the Spirit. First it is no new thing for the name of
Baptism to be translated unto the Gifts of the Spirit, as we saw in the first
and in the eleventh Chapters, Chap. 1.5. and 11.6.
where Luke said, that when Christ promised to his Apostles to send the
Spirit visiblie, he called it Baptism.

Also that when the Spirit came down upon Cornelius, Peter remembered the words
of the Lord, ye shall be baptized with the holy Ghost. Again we see that
those visible gifts are spoken off by name in this place, and that the same
are given with baptism. And whereas it follows immediately, that when he had
laid his hands upon them, the Spirit came, I take it to be added by way of
interpretation: for it is a kind of speaking much used in the scripture, first
to set down a thing briefly, and afterward to make it more plain. Therefore
that which by reason of brevity was somewhat obscure, does Luke better
express, and lay more open, saying, that by laying on of hands the Spirit was
given them. If any man object, that when Baptism is put for the gifts of the
Spirit, it is not taken simply, but having somewhat added to it: I answer
that Luke his meaning does sufficiently appear by the text: and again, that
Luke does allude unto the Baptism whereof he spoke. And surely if you
understand it of the external sign, it shall be an absurd thing that it was
given them, without using any better doctrine. But and if you take it
metaphorically for institution, the speech shall be as yet harsh: and the
narration should not agree, that After they were taught the holy Ghost came
down upon them. Furthermore as I confess that this laying on of hands was a
sacrament: so I say that those fell through ignorance, who did continually
imitate the same. For seeing that all men agree in this, that it was a grace
which was to last only for a time, which was showed by that sign: it is a
perverse and ridiculous thing to retain the sign sythence the truth is taken
away. There is another respect of Baptism and the Supper, wherein the Lord
does testify that those gifts are laid open for us, which the Church shall
enjoy even until the end of the world. Wherefore we must diligently and
wisely distinguish perpetual sacraments from those which last only for a
time, least vain and frivolous visures have a place among the Sacraments.
Whereas the men of old time did use laying on of hands, that they might
confirm the profession of faith in those who were grown up, I do not mislike
it: so that no man think that the grace of the Spirit is annexed to such a
ceremony, as does Jerome against the Luciferians.

But the Papists are worthy of no pardon, who being not content with the
ancient rite, durst thrust in rotten and filthy anointing: that it might be
not only a confirmation of Baptism but also a more worthy sacrament, whereby
they imagine that the faithful are made perfect, who were before only half
perfect: whereby those are armed against the battle, who before had their
sins only forgiven them. For they have not been afraid to spue out these
horrible blasphemies.

8 And going into the Synagogue, he spoke freely about three months disputing
and persuading concerning the kingdom of God.

9 And when some waxed hard hearted, that they could not believe, speaking evil
of the way before the multitude, departing from them he did separate the
disciples, and disputed daily in the school of one Tyrannus.

10 An this he did by the space of two years, so that all which dwelt in Asia,
hard the word of the Lord Jesus, both Jews and Greeks.

11 And the Lord showed no small miracles by the hands of Paul:

12 So that from his body were brought napkins and partlets unto those that
were sick, and the diseases departed from them, and the evil spirits came
out of them.

8 Going into the Synagogue. By this we gather that Paul began with the
company of the godly, who had already given their names to Christ: Secondly,
that he came into the Synagogue, that he might gather together into one body
of the Church, the rest of the Jews who knew not Christ as yet, or ar least
who had not as yet received him. And he says that Paul behaved himself
boldly, that we may know that he was not therefore heard by the space of
three months, because he did craftily cover the doctrine of the Gospel, or
did insinuate himself by certain dark crookes. Luke does also by and by
express some token of boldness, showing that he disputed and persuaded
touching the kingdom of God. And we know that by this word is oftentimes
noted that restoring which was promised to the fathers, and which was to be
fulfilled by the coming of Christ. For seeing that without Christ there is an
evil favored and confused scattering abroad and ruin of all things, the
prophets did attribute this not in vain to the Messiah who was to come, that
it should come to pass that he should establish the kingdom of God in the
world: And now because this kingdom does bring us back from falling and
slyding back, unto the obedience of God, and makes us sons of enemies: it
consists first in the free forgiveness of sins, whereby God does reconcile
us to himself, and does adopt us to be his people: secondly, in newness of
life, whereby he fashioneth and makes us like to his own image. He says
that he disputed and persuaded: meaning that Paul did so dispute, that he
proved that with sound reasons, which he did allege: that done, he used the
pricks of godly exhortations, whereby he pricked forward his hearers. For no
profounde disputations shall make us obedient to GOD, unless we be moved with
godly admonitions.

9 Seeing their hearts were hardened. We do not read that Paul was heard so
pacie^tly and so favorably by the Jews at any place, as at Ephesus, at his
first coming. For where as others raising tumults did drive him away, he was
requested by these to tarry longer. Now after that he had endeavored by the
space of three months to erect the kingdom of God among them, the ungodliness
and stubbornness of many does show it self. For Luke says that they were
hardened: and surely such is the power of the heavenly doctrine, that it does
either make the reprobate mad, or else more obstinate: and that not of nature,
but accide^tally, as they say: because when they be urged by the truth, their
secret poiso^ breaks out. Luke adds that they spoke evil of the way before
the people. For the co^temners of the gospel do resist that deadlily among
others which they will not embrace. And this do they to no other end save only
because they be desirous (if it can be) to have al men partners in their
impiety. It is well known that every ordinance is understood by this word
way: but here it is referred unto the gospel of Christ. Now Luke says that
Paul departed from them, and did separate the brethren, by which example we are
taught, that when we have experience of desperate and incurable stubbornness,
we must loose our labor no longer. Therefore Paul admonishes Titus, to
avoid a man that is an heretic, Tit. 3.10.
after once or twice admonition. For the word of God is unjustly blasphemed,
if it be cast to dogs and swine. Also we must provide for the weak, least
through wicked backbitings and slaundering of sound doctrine, their godliness be
subverted. Therefore Paul did separate the Disciples, least the goats should
with their stink infect the flock of sheep: Secondly that the pure
woorshippers of God might make profession freely.

Disputing daily. This place shows how continual Paul his diligence was in
teaching: and that they be too churlish and dainty, who are straight way weary
of learning. For we see how few come daily, who are ready and apt to hear.
And though he had a particular care for the household flock, which he had
gathered as into a sheepfold, yet he does not suffer strangers to be destitute
of his industry: but continuing the course of his disputation, he tries
whether he can find any which are apt to be taught. He calls it the school
of Tyrannus, meaning no such man as had gotten the government of Asia: for the
Romans bare rule throughout al Asia; but it is to be thought that the schole
was built at the charge of one Tyrannus, and given to the City. Therefore the
faithful did use a public place, which bare the name of the builder, where
they had their assemblies.

10 All which dwelt. Luke does not mean that the men of Asia came thither to
hear Paul: but that the smell of his preaching went throughout all Asia, and
that the seed was sown far and wide: so that his labor was fruitful not
only to one City, but also to places which were far off: and that comes
to pass oftentimes, that when the truth of God is preached in one place, it
sounds where the voice of the minister cannot sound, being spread abroad
far and wide: because it is delivered from hand to hand, and one does teach
another. For one man were not sufficient, unless every man were for himself
diligent to spread abroad the faith.

11 No small miracles. He calls miracles virtutes or powers, after the
common custom of the scripture, which were testimonies of the extraordinary
power of God. And he shows that Paul his Apostleship was set forth with these
ensigns, that his doctrine might have the greter authority. For it is a common
speech, That wonders and signs are showed by the hand of men. So that the
praise thereof is ascribed to God alone as to the author: and man is only the
minister. And that he may the more amplify the miracles, he says that
handkircheffes and partlers were brought unto the sick, which so soon as they
touched they were healed. It is not unknown to what end Paul had such power
given him: to wit, that he might prove himself to be a true Apostle of Christ,
that he might make the gospel to be believed, and might confirm his
ministry. And here it is expedient to call to mind, those things which we had
before touching the lawful use of miracles. And whereas God did heal the
sick with Paul's handkirchiffes, it tended to that end, that even those who
had never seen the man, might notwithstanding reverently embrace his doctrine
though he himself were absent. For which cause the Papists are more blockish,
who wrest this place unto their relics: as if Paul sent his handkircheffes,
that men might worship them and kiss them in honor of him: as in papistrie
they worship Frances his shoes and mantill, Roses girdle, Saint Margarets
Comb, and such like trifles. Yea rather he did choose most simple things,
least any superstition should arise by reason of the price or pomp. For he was
fully determined to keep Christ his glory sound and undiminished.

13 And certain of the vagabound Jews exorcists assaied to name over those
which had evil spirits, the name of the Lord Jesus, saying, We adjure you by
Jesus whom Paul preaches,

14 And there were certain sons of Sceua a Jew the chief of the Prists, who
did this.

15 And the evil spirit answered and said, Jesus I know, and Paul I know: but
who are ye?

16 And the man in whom the evil Spirit was ran upon them, and overcame
them, and prevailed against them, so that they escaped out of that house naked
and wounded.

17 And this was known to all both Jews and Grecians, which dwelt at Ephesus.
And fear came upon them all, and the name of the Lord Jesus was magnified.

13 To the end it may more plainly appear that the Apostleship of Paul was
confirmed by those miracles whereof mention was made of late: Luke does now
teach that when certain did falsely pretend the name of Christ, such abuse was
most sharply punished. Whereby we gather that such miracles were wrought by the
hand of Paul to no other end, save only that all men might know that he did
faithfully preach Christ to be the power of God: forasmuch as the Lord did
not only not suffer them to be separate from the pure doctrine of the Gospel:
but did so sharply punish those who did draw them preposterouslie unto their
inchauntments: whence we gather again, that whatsoever miracles do darken the
name of Christ, they be iugling castes of the devil: and that those be
cussoners and falsifiers, who draw the true miracles of God to any other end,
save only that true religion may be established.

Certain exorcists. I do not doubt but that this office did proceed of
foolish emulation. God was wont to exercise his power diverse ways among the
Jews: and he had used the Prophets in times past as ministers to drive away
devils: under color hereof they invented coniuration, and hereuppon was
erected unadvisedly an extraordinary function without the commandment of
God. Also it may be that (God appointing it so to be) it did somewhat: not that
he favored it preposterously, but that they might more willingly retain the
religion of their fathers until the coming of Christ. Under the reign of
Christ, wicked ambition caused strife between the Christians and the Jews.
For exorcists were made after the will of men: after that (as supestition does
always wax worse and worse) the Pope would have this common to all his
Clerks, who were to be promoted unto an higher degree. For after that they be
made doorekepers, forthwith the coniuring of devils is committed to them: and
by very experience they set themselves to be laughed at. For they are in forced
to confess that they give a vain title, and such as is without effect, for
where is the power they have to conjure devils: and the very exorcists
themselves do take upon them to their own reproach, an office which they never
put in practice. But this falls out justly, that there is no end of erring,
when men depart from the word of God. As touching these men we gather that they
were wandering roges and such as went from door to door, of which sort we see
many at this day in popery: for he says that they went about. By which words
he gives us to understand that they went to and fro as occasion was offered
them to deceive men.

We adjure you by Jesus. It is a thing like to be true that these deceivers
flee unto the name of Christ, that they might get new power, whereof they had
falsely boasted before, or because the power which they had did cease, that
they might darken the Gospel. This invocation had two faults: for whereas they
were enemies to Paul his doctrine, they abuse the color thereof without faith,
as it were unto magical inchauntmentes: secondly they take to themselves
without the calling of God that which is not in man's hand. But the lawful
calling upon the name of God and Christ, is that which is directed by faith,
and does not pass the bounds of a man's calling. Wherefore we are taught by
this example, that we must attempt nothing unless we have the light of the
word of God going before us, least we suffer like punishment for our sacrilege.
The Lord himself commands us to pray. Whosoever they be which have not the
gift of miracles given them, let them keep themselves within these bounds. For
when the Apostles made the unclean spirits come out of men, they had God for
their author, and they knew that they did faithfully execute the ministry
which he had enjoined them.

16 The man running upon them. That is attributed to the man which the devil
did by him. For he had not been able to do such an act of himself, as to
put to flight seven strong young men being wounded and naked. And to set down
for a certainty how the devil does dwell in men, we cannot, save only that
there may be a contrariety between the spirit of God, and the spirit of
Satan. For as Paul teaches that we be the temples of God, because the spirit
of God dwells in us: so he says again, that Satan works effectually in
all unbelievers. Notwithstanding we must know that Luke speaks in this place
of a particular kind of dwelling: to wit, when Satan has the bridle so much
that he does possess the whole man.

Furthermore God meant to show such a token, that he might declare that his
power is not included in the sound of the voice, and that it is not lawefull
superstitiously to abuse the name of his son. And when he suffers Satan to
deceive us, let us know that we be more sharply punished, then if he should
wound us in the flesh For the false show and color of miracles, is an horrible
enchantment to bewitch and befot the unbelievers, that they may be drowned in
deeper darkness, because they refused the light of God.

17 There came fear. The fruit of that vengeance which God brought upon those
who did wickedly abuse the name of Christ is this, in that they were all
touched with reverence, least they should contemn that doctrine, whose revenger
the Lord had showed by an evident token and testimony he would be, and they
were brought to reverence Christ. For besides that God does inuit us by all
his judgments to come thus far, that they may terrify us from sinning: in
this example peculiarly was the majesty of Christ set forth, and the
authority of the gospel established, wherefore there is more heavy and
grievous punishment prepared for deceivers, who with their inchauntments
profane the name of Christ wittingly, least they promise to themselves that
they shall escape unpunished for such gross sacrilege. Whereas he says that it
was made known to all men, it signifies as much, as commonly or every where.
For his meaning is that the matter was much talked off among the people, to the
end the name of Christ might be made known to mo men.

18 And many of those which believed came, confessing and showing their works.

19 And many of those which used curious arts, bringing their books, burnt
them before them all: and when they had cast the price of them, they found it
fifty thousand pieces of silver.

20 So mightily grew the word of the Lord, and was confirmed.

21 And when these things were accomplished, Paul purposed in Spirit, having
passed over Macedonia and Achaia, to go to Jerusalem, saying, After that I
have bin there, I must also see Rome.

22 And when he had sent two of those which ministered to him into Macedonia, to
wit, Timotheus and Erastus, he stayed for a time in Asia.

18 Many which believed. Luke brings forth one token of that fear whereof
he spoke. For they did in deed declare that they were thoroughly touched and moved
with the fear of God, who of their own accord did confess the faults and
offenses of their former life, least through their dissimulation they should
nourishe the wrath of GOD within. We know what a hard matter it is to wring
true confession out of those who have offended, for seeing men count nothing
more precious then their estimation, they make more account of shame then of
truth. Yea so much as in them lies they seek to cover their shame. Therefore
this voluntary confession, was a testimony of repentance and of fear. For no
man unless he be thoroughly touched will make himself subject to the slanders
and reproaches of men, and will willingly be judged upon earth, that he may be
loosed and acquitted in heaven. When he says, Many, by this we gather that
they had not all one cause, for it may be that these men had corrupt
consciences a long time: as many are oftentimes infected with hidden and
inward vices. Wherefore Luke does not prescribe all men a common Law: but he
sets before them an example which thos^ must follow who need like medicine.
For why did these men confess their facts, save only that they might give
testimony of their repentance, and seek counsel and ease at Paul's hands? It
was otherwise with those who came unto the Baptism of John, confessing their
sins. Mat. 3.6.
For by this means they did confess that they did enter into repentance
without dissimulation. But in this place Luke teaches by one kind, after what
sort the faithful were touched with the reverence of God, when God set before
them an example of his severity. For which cause the impudency of the Papists
is the greater, who color their tyranny by this fact. For wherein does their
auricular confession agree with this example? First the faithful confessed how
miserably they had bin deceived by Satan before they came to the faith,
bringing into the sight of men certain examples. But by the Popes Law it is
required that men reckon up all their words and deeds and thoughts. We reed
that those men confessed this once. The Popes Law commands that it be
repeated every year at least. These men made confession of their own accord:
the Pope binds all men with necessity. Luke says there came many, not
all: in the Pope his Law there is no exception. These men humbled themselves
before the company of the faithful: the Pope gives a far other commandment:
that the sinner confess his sins whisperingly in the ear of one priest. Lo
how well they apply the Scriptures to prove their subtlety.

19 Who used curious crafts. Luke does not only speak of magical iuglings,
but of frivolous and vain studies, whereof the more part of men is for the
most part too desirous. For he uses the word perierga: under which the
Grecians comprehend whatsoever things have in themselves no sound commodity:
but lead men's minds and studies through diverse crookes unprofitably. Such is
judicial Astrology, as they call it, and whatsoever diuinations men invent to
themselves against the time to come. They burn their books that they may cut
off all occasion of erring both for themselves and for others. And whereas the
greatness of the price does not call them back from indamaging themselves so
much, they do thereby better declare the study of their godliness. Therefore as
Luke did of late describe their confession in words, so now he sets down
the confession they make in deeds. But because the Grecians take argurion for
all kind of money, it is uncertain whether Luke does speak of pence or
sestertians. Notwithstanding because it is certain, that he expressed a sum
that we might know that the faithful did valiantly contemn gaine^; I do
nothing doubt but that he means pence or some other better kind of coin.
And fifty thousand peace, make about nine thousand pound of french money.

20 Grew mightily. The word cata cratos, does signify that the word
increased not a little, or that these proccedings were not common: as if he
should say, that in those increasings appeared rare efficacy and such as was
greater than it used commonly to be. The word Grew do I refer unto the
number of men, as if he should have said, that the Church was increased, new
disciples being gathered together daily because doctrine is spread abroad. And
I interpret that, that the word was confirmed in every one, thus, to wit, that
they did profit in the obedience of the Gospel and in godliness more and more,
and that their faith took deeper root.

21 He purposed in Spirit. His meaning is that Paul purposed to take his
journey through the instinct and motion of the Spirit: that we may know that
all his whole life was framed according to Gods will and pleasure. And
therefore has he the Spirit to be the governor of his actions, because he
did both give over himself by him to be ruled, and did also depend upon his
government. Neither skilleth that which follows, that he had not that
success in his journey which he did hope for, for God does oftentimes
govern and rule his faithful servant, suffering them to be ignorant of the
end. For he will have them so far forth addicted to him, that they follow
that which he has showed them by his spirit, even shutting their eyes, when
matters be doubtful. Moreover it is certain that he was wholly addicted to
profit the Churches omitting and forslowing his own commodity, in that he
had rather deprive himself of Timotheus a most excellent, to him of all most
faithful, most dear, finally a most fit companion, than not to provide for
the Macedonians.

23 And at that time there happened no small tumult about that way.

24 For a certain man named Demetrius a silver smyth, which made silver
shrines for Diana, brought us small gains to the men of that occupation.

25 Whom when he had called together, and those who were makers of like
things, he said, Men ye know that by this craft we have advantage:

26 And ye see and hear that not only at Ephesus, but almost throughout all
Asia this Paul has persuaded, and turned away much people, saying that they be
not gods which are made with hands.

27 And not only this part comes in danger to us, least it be set at
naught: but also least the Temple of the great goddess Diana be despiced, and
it come to pass, that her majesty be destroyed, whom all Asia and the world
worshippeth.

28 When they heard these things they were full of wrath, and cried out saying,
Great is Diana of the Ephesians.

23 Tumult about that way. Concerning this word Way let the readers understand
thus much, that it is here taken for that which the Latins call Sect: the
Greek Philosophers call it Heresies or heresy. But because in the Church of
God, where the unity of faith ought to reign, there is nothing more odious or
detestable, than for every man to choose at his pleasure that which he will
follow: I think that Luke did fly that name which was for good causes
infamous among the godly, and that after the Hebrew phrase he put way in
steed of Ordinance. And as touching the sum of the matter, we see how
wonderfully the Lord did exercise his servant. He did hope when he did
address himself for his journey, that the Church would be quiet after his
departure, and lo there arises an uproar at a sudden, where he did least
fear. But in Demetrius it appears what a hurtful plague covetousness is.
For one man for his own gains sake is not afraid to trouble a whole City
with sedition. And the crafts men, who were as firebrandes kindled by him, and
do spread abroad the fire every where, do teach us what an easy matter it
is to cause filthy men and those whose belly is their God, to commit all
manner wickedness: especially if they live only by gains evil gotten, and
the hope of gain be taken from them. Moreover in this history we see a
lively image of our time. Demetrius and his band raise a tumult: because if
superstition whereby they were wont to get gains be taken away, their craft
will fall to ground. Therefore they fight as if it were for their life: least
Demetrius go without his fat pray, and the rest want their daily living.
What zeal does at this day prick forward the Pope, the horned Bishops,
the Munkes, and all the rablement of the popish clergy? Yea what fury does
drive them, so sore to resist the Gospel? They boast that they strive for the
Catholic faith: neither did Demetrius want an honest color, pretending the
worship of Diana.

But the matter it self does plainly declare, that they fight not so much
for the altars as for the fi^es: to wit, that they may have hot kitchings. They
can well wink at filthy blasphemies against God, so they lack nothing of
their revenues, Only they are more than courageous in maintaining such
superstitions as are meetest for their purpose.

Therefore being taught by such examples, let us learn to make choice of such a
kind of life as is agreeable to the doctrine of Christ: least desire of gain
provoke us to enter a wicked and ungodly combat: and as for those who through
ignorance or error are fallen unto any ungodly occupation, or are entangled in
any other impure and wicked kind of life: let them notwithstanding beware of
such sacrilegious rashness. And as touching godly teachers, let them learn by
this example, that they shall never want adversaries, until the whole world
through denial of it self offer peace: which we know will never come to pass.
Because Paul's doctrine takes away Demetrius and the rest of the silver
smithes gains, they leap out furiously to put out the same, will not they do
the same, whom the Gospel shall contrary? But there is no man who has not
occasion to fight. For all the affections of the flesh are enmies to God. So
that it must needs be, that how many lusts of the flesh there be in the world
there are as many armed enemies to resist Christ. It will in deed oftentimes
fall out that God will bridle the wicked, least they raise some tumult, or
break out into open rage. Yet whosoever is not tamed, and brought down to
bear Christ's yoke, he shall always hate his gospel. So that faithful and
godly teachers must persuade themselves that they shall always have to deal
with great store of enemies. Demetrius his covetousness is manifest.
Nevertheless we must also know this, that he was Satan his fan, who seking by
all means to overthrow Paul's doctrine, found this fit instrument. Now forasmuch
as we know that Satan is a deadly enemy to Christ and the truth, do we think
that he shall ever want ministers, who shall rage through his motion and
persuasion, either with open rage, or else seek to work the overthrow of the
Gospel by secret practices, or spue out the poison of their hatred, or else at
least show some token of enmity by fretting and murmuring.

25 By this craft. Demetrius does in this place filthily bewray his malice. It
is lawful for a man in some measure to provide for his priua^^ profit: but to
trouble common peace for a man's own gain, to overthrow equity and right to
give over a man's self, to do violence and commit murder, to extinguish that of
set purpose which is just and right: that is too great wickedness. Demetrius
confesses that this is the state of the cause, because Paul denies that those
are Gods which are made with men's hands. He does not inquire whether this be
true or no: but being blinded with a desire to get gain, he is carried headlong
to oppress ^^ue doctrine. The same blindness does drive him headlong to seek
violent remedies. Also the craft men, because they be afraid of poverty and
hunger, run headlong as violently, for the belly is blind and deaf, so that it
can admit no equity. For which cause every one of us ought more to suspect
himself, when the question is touching our own gain and profit, least the
same covetous desire which made these men so mad, take away all difference of
justice and injustice, of that which is filthy and that which is honest.

27 Not only this part. This is first disorderedly handeled in that Demetrius
is careful for religion after other things: because nothing is more absurd
then to prefer the belly before the goddess: but eue^ this is also vain, in
that he prete^deth that the worship of Diana is in hazard. For if he had
suffered no loss by Paul his doctrine he would have sit quietly at home: he
would neither have taken thought for the worship of Diana, neither would he
have troubled others. What is the cause then he is so diligent and so earnest
in his business, even this, because he was plagued at home? and because he saw
that he and his copartners had no honest or probable cause to make any stir,
he goes about to color the matter with some other color. Therefore to the
end he may cover the shame of his wicked fact, he cloketh it with the title of
religion; which is plausible. So that the wicked howsoever they strive
frowardly against God; yet they gather here and there honest excuses
impudently: but God does not suffer himself to be mocked: but does rather
pull them out of their starting holes. There needs no other witness to
refute Dimetrius his hypocrisy because he cutteth his own throat with his
own words, when he bewrays the sorrow which he had conceived, because of the
loss which he sustained. In like state do the papists stand at this day: they
boast with full mouth, that they be patrons of the catholic faith, and of the
holy mother the church, but when they have spoken thus touching their zeal, in
the very handeling of the cause they breath out with wide open throat the smell
of their kitchins. But if we have a desire to handle the cause of godliness
purely and in earnest, let us forget our commodities, that the glory of God may
have the chief place. For the show of profit does so tie all our senses with
inticements, that though we wander through all manner wickedness, yet do we
flatter our selves, so long as we be determined to provide for our own
commodity.

Whom all Asia and the world does worship. It seems to Demetrius an unmeet
thing that Diana her majesty should be brought to naught, which all the world
does reverence and worship, and this is a common starting hole for all
superstitious persons, to pretend the consent of the multitude. But true
religion requires a more steadfast stay then in the will and pleasure of men.
There is nothing which at this day does more keep back the simple and
unskillful then that they dare not cast from them such ancient errors as are
commonly received every where. Because they feign and imagine that that which
pleased many though foolishly and rashly, is to be counted lawful. For which
cause they be not afraid boldly to set the very name of custom against God
himself. But the Lord does prescribe to us another manner of rule, to wit, that
being content with his authority alone, we do not pass either for the
opinion of men, no^ for our own commodity, nor for the custom of many
nations.

29 And all the city was full of confusion and they rushed into the common
place with one consent, having caught Gaius and Aristarchus, men of Macedonia,
Paul his companions.

30 And when Paul would have entered in unto the people, the disciples would not
suffer him.

31 And certain also of the chief of Asia which were his friends sent unto
him, requesting him that he would not enter into the common place.

32 Some therefore cried one thing, and some another: for the assembly was out
of order, and the more part knew not for what cause they came together.

33 And some of the company drew forth Alexander, the Jews thrusting him
forward. And when Alexander had required silence with the hand, he would have
excused the matter to the people.

34 Whom when they knew to be a Jew, there arose a shout of all men almost for
the space of two hours, crying, great is Diana of the Ephesians.

29 Luke sets down in this place the nature of the people, as if it were
depainted in a table. Like as if a thousand houses should be set on fire at a
sudden: so all the City was on an uproar in one moment: and when such a
tempest is once raised, it is not easily stayed. And forasmuch as the servants
of Christ cannot avoid this mischief, they must be armed with invincible
constancy, that they may boldly suffer the tumults raised among the people,
and that they may not be troubled as with some new and strange matter, when
they see that the people is unquiet. So Paul himself does elsewhere triumph
that he went valiantly through the midst of sedition. 2. Cor. 6.5.
Nevertheless the Lord does uphold the ministers of his word with an
excellent comfort, when as they be tossed amidst diverse storms and garboyles,
and with excellent boldness does he establish them, when he does testify
that he holds the helm of his Church: and not that only, but that he is the
governor and moderatour of all tumultes and storms, so that he can stay the
same so soon as it seems good to him. Therefore let us know that we must
sail as it were in a tempestuous sea: yet that we must suffer this infamy, as
if we our selves were the procurers of trouble: neither may any thing lead us
away from the right course of our duty. So that in sailing we shall be sore
troubled: yet will not the Lord suffer us to suffer shipwreck. Furthermore we
see that though sedition be confused, yet does the people always take the
worse part: as the men of Ephesus do now catch Gaius and Aristarchus, and they
drive back Alexander with their furious outcries. Whence comes this, save
only because Satan does reign in their hearts, so that they rather favor an
evil cause? There is also another reason, because a prejudice conceived upon a
false report does possess their minds, so that they cannot abide to sift the
cause any farther.

30 And when Paul would. We may see that Paul his constancy was coupled with
modesty. When as he might well have kept himself out of sight, of his own
accord was he prepared to put himself in hazard. And yet he does not
refuse to follow their counsel, who knew the state of matters better than
he. If he had not been kept back, that which he determined to do, could
not have been imputed to rashness. There was no sedition raised through his
fault: why ^de not he venture his life? especially seeing that he did not
despair of better success. But when the brethren and such friends as were
more skillful diswade him, his modesty is worthy to be commended, in that he
does not stand stoutly in his purpose.

33 They drew out Alexander. It is to be thought that the Jews did not send
forth this Alexander to plead the common cause of the nation: but that they
were desirous to bring him before the people that he might be murdered.
Nevertheless the name Jew made him to be so hated that they did outragiously
refuse whatsoever he was about to speak in the matter and cause: yea he did
hardly escape with his life in such an uproar. Moreover it is uncertain whether
this be that Alexander of whom Paul makes mention elsewhere: 1. Tim. 1.20
and 2. Tim. 4.14.
yet the conjecture seems to me allowable. But and if we believe that it is
he, let us learn by this fearful example to walk circumspectly least
Satan carry us away into like falling away. For we see that he who was at
the point to suffer martyrdom, became a treacherous and wicked revolt.

34 Great is Diana of the Ephesians: This was a clamorous confession but
without any soundness, neither did it proceed from the faith of the heart.
For whence came that great divinity of Diana whereof they spoke, save only
because like mad men they furiously defend that error which they had once
received? It fares otherwise with true godliness; that we believe with the
heart unto righteousness, and then does the confession of the mouth follow to
salvation. Therein does the distemperature and mad stubbernenesse of all
mad, men and brainesicke fools differ from the constancy and zeal of the
martyrs. And yet notwithstanding our sluggishnesse is shameful, if we be not
as ready and stout in the confession of a sure faith as are they in their
filthy error. For we see what the Spirit of God prescribes unto us by the
mouth of David, Psalm. 106.10
I believed, and therefore will I speak.

35 And when the town clarke had pacified the multitude, he said, Ye men of
Ephesus, what man is he that knows not that the City of the Ephesians is a
worshipper of the great goddess Diana, and of the image that came down from
Jupiter.

36 And seeing these things are out of question, you must be quiet, and do
nothing rashly.

37 For ye have brought men which are neither Churchrobbers, nor yet
blasphemers of your goddess.

38 But and if Demetrius and the craftsmen that are with him, have a matter
against any man, there be open assemblies, and there be deputies, let them
accuse one another.

39 But and if there be any other matter in question, it shall be decided in a
lawful assembly.

40 For it is to be doubted least we be accused of this days sedition,
seeing there is no cause whereby we may give a reason of this concourse. And
when he had thus spoken, he let the assembly depart.

35 Luke shows in this place that the tumult was so appea^ed that yet
notwithstanding superstition prevailed with the mad people, and the truth of
God was not heard. For the town clarke, as politic me^ use to do, counts it
sufficient for him if he can by any means appease the outrageous multitude.
Nevertheless the cause it self is oppressed. He saw undoubtedly Demetrius his
malice, and how he had troubled the city, abusing the pretense of religion
for his own private gain: but he touches not that wound which he knew to be
unknown to the unskillful. Nevertheless to the end he may stay the vproare and
contention, he extolleth the feigned power of Diana, and maintains her
superstitious worship. If Paul had been in the common place at that time, he
would rather have suffered death an hundredth times, then have suffered himself
to be delivered from danger paying so dear for it. For though the town clarke
had not been by him commanded to speak thus: yet it should have been
treacherous dissimulation in a public witness and preacher of heavenly
doctrine. The Scribe affirms that the Image which the Ephesians did worship
came down from heaven, and that Paul and his companions spoke no blasphemy
against their goddess. Could he have holden his peace, but he must needs by
his silence have allowed his false excuse? And this had been to shake hands with
idolatry. Therefore it was not without cause that Luke said before that Paul
was kept back by the brethren: and not suffered to enter into the common place.

37 Men which are neither church robbers. He does both truly and well deny
that they be churchrobbers: but he does shortly after falsely define the kind
of churchrobberie, to speak blasphemously against Diana. For seeing that all
superstition is profane and polluted, it follows that those be sacrilegious
persons who translate the honor which is due to God alone, unto Idols. But the
wisdom of the town clarke, and that carnal, is here commended, and not his
godliness. For he had respect unto this alone, to extinguish the heat of the
uproar: and therefore does he at length conclude, if Demetrius have any private
matter, there be judgment seats and Magistrates. And that public affairs
must be handeled in a lawful and not in a disordered assembly: in an assembly
gathered by the commandment of the magistrates, and not in a concourse which
is without consideration, run together through the motion of one man, and to
satisfy his appetite. He calls them deputies in the plural number, not that
Asia had more then one, but because Legates did sometimes keep courts in the
place of the deputies. Also he appeaseth them by putting them in fear, because
the deputy had occasion offered to punish and fine the city sore.

CHAP. XX.
1 AND after the tumult was ceased, when Paul had called unto him the
disciples, and had embraced them, he took his journey that he might go into
Macedonia.

2 And when he had walked through those parts, and had with much speech
exhorted them, he came into Grecia.

3 And when he had spent three months there, when the Jews laid in wait for
him as he was about to loose into Syria: he purposed to return through
Macedonia.

4 And there accompanied him unto Asia, Sopater of Berrhea: and of the
Thessalonians, Aristarchus and Secundus, and Caius of Derbie, and Timotheus:
and of Asia, Tichichus and Trophimus.

5 When these were gone before, they stayed for us at Troas.

6 And we sailed away after the day of sweet bread from Philippi, and came to
them to Troas within five days, where we stayed seven days.

1 Luke declares in this chapter how Paul loosing from Asia, did again cross
the Seas to go to Jerusalem. And though whatsoever is written in this
narration be worthy of most diligent meditation and marking: yet does it need
no long exposition. It appears that the church was preserved in saftie by the
wonderful power of God amidst those troublesome tumults. The church of Ephesus
was as yet slender and weak: the faithful having had experience of a sudden
motion once, might for just causes fear, least like storms should ever now
and then arise. We need not doubt that Paul did with much ado depart from the^:
yet because greater necessity does draw him unto another place, he is
enforced to leave his sons who were lately begotten and had as yet scarce
escaped shipwreck, in the midst of the raging Sea. As for them though they be
very loath to forgo Paul, yet least they do injury to other churches, they do
not keep him back nor stay him. So that we see that they were not wedded to
themselves, but that they were careful for the kingdom of Christ, that they
might provide as well for their brethren as for themselves. We must diligently
note these examples, that one of us may study to help another in this
miserable dispearsing: but if it so fall out at any time that we be bereft of
profitable helps, let us not dout nor waver, knowing that God does hold the
helm of our ship. And we must also note this that Paul does not depart until
he have saluted the Brethren, but does rather strengthen them at his departure.
As Luke says straightway of the Macedonians, that Paul exhorted them with
many words: that is not ouerfieldes, as if it were sufficient to put them
only in mind of their duty: but as he commands else where that others
should do, he urged importunately and beat in thoroughly, things which were
needful to be known: that they might never be forgotten.

2. Tim. 4.2.
3 Because the Jews laid wait for him. The Lord did exercise his servant so
diversely and continually, that he set before us in him an example of most
excellent constancy. It is not sufficient for him to be wearied with the labor
and trouble of a long and werisome journey, unless he be also brought in danger
of his life by those which lay in wait for him. Let all the servants of
Christ set this mirror before their eyes, that they may never faint through
the wearisomnes of straits. Notwithstanding when Paul does journey another way
that he may avoid their laying in wait, he shows that we must have regard of
our life so far forth, that we throw not our selves headlong into the midst
of dangers. And those who accompany him, give no small testimony of their
godliness: and we see how precious his life was to the faithful, when as a great
many being chosen out of diverse countries to be his companions, do for his
sake take a hard and sharp journey, not without great charges. Luke says that
Paul tarried at Philippos so long as the days of unleavened bread did last,
because he had at that time better opportunity offered to teach. And for as
much as it was unknown as yet that the law was disanulled, it stood him upon
to beware least by neglecting the feast day, he should be thought among the rude
to be a contemner of God. Though for mine own part I think that he sought
principally opportunity to teach, because the Jews were then more attentive
to learn.

7 And upon one day of the Sabbothes when the disciples were come together to
break bread, Paul disputed with them, being about to take his journey on the
morrow: and he prolonged his speech until midnight.

8 And there were many lights in an upper chamber, where they were gathered
together.

9 And a certain young man named Eutichus sitting in a window, being fallen
into a deep sleep, as Paul disputed long time, being more overcome with
sleep, he fell down from the third loft downward, and was taken up dead.

10 And when Paul came down, he fell upon him, and embracing him said, Be not
ye troubled, for his soul is in him.

11 And when he was gone up, and had broken bread and had eaten, having had
long conference until it was day, he departed.

12 And they brought the boy alive, and were not a little comforted.

13 But when we had taken ship, we loosed to Asson, thence to receive Paul,
for so had he appointed, being about to go by land.

7 And in one day. Either does he mean the first day of the week, which was
next after the Sabbath, or else some certain Sabbath. Which latter thing may
seem to me more probable: for this cause because that day was more fit for an
asse^bly, according to custom. But seeing it is no new matter for the
Evangelists to put, one, instead of the first, Mat. 26.1. Luke 24.1. Ioh. 20.1.
according to the custom of the Hebrew tongue, it shall very well agree, that on
the morrow after the Sabbath, they came together. Furthermore, it were too cold
to expound this of any day. For to what end is there mentioned of the Sabbath,
save only that he may note the opportunity and choice of the time? Also it is a
likely matter that Paul waited for the sabbath, that the day before his
departure, he might the more easily gather all the disciples into one place, And
the zeal of them al is worth the noting, in that it was no trouble to Paul to
teach until midnight, though he were ready to take his journey, neither were
the rest weary of learning. For he had no other cause to continue his speech so
long save only the desire and attentiuenes of his auditory.

To break bread. Though breaking of bread does sometimes signify among the
Hebrews a domestical banquet: yet do I expound the same of the holy supper in
this place, being moved with two reasons. For seeing we may easily gather by
that which follows, that there was no small multitude gathered together there:
it is unlikely that there could any supper be prepared in a private house.
Again Luke will afterward declare that Paul took bread, not at supper time, but
after midnight. Hereunto is added that, that he says not that he took meat
that he might eat. but that he might only taste. Therefore I think thus, that
they had appointed a solemn day for the celebrating of the holy supper of the
Lord among themselves, which might be commodious for them all. And to the end
Paul might remedy after a sort the silence of longer absence, he continues his
speech longer then he did commonly use to do. That which I spoke of the great
number of men is gathered thence, because there were many lights in the upper
chamber: which was not done for any pomp or ostentation, but only for
necessities sake. For when there is no need, it is ambition and vanity which
makes men bestow cost. Furthermore it was meet that all the whole place should
shine with lights least that holy company might be suspected of some wickedness
or dishonestie: add also another conjecture, if the chamber had bin emptye,
those which were present would not have suffered Eutichus to sit upon a window.
For it had bin filthy licenciousnes in despising the heavenly doctrine, to
depart aside into a widow, seeing there was room enough elsewhere.

9 When he was fallen into a deep sleep. I see no cause why some interpreters
should so sore and sharply conde^n the drousines of the young man, that they
should say that he was punished for his sluggishnes by death. For what marvel
is it, if seeing the night was so far spent, having striuen so long with
sleep, he yielded at length? And whereas against his will and otherwise then
he hoped for, he was taken and overcome with deep sleep, we may guess by
this that he did not settle himself to sleep. To seek out a fit place
wherein to sleep, had bin a sign of sluggishnes, but to be overcome with
sleep, sitting at a window, what other thing is it, but without fault to yield
to nature? As if a man should faint through hunger or too much wearisomnes.
Those who being drowned in earthly cares come unto the word lothsomly: those
who being full of meat and wine, are thereby brought on sleep: those who are
vigilant enough in other matters, but hear the word as though they did not
pass for it, shall be justly condemned for drousines: but Luke does in plain
words acquit Eutichus, when he says that he fell down, being overcome with
deep sleep after midnight.

Moreover, the Lord mea^t not only by the sleep, but also by the death of this
young man to awake and stir up the faith of his, that they might more joyfully
receive Paul his doctrine and might keep it deeply rooted in their minds. It
was in deed at the first no small temptation, but such as might have shaken
even a most constant man full sore, for who would have thought that Christ had
bin chief governor in that company, wherein a miserable man through a fall
became dead? Who would not rather have thought this to be a sign of Gods
curse? But the Lord by applying a remedy, does forthwith rid the minds of his
of all perturbation.

10 He lay down upon him. We know that the Apostles in working miracles did
sometimes use certain external rites, whereby they might give the glory to
God the author. And now whereas Paul does stretch himself upon the young
man, I think it was done to no other end, save only that he might more stir
up himself unto prayer. It is all one as if he should mix himself with the
dead man. And peradventure this was done for the imitation of Elizeus, of whom
the sacred history does report the same thing. Yet the vehemency of his
affection did more move him, that the emulation of the Prophet. For that
stretching of himself upon him, does more provoke him to crave his life with
all his heart, at the hands of the Lord. So when he embraces the body of
the dead man, by this gesture he declared that he offered it to God to be
quickened, and out of the text we may gather that he did not depart from
embracing it, until he knew that the life was restored again.

Be ye not troubled. We must note that Paul took great care principally for
this cause, least that sorrowful event should shake the faith of the godly,
and should trouble their minds. Nevertheless the Lord did as it were seal
up and establishe that last Sermon which Paul made at Troas, when he says,
that his soul is in him, he does not deny that he was dead, because by this
means he should extinguish the glory of the miracle: but the meaning of these
words is, that his life was restored through the grace of God. I do not
restrain that which follows, to wit, that they were greatly comforted unto
the joy which they had by reason of the young man which was restored to life:
but I do also comprehend the confirmation of faith, seeing God gave them such
an excellent testimony of his love,

13 When we had taken ship. It is uncertain why Paul did choose rather to
go by land: whether it were because sailing might be to him troublesome, or
that as he did pass by he might visit the brethren. I think that he did
then eschew the seas for his healthes sake. And his courtesy is greatly to be
commended, in that he spared his companions. For to what end did he suffer
them to depart, save only that he might ease them of the trouble? So that
we see that they did strive among them selves in courtesy and good turns. They
were ready and willing to do their duty: but Paul was so far from
requiring things streitly at their hands, that of his own accord and
courteously he did remit those duties which they were ready to do: yea
setting aside his own commodity, he comanded them to do that which was for
their comfort. It is well known that the city Asson is by the describers of
countries attributed to Troas. The same as Pliny does witness was called
Appolonia. They say that it was a free City of the Aetolianes.

14 And when we were come together at Asson, having received him we came to
Mitylenes.

15 And sailing thence the day following we came over against Chios: and on the
morrow we arrived at Samos, and having tarried at Trogyllium we came to Miletum.

16 For Paul purposed to sail beyond Ephesus, least he should spend the time
in Asia. For he made have if it were possible for him, to keep the day of
Pentecost at Jerusalem.

17 And having sent messengers from miletum to Ephesus, he called the Elders of
the Church.

18 Who when they were come to him, he said unto them, Ye know from the first
day wherein I entered into Asia, how I have bin with you at all seasons.

19 Serving the Lord with all humility of mind, and with many tears and
temptations, which happened to me by the laying in wait of the Jews.

20 So that I have kept nothing back which might be for your profit, but did
show to you and teach you publicly and through every house,

21 Testifiyng both to the Jews and Grecians the repentance which is toward
God, and the faith which is toward our Lord Jesus Christ.

16 For Paul purposed. It is not to be douted but that he had great and
weighty causes to make have: not that he made so great account of the day, but
because strangers did the^ use to come together to Jerusalem out of al
quarters. Forasmuch as he did hope that he might do some good in such a great
assembly, he would not foreslow the opportunity. Therefore let us know that the
worship of the law was not the cause that he made so great have: but he set
before his eyes the edifying of the church: partly that he might show to the
faithful that the kingdom of Christ was enlarged, partly that if there were
any as yet strangers from Christ, he might gain them: partly that he might
stop the mouths of the wicked. Notwithstanding we must note, that he did in
the mean season provide for other churches. For in se^ding for the elders of
Ephesus to Miletum, he shows that he did not neglect Asia. And whereas they
come together when they be called, it is not only a token of concord, but also
of modesty. For they were many: yet does it not irke them to obey one
Apostle of Christ, whom they knew to be endued with singular gifts.
Moreover it appears more plainly by the text, that those are called elders,
not which were gray headed, but such as were rulers of the Church. And it is an
usual thing almost in all tongues, that those be called elders and fathers, who
are appointed to govern others, though their age be not always according.

18 Ye know. Paul in this sermon stands principally upon this, that he may
exhort those pastors of Ephesus, by his own example, to do their duty
faithfully. For that is the true kind of censure, and by this means is
authority purchased to doctrine, when the teacher prescribes nothing, which he
himself has not done in deed before. And it was no unseemly thing for Paul to
speak of his virtues. There is nothing less tolerable in the servants of
Christ then ambyrion and vanity: but for as much as all men know full well what
modesty and humility was in the holy man, he needed not to fear least he
should incur the suspicion of vain boasting: especially seeing that being
enforced by necessity, he did declare his faithfulness and diligence that
other might take example thereby. He does in deed greatly extol his labors,
patience, fortitude, and other virtues, but to what end? Surely not that he
may purchase commendation at the hands of his auditory, but that this holy
exhortation may pearce more deeply, and may stick fast in their minds. He did
also shoot at another mark, that his integrity and uprightness in dealing,
might serve afterward to commend his doctrine. And he cites eye witnesses,
least he seem to speak of things unknown. I call those witnesses who did not
only know all things: but had also a judgment which was pure, and corrupt with
no affections.

19 Serving the Lord. He reckons up first not only in what straites he was,
but most of all his humility coupled with contempt of the world, and rebukes,
and other afflictions: as if he should say, that he was not honorably received
or with commendation: but he was conuersaunt among them under the contemptible
form of the cross. And this is no small trial, when we faint not, though we see
our selves trodden under foot by the intolerable pride of the world.

Notwithstanding we must note every thing more distinctly. To serve the Lord is
taken in this place, not for to woorship God in holiness and righteousness, which
is common to all the godly. But it does signify to execute a public
function. Therefore Paul does not speak of some one private man: but as one
made a minister of the Church. And so he does testify that he fulfilled the
Apostleship to him committed with humility and modesty: both because knowing
his own infirmity, he did mistrust himself: and also because considering the
excellency of his calling, he counted him self very unmeet: and lastly,
because he did willingly submit him self to bear the reproach of the Cross.
For this humility is set both against vain confidence, and also haughtiness.
Secondly, he touches his tears, which strifes, diverse assaults of Satan, the
rage of wicked men, the inward diseases of the Church, and offenses had made
him shed: at length he adds that he led a fearful life amiddest the
layinges in wait of the Jews: and he confesses that he was ^empted
therewith, as he was not hardened though he did not faint. For he is not
ashamed to confess his infirmity. His drift is, that those to whom he
speaks may not faint through like tribulations, and that being void of all
ambition, they may do their duty carefully and reverently. And that they
may not only with a pacient mind suffer them selves to be despised of men,
but that they may be cast down in them selves: because that man can never be
rightly framed to obey Christ, whose looks are lofty, and whose heart is
proud. And (as men cannot long bear a show of virtue) to the end it may
appear manifesty, that he behaved him self sincerely and from his heart, he
makes mention of his constancy which lasted three years, wherein he had still
kept one course. Ye know (says he) how I have behaved my self since the
first day until this time. To conclude, this is the true trial of the
servants of Christ, not to be changed as the times change: but to continue
like to themselves, and always to keep a straight course.

20 I have kept back nothing. He commends his faithfulness and diligence
in teaching in three respects, that he instructed his scholars thoroughly and
perfectly, so that he omitted nothing which might make for their salvation:
that being not content with general preaching, he did also endeavor to do
every man good. Thirdly, he recites a brief sum of all his whole doctrine,
that he exhorted them unto faith in Christ and repentance. Now for as much as
he depaynteth out unto us a pattern of a faithful and good Teacher: whosoever
they be who are desirous to prove their industry to the Lord, they must set
before their eyes the edifying of the Church: as he commands Timotheus in
another place, to consider what things be profitable, 1. Tim. 4.7.8.
that he may be instaunt in delivering those things. And surely the Scripture
(according to whose rule all manner of teaching must be examined, yea which is
the only method of teaching aright) does not contain profound speculations,
to delight men when they have nothing else to do; but as the same Paul does
testify, it is all profitable to make the man of God perfect. But Paul
prescribes such a desire to edify, that the Pastor must omit nothing, so
much as in him lies, which is profitable to be known. For they be bad
masters who do so keep their scholars in the first principles, 1. Tim.
3.17.
that they do never come unto the knowledge of the truth. And surely the
Lord does not teach us in his word only to halfes (as they say) but he
delivers perfect wisdom and such as is in all points absolute: whereby it
appears how impudently those men boast them selves to be ministers of the
word, who do not only cloak and foster the ignorance of the people with
their silence, but do also wink at gross errors and wicked superstitions:
as at this day in Papistrie, many send out some sparkles of sound doctrine,
but they dare not drive away the darkness of ignorance, and where as the
wicked fear of the flesh does hinder them, they pretend that the people is
not capable of sound doctrine.

Indeed I confess that all things cannot be taught at one time, and that we
must imitate Paul his wisdom, who did apply himself unto the capacity of the
ignorant. But what moderation is this when they suffer the blind to fall into
the ditch, when they leave miserable souls under the tyranny of Antichrist:
and whereas they see Idolatry rage, the worship of God corrupt, his Law
broken, and finally all (...) things profaned, they do either with silence
pass over such filthy confusion, or else they show it under hand sparingly
and obscurelie like men that be afraid? Therefore we must note Paul his word,
when as he says that he kept back nothing, but did show whatsoever things
were profitable for the people: for by this we gather that the pure and free
profession of sound doctrine is required at the hands of the servants of
Christ, wherein there must be no boughts nor crooks, and that nothing is more
unseemly in them than oblique insinuations, and such as are inwrapped in
crafty dissimulation.

Publikelie and through out every house. This is the second point, that he
did not only teach all men in the congregation, but also every one privately,
as every man's necessity did require. For Christ has not appointed Pastors
upon this condition, that they may only teach the Church in general in the
open pulpit: but that they may take charge of every particular sheep, that
they may bring back to the sheepefold those which wander and go astray, that
they may strengthen those which are discouraged and weak, that they may cure
the sick, Eze. 34.4.
that they may lift up and set on foot the feeble: for common doctrine will
oftentimes wax cold, unless it be helped with private admonitions.

Wherefore the negligence of those men is inexcuseable who having made one
Sermon, as if they had done their task live all the rest of their time idly:
as if their voice were shut up within the church walls, seeing that so soon as
they be departed thence they be dumb. Also disciples and scholars are taught,
that if they will be numbered in Christ's flock, they must give place to their
pastors, so often as they come unto them: and that they must not refuse
private admonitions. For they be rather Bears then sheep, who do not
vouchsafe to hear the voice of their pastor unless he be in the pulpit: and
cannot abide to be admonished and reproved at home, yea, do furiously refuse
that necessary duty.

21 Testifying both to Jews. Descending now unto the third point, he sets
down the sum of this doctrine in a few words, to wit, that he exhorted
all men unto faith and repentance, as it was said before, that, The Gospel
consists upon these two points only. Whence we do also gather, wherein the
true edifying of the Church, does properly consist, the care and burden
whereof does lie upon the Pastors shoulders, and whereunto we must apply
all our study, if we be desirous to profit profitably in Gods school. We
have already said, that the word of God is profaned, when the readers of the
same do occupy themselves in frivolous questions. But to the end we may not
read the same wanderingly, we must note and aim at this double mark which the
Apostle sets before us. For whosoever he be that turns unto any other
thing, in taking great pains, he shall do nothing else but walk in a
circuit. By the word Testify he expresses greater vehememencie, as if he
should have said that by ^^^ifying he did commend, that the excuse of
ignorance might not remain. For he alludeth unto the custom used in Courts:
where testifying is used to take away all doubt. As men are not only to be
taught, but also to be constrained, to embrace salvation in Christ, and to
addict themselves to God to lead a new life. And though he affirm that he
was wanting to none, yet does he place the Jews in the first place: because as
the Lord had preferred them in the degree of honor before the Gentiles, so it
was meet that Christ and his grace should be offered them until they should
quite fall away.

Repentance toward God. We must first note the distinction of faith and
Repentance, which some do falsely and unskillfully confound, saying that
repentance is a part of faith. I grant in deed that they cannot be separate:
because God does illuminate no man with the Spirit of faith, whom he does not
also regenerate unto newness of life. Yet they must needs be distinguished as
Paul does in this place. For Repentance is a turning unto God, when we frame
our selves and all our life to obey him: but faith is a receiving of the grace
offered us in Christ. For all religion tends to this end that embracing
holiness and righteousness, we serve the Lord purely, also that we seek no
part of our salvation any where else save only at his hands: and that we seek
salvation in Christ aloue. Therefore the doctrine of repentance contains a
rule of good life, it requires the denial of our selves, the mortifying of
our flesh, and meditating upon the heavenly life. But because we be all
naturally corrupt, strangers from righteousness, and turned away from God
himself: again, because we fly from God, because we know that he is
displeased with us: the means as well to obtain free reconciliation, as
newness of life must be set before us. Therefore unless fath be added, it is
in vain to speak of repentance: yea those teachers of repentance, who
neglecting faith, stand only upon the framing of life, and precepts of good
works, differ nothing or very little from profane Philosophers. They teach how
men must live, but forasmuch as they leave men in their nature, there can no
bettering be hoped for thence, until they inuit those who are lost unto hope
of salvation, until they quicken the dead, promising forgiveness of sins,
until they show that God does by his free adoption take those for his
children, who were before bonslaues of Satan, until they teach that the spirit
of regeneration must be begged at the hands of the heavenly father, that we
must draw godliness, righteousness, and goodness from him who is the fountain of
all good things. And herevppon follows calling upon God, which is the
chiefest thing in the woorship of God. We see now how that repentance and faith
are so linked together, that they cannot be separate. For it is faith which
reconcileth God to us, not only that he may be favorable unto us, by acquitting
us of the guiltines of death, by not imputing to us our sins: but also that
by purging the filthiness of our flesh by his spirit, he may fashion us
again after his own image. He does not therefore name repentance in the former
place, as if it did wholly go before faith, for as much as a part thereof
proceeds from faith, and is and effect thereof: but because the beginning of
repentance is a preparation unto faith. I call the d^sing of our selves the
beginning, which does enforce us, after we be thoroughly touched with the fear
of the wrath of God, to seek some remedy.

Faith toward Christ. It is not without cause that the scripture does every
where make Christ the mark whereat our faith must aim, and as they say
commonly, set him before us as the object. For the majesty of God is of it self
higher then that men can climb thereunto. Therefore unless Christ come between,
al our senses do vanish away in seeking God. Again, in as much as he is the
judge of the world, it must needs be that the beholding of him without
Christ, shall make us afraid. But God does not only represent himself unto us in
Christ his image: but also refresh us with his fatherly favor, and by all
means restore us to life. For there is no part of our salvation, which may not
be found in Christ. By the sacrifice of his death he has purged our sins: he
has suffered the punishment that he might acquit us: he has made us clean by
his blood: by his obedience he has appeased his fathers wrath: by his
resurrection he has purchased righteousness for us. No marvel therefore if we
said, that faith must be fixed in the beholding of Christ.

22 And behold I go now bound in the spirit to Jerusalem, not knowing what
things shall befall me there.

23 Save only that the holy Ghost does witness throughout every city, saying
that bonds and afflictions are prepared for me.

24 But I care not, neither is my life dear to me, that I may finishe my
course with joy, and the ministry which I have received of the Lord Jesus to
testify the Gospel of the grace of God.

25 And now behold I know that after this ye shall not see my face, al you
through whom I have gone preaching the kingdom of God.

26 Wherefore I take you to record this day, that I am clean from the blood
of all men.

27 For I have kept nothing back, but have showed you all the counsel of God.

22 And behold. He declares now more fully to what end he entreated of his
upright dealing: to wit, because they should never see him any more. And it was
very expedient, that the pattern which was set before them by God, of them to
be followed, should be always before their eyes, and that they should remember
him when he was dead. For we know how readily men degenerate from pure
institution. But thought he deny that he does know what shall befall him at
Jerusalem, yet because he was taught by many prophecies, that bo^ds were
prepared for him there as if he were now ready to die, he cutteth off shortly
after the hope of his return. And yet for all this he is not contrary to him
self. He speaks doubtfully at the first of set purpose, that he may
soften that which was about to be more hard and bitter: and yet he does truly
affirm, that he knew not as yet the ends and eue^ts of things: because he had
no certain and special revelation touching the whole process.

Bound in the spirit. Some expound this that he was bound to the churches, who
had committed to him this function to carry alms. Notwithstanding, I do
rather think, that hereby is meant the inward force and motion of the spirit:
not as though he were so inspired, that he was out of his wit: but because
being certified of the will of God, he did meekely follow the direction and
instinct of the spirit, even of his own accord. Therefore this speech
imports as much as if he should have said, I cannot otherwise do, unless
I would be stubborn and rebellious against God, who does as it were draw me
thither, being bound by his spirit. For to the end he may excuse himself of
rashness, he says that the spirit is the author and guide of his journey. But
would to God those brainsick men, who boast that the spirit does indite to
the^ those things which proceed from their own fantasy, did know the spirit as
familiarly as did Paul, who does notwithstanding not say that al his motions
and instigations are of the spirit, but declares that that fell out in one
thing as a singular thing. For men do oftentimes foolishly and unadvisedly take
in hand those things, which they put in practice afterward stoutly, because
they be ashamed of lightness and vnstabilitie. And he does not only mean that
he took in hand his journey for a good cause which the spirit of god shows
him: but that it is altogether necessary for him, because it is wickedness to
resist. Furthermore, let us learn by the example of the holy man, not to kick
against the spirit of the Lord, but obedie^tly to give over our selves by him
to be governed, that he may rule us at his pleasure after we be as it were
bound to him. For if the reprobate, who are the bo^d slaves of Satan be carried
not only willingly, but also greedily through his motion: how much more ought
this voluntary bondage, or service to be in the children of God?

23 But that the holy ghost. I do not understand this of secret oracles, but of
those foretellings, which he heard every where of the Prophets. And this speech
has greater dignity to set forth the prophecies, then if the men themselves,
which spoke, were called and cited to be witnesses. For by this means the word
of God has his authority, when we confess that the spirit of God is the
author thereof: though the ministers be me^. Now for as much as the same spirit
which foretells Paul of bonds and tribulations, does also hold him fast bound
that he cannot refuse to submit himself unto him, by this we learn that what
dangers so ever hang over our heads, we are not thereby acquitted, but that we
must obey the co^mandeme^ts of god, and follow his calling. In vain therefore do
those me^ flatter the^ selves, who will do good so long as they be free from
molestation, and may make disco^modities, damages and dangers of death
sufficient excuses. 24 I care not. All the godly must be so framed in their
minds, and chiefly the ministers of the word, that setti^g al things apart,
they make have to obey god. The life is indeed a more excellent gift, the^ that
it ought to be neglected: to wit, seeing we be therein created after the image of
god, to the end we may think upon yt blessed immortality which is laid up for
us in heaven: in which the lord does now by diverse testimonies and tokens show
himself to be our father.

But because it is ordained to be unto us as a race, we must alwa^ ^sten unto
the mark, and overcome all hindrances, least any thing binder or stay us in
our course. For it is a filthy thing for us to be so holden with a blind desire
to live, that we loose the causes of life for life it self: and this do the
words of Paul express. For he does not simply set light by his life: but he
does forget the respect thereof, that he may finish his course: that he may
fulfill the ministry which he has received of Christ: as if he should say that
he is not desirous to live, save only that he may satisfy the calling of God:
and that therefore it shall be no grief to him to loose his life, so that he
may come by death unto the goal of the function prescribed to him by God. And
we must note that which he says with joy, for his meaning is that this is
taken from the faithful by no sorrow or grief, but that they both live and die
to the Lord. For the joy of a good conscience is more deeply and surely laid
up, tha^ that it can be taken away by any external troble, or any sorrow of
the flesh: it triumphs more joyfully, than that it can be oppressed. Also we
must note the definition of his course: to wit, that it is the ministry
received of the Lord. Paul does in deed speak of himself: yet by his own
example he teaches that all those go astray who have not God to be the
governor of their course. Whereupon it follows that his calling is unto
every one of us a rule of good life. Neither can we be otherwise persuaded that
the Lord allows that which we do, unless our life be framed and ordered
according to his will, which certainty is required especially in the ministers
of the word, that they take nothing in hand unless they have Christ for their
author. Neither is it to be doubted but that Paul in giving his Apostleship
this mark (as he uses to do very often) does confirm the credit thereof. He
calls it the Gospel of the grace of God, of the effect or end,
notwithstanding this is a title of rare commendation, that by the gospel
salvation and the grace of god are brought unto us. For it is very expedient
for us to know that god is found there to be merciful and favorable.

25 And behold now I know. He does now utter that plainly which he had
insinuated covertly. And we said that he did put them out of hope of his
return, to the end he might more deeply imprint in their minds his
exhortations. For we know what great force the words and speeches of men have,
which are uttered at their departure or death. Also he would have them beware by
this forwarning, that they do not depend upon his presence, and so their faith
should faint through wearisomnes. The doctrine of the Gospel is called the
kingdom of God now again, which does begin the kingdom of god in this world,
by renewing men after the image of God, until it be made perfect at length in
the last resurrection.

26 Wherefore I take you to record. It is all one as if he had said, I call
you to witness, or I call you to bear witness before God and his Angels And
this does he not so much for his own cause as that he may prescribe unto them
their duty with greater authority. Furthermore this place contains a brief
sum of teaching rightly and well, and it exhorts the teachers themselves
vehemently and sharply, that they be diligent in their function. What order
must Pastors than keep in teaching? First ^et them not esteem at their
pleasure what is profitable to be uttered and what to be omitted: but let them
leave that to God alone to be ordered at his pleasure. So shall it come to pass
that the inventions of men shall have none entrance into the Church of God.
Again mortal man shall not be so bold as to mangle the scripture and to pull
it in pieces, that he may diminish this or that at his pleasure, that he may
obscure some thing, and suppress many things: but shall deliver whatsoever is
revealed in the scripture, though wisely and seasonablie for the edifying of
the people, yet plainly and without guile, as becomes a faithful and true
interpreter of God. I said that wisdom must be used: because we must always
have respect unto profit, so there be no subtlety used, wherein many take too
great delight, when as they turn and wrest the word of God unto their methods,
and forge to us a certain kind of Philosophy mixed of the Gospel and their
own inventions: Namely because this mixture is more delectable. Thence have we
freewill, thence the deserts of works, thence the denial of the providence and
free election of God. And that which we said eue^ now is to be noted, that the
counsel of god, whereof Paul makes mention, is included in his word, and that
it is to be sought no where else. For many things are kept from us in this
life, the perfect and full manifestation whereof is deferred until that day,
wherein we shall see God as he is with new eyes face to face. Therefore those
do set forth the will of God, who interpreat the scriptures faithfully, and out
of them instruct the people in the faith, in the fear of God, and in all
exercises of Godliness. And as we said of late, that those are condemned by this
sentence, 1. Cor. 13.12.
who disputing philosophicallie, least they should teach any thing which is
removed from the common sense of men, and therefore odious, do corrupt with
their leaven the purity of the scripture: so, both sharply and sore does Paul
thunder against them, who for fear of the cross and persecution do speak
only doubtfully and darkly.

I am clean from the blood. I do not doubt but that he had respect unto the
place of Ezechiel: Ezec. 3.18.20.
where God denounces that his prophet shall be guilty of the blood of the
wicked unless he exhort them unto repentance. For upon this condition does he
appoint pastors over his church, that if any thing perish through their
negligence an account may be required at their hands: yea, that unless they
show the way of salvation without guile and crookes, the destruction of those
who go astray may be imputed unto them. Those men must needs be wonderful dull
whom such a sharp threatening cannot awake. Wherefore the Epicurish impiety of
the popish clergy does the more bewray it self, where though they crake and
brag of their honorable titles, yet they think no more upon giving of an
account for so many souls which perish, than if there sat no judge in heaven,
neither is their ungodliness any whit less filthy before the whole world, in
that being given only to devour sheep, they usurp the name of Pastors.
Furthermore the Lord shows how dear souls be to him, seeing that he does so
sharply punish the Pastors sluggishnes, for their destruction: but we see what
small account many men make of their own salvation, for which even God himself
does vouchsafe to be careful.

28 Therefore take heed to your selves and to all the flock, wherein t^ (...)
ghost has made you overseers to govern the church of God, which he has
purchased with his blood.

29 For I know this, that after my departure grievous wolves will enter in among
you, not sparing the flock.

30 And of your own selves shall arise men, speaking perverse things, that
they may draw disciples after them.

31 For which cause watch ye, remembering that by the space of three years, I
ceased not night and day to warn every one of you with tears.

32 And now brethren I commend you to God and to the word of his grace, who
is able to build farther and to give you an inheritance among all those who are
sanctified.

28 Take heed therefore. He does now apply his speech unto them, and by many
reasons shows that they must watch diligently, and that he is not so careful,
but because necessity does so require. The first reason is, because they be
bound to the flock over which they be set. The second, because they were
called unto this function not by mortal man, but by the holy Ghost. The
third, because it is no small honor to govern the Church of God. The fourth,
because the Lord did declare by an evident testimony, what account he does make
of the church, seeing that he has redeemed it with his blood. As touching the
first, he does not only command them to take heed to the flock, but first
to themselves. For that man will never be careful for the salvation of other
men, who will neglect his own. And in vain shall that man prick forward
other to live godlily, who will himself show no desire of godliness. Yea
that man will not take pains with his flock, who forgets himself, seeing
he is a part of the flock. Therefore to the end, they may be careful for the
flock to them committed, Paul commands and warns, that every one of them
keep himself in the fear of God. For by this means it should come to pass
that every one should be as faithful toward his flock as he ought. For we
said that Paul reasons from their calling, that they be bound to take pains
in the church of God, whereof they have the government. As if he should say,
that they may not do whatsoever they like best, neither are they free, after
they be made pastors: but they be bound publicly to all the flock.

The holy Ghost has made you overseers. By the very word he puts them
in mind, that they be placed, as it were in a watch tower, that they may
watch for the common safety of all men. But Paul stands principally upon
this, that they were not appointed by men, but the charge of the Church was
committed unto them by God. For which cause they must be the more dilligent and
careful, because they must give a strait account before that high seat of
judgment. For the more excellent the dignity of that Lord and master whom we
serve, is, the more reverence do we give him naturally, and the reverence it
self does sharpen our study and diligence.

Moreover, though the Lord would have ministers of the word chose^ from ^he
beginning by the voices of men, yet does he always challe^ge the government of
the church to himself, not only to the end we may acknowledge him to be the
only governor thereof, but also know that the vnco^parable treasure of
salvation, does come from him alone. For he is robbed of his glory if we
think that the gospel is brought unto us, either by chance, or by the will of
me^, or their industry. But this does Paul attribute peculiarly to the spirit,
by who^ God does govern his church, and who is to every man a secret witness of
his calling, in his own conscience. Concerning the word Ouerseer, or Bishop,
we must briefly note this, that Paul calls all the elders of Ephesus by this
name, as well one as other. Whence we gather, that according to the use of the
scripture, Bishops differ nothing from Elders But that it came to pass through
vice and corruption, that those who were chief in every city, began to be
called Bishops. I call it corruption, not because it is evil that some one man
should be chief in every college or company: but because this boldness is
intolerable, when men by wresting the names of the scripture unto their
custom, doubt not to change the tongue of the holy ghost.

To govern the Church. The Greek word Poiemainein does signify to feed.
But by a fit similitude it is translated unto every kind of government. And
we have said that this is the third argument drawn from the excellency of
the function: as the same Paul tells Timotheus elsewhere, that he take heed
and see how he ought to behave him self in the house of God, which is the
church of the living God, the pillar and ground of truth. As if he should say,
that there is no time to be idle in such a weighty calling, and that those are
less excusable, who^ God has made stewards of his family, the higher that
degree of honor is, unless they be correspondent to so great dignity, that is,
unless they do their duty diligently Now if Bishops or overseers be made by the
holy ghost, to the end they may feed the church, the Hierarchy of papistry is
ridiculous, wherein bishops being proud of their painted sheath and vain title,
do not so much as once meddle with the function of teaching, no not for
fashions sake.

Which he has purchased. The 4. reason whereby Paul does carefully prick
forward the pastors to do their duty diligently, because the lord has given no
small pledge of his love toward the church, in shedding his own blood for it.
Whereby it appears how precious it is to him: and surely there is nothing which
ought more vehemently to urge pastors to do their duty ioifully, then if they
consider, that the price of the blood of Christ is committed to the^. For
herevpo^ it follows, that unless they take pains faithfully in the church, the
lost souls are not only imputed to the^, but they be also guilty of
sacrilege, because they have profaned the holy blood of the son of God, and
have made the redemption gotten by him to be of none effect, so much as in
them lies. And this is a most cruel offense, if through our sluggishnes the
death of Christ do not only become vile or base, but the fruit thereof be also
abolished and perish: and it is said that god has purchased the church, to the
end we may know that he would have it remain wholly to himself, because it is
meet and right that he possess those who^ he has redeemed.

Notwithstanding we must also remember, that all mankind are the bondslaues of
Satan, until Christ set us free from his tyranny, gathering us into the
inheritance of his father. But because the speech which Paul uses seems to
be somewhat hard, we must see in what sense he says that God purchased the
Church with his blood. For nothing is more absurd, than to faigne or imagine
God to be mortal or to have a body. But in this speech he commends the
unity of person in Christ: for because there be distinct natures in Christ,
the scripture does sometimes recite that apart by it self which is proper to
either. But when it sets god before us made manifest in the flesh, it does
not separate the human nature from the godhead. Notwithstanding because again
two natures are so united in Christ, that they make one person, that is
improperly translated sometimes unto the one, which does truly and in deed
belong to the other, as in this place Paul does attribute blood to God: because
the man Jesus Christ who shed his blood for us, was also God. This manner of
speaking is called of the old writers communicatio idiomatum, because the
property of the one nature is applied to the other. And I said that by this
means is manifestly expressed one person of Christ: least we imagine him to be
double, which Nestorius did in times past attempt, and yet for all this we must
not imagine a confusion of the two natures, which Eutiches went about to bring
in: or which the Spanish dog Seruetus has at this time invented, who makes
the godhead of Christ nothing else but a form or image of the humain nature,
which he dreameth to have always shined in God.

29 For I know. Paul does now exhort the Ephesians to watch diligenly, by the
necessity which is a most sharp prick. For he says that grievous wolves are
ready to invade the sheepefold. This is a thing always incident to the Church
to be hated of wolves. Wherefore there is no time to sleep. But the more and
the more hurtful those be who break in, the more watchful must the Pastors
be. For God does sometimes release some part of trouble, that the flock may be
fed quietly and peaceably: and as when the weather is fair and clear the
sheep are fed more safely in the fields, and there is more danger when the
air is cloudy and dark: so the Church of God has sometimes some fair weather
granted to it, after that comes a troublesome time, which is more fit for the
subtlety of the wolves. Therefore Paul does mean, that it stands them upon
to be more watchful than they have bin hitherto, because greater dangers hang
over their heads. But the question is how Paul knew this. First we need not
doubt of this, but that his presence was of great force to drive away wolves,
and no marvel if the power of the spirit which shines in the ministers of
Christ do bridle the wicked so, that they dare not utter their poison: yea if
that heavenly light do drive away much darkness of Satan. Therefore seeing that
Paul did know that the malice of satan was kept under for a time by his
industry, he does easily foretell what will happen after his departure, though it
be likely he was certified by the lord through the spirit of prophecy, that
others might be admonished by him, as we see it came to pass. Howsoever it be,
so often as faithful Pastors go away, let us learn that we must beware of
wolves; whom they can hardly drive from the sheepcoates though they watch most
narrowly.

30 Of your own selves shall arise. This amplifieth the grieuousnesse of the
evil, because there be some wolves within, and so hiding themselves under the
title of Pastors, do wait for some opportunity wherein they may do hurt.
Also he declares what danger these wolves do threaten, to wit, the scattering
abroad of the flock: when the Church is drawn away from the unity of faith,
and is divided into sects. Neither are all those wolves who do not their
duty as they ought: but there be oftentimes hyrelings a kind of men not so
hurtful as the other. But the corruption of doctrine is a most deadly plague
to the sheep. Now in the third place the fountain and beginning of this evil
is noted: because they will draw disciples after them. Therefore ambition is the
mother of all heresies. For the synceritie of the word of God does then
flourish, when the Pastors join hand in hand to bring disciples unto Christ:
because this alone is the sound state of the Church, that he be heard alone:
wherefore both the doctrine of salvation must needs be perverted, and also the
safety of the flock must needs go to naught, where men be desirous of
mastership. And as this place teaches that almost all corruptions of doctrine
flow from the pride of men: so we learn again out of the same that it cannot
otherwise be, but that ambitious men will turn away from right purity, and
corrupt the word of God. For seeing that the pure and sincere handling of the
scripture tends to this end, that Christ alone may have the pre-eminence: and
that men can challenge nothing to themselves, but they shall take so much from
the glory of Christ: it follows that those are corrupters of sound doctrine,
who are addicted to themselves and study to advance their own glory, which does
only darken Christ. John. 7.18.
Which thing the Lord himself does confirm in the seventh of John.
Furtheremore by the word Arise which he uses, he signifies that those wolves
do nourish secreat destruction, until they may have some opportunity offered
to break out. And this place does very well prevent an horrible stumbling
block and offense which Satan has always cast in to trouble weak
consciences. If external and professed enemies do resist the Gospel, this
does not so much hurt to the Church, as if inward enemies issue out of the
bosom of the Church which at a sudden blow to the field, or which
unfaithfully provoke the people to fall away: and yet God has from the
beginning exercised his Church with this temptation, and now does exercise it.
Wherefore let our faith be fortified with this defense, that it fail not, if
at any time it so fall out that Pastors begin to rage like wolves. He says
they shall be grievous wolves that he may the more terrify them: secondly they
shall be authors of wicked opinions, and that to the end they may draw
disciples after them: because it cannot almost otherwise be but that ambition
will corrupt the purity of the Gospel. By this it appears also how frivolous
and vain the brag of the Papists is, touching their continual succession.
For seeing we ca^ easily show that these horned beasts are nothing less than
that which they will be thought to be: being always convict, they fly unto
this fortress, that they succeed the Apostles by a continual course. As if
these did not also succeed the^, of who^ Paul wills to take heed. Therefore
seeing that god, either to prove the constancy of his, or in his just
judgment does oftentimes suffer wolves to rage under the person of Pastors:
the authority does not consist in the name and place alone: neither is
succession any thing worth, unless faith and integrity be joined
therewithal. But and if the Papists object, that they cannot be called wolves,
one word of Paul shall be as a touchstone to prove whether this be so or no:
that they may (says he) draw Disciples after them. And to what end tends
all popish religion save only that men's lust and pleasure may reign in steed
of Gods word? But Christ has no Disciples, where he is not counted the
only master.

31 For which cause watch. Paul does again exhort them unto diligence by his
own example: though he does join therewithal fear of danger: as if he
should say, that they have need of great attention to beware: and that it is an
unseemly thing that they should be wearied, who have seen his singular
patience by the space of three years. Also he speaks of his tears which did
add no small efficacy to his exhortations. Whereas he says that he admonished
every one, it may be referred as well unto the common people as unto the elders.
For because he was determined to speak such things as should be common to the
whole church, he speaks as if the whole body were present. Nevertheless if
any had rather rastrain it unto the order of the pastors: the meaning shall
be this, that their studies must be kindled not only with this speech which
he now makes, but that it is meet that they remember those often exhortations
which he did continually beat in by the space of three years, and that with
many tears. Yet it seems to me to be more likely that he speaks of all in
general.

32 I commend you to God. He uses a prayer, which in an oration serving to
move the hearers greatly, ought not to be counted absurd. For he did not pass
for dividing his Sermon into parts as the Rhetoricians use to do: seeing no
words were sufficient to express the vehemency of the affections wherewith
he was inflamed. He had entreated already of great matters and weighty, which
did far exceed man's ability.

Therefore he turns himself unto prayer, and by little and little draws toward
an end of his speech: though it be rather an expressing of a desire, then a
direct prayer. As if he should have said, that they be unable to bear so great
a burden: but he does wish to them new help from heaven, whereto they may
trust and overcome all temptations. And it is not to be doubted, though he
speak unto the pastors alone, but that he does also comprehend the whole
church. First he commends the^ to God. Secondly to the word of his grace.
Notwithstanding it is all one commendation: but Paul meant to express the
means whereby the Lord does defend the salvation of his, which (as Peter
says) is kept by faith: 1. Pet. 1.5.
and the means of this keeping depends upon the word least it come in
hazard amidst so many dangers. And it is very expedient for us to know how God
will keep us. For because his majesty is hid from us, until he come unto us
by his word, we look too and fro being in doubt.

Therefore so soon as he receives us to be kept, he makes his word the
instrument to keep our salvation, in which sense he adds the adiunct, Grace
(for the Genetiue case after the manner of the Hebrews does signify an effect)
to the end the faithful might the more safely rest in the word, where God does
show forth his favor. This exposition is plain and apt: for whereas some
understand it of Christ, it is too much rackt.

Who is able to build farther. The participle dunamenos, is to be referred unto
God, not unto his word. And this consolation is added for this cause least they
faint through the feeling of their infirmities. For so long as we be inuironned
with the infirmities of the flesh, we be like to an house whose foundation is
laid. All the godly must be grounded in deed in Christ, but their faith is
far from being perfect. Yea though the foundation continue stable and sure, yet
some parts of the building be like to fall and quail. Wherefore there is great
need both of continual building, and also now and then new props and stays be
necessary. Nevertheless Paul says that we must not faint, because the Lord will
not leave his work unfinished: Phil. 1.6. Psalm. 138.8.
as he does likewise teach in the first chapter to the Philippians, He which
has begun a good work in you, will perform it until the day of the Lord.
Whereto that of the Psalm answers, thou will not forsake the work of our
hands. That which is added immediately concerning the inheritance of life,
appertains unto the very inioying of life. So soon as Christ has appeared
to us, we pass in deed from death to life: and faith is an entrance into the
kingdom of heaven: neither is the Spirit of adoption given to us in vain: but
Paul promises in this place to the faithful, a continual increase of grace,
until they see the possession of the inheritance whereunto they have been
called, which is now laid up for them in heaven. He calls it the power of god
not as we use to imagine it without effect, but which is commonly called
actual. For the faithful must so lay hold upon it, that they may have it
ready like to a shield or buckler to hold up against all assaults of Satan.
As the Scripture does teach that we have aid enough in the power of God: so
let us remember that none are strong in the Lord save those who aba^doning all
hope and confidence of their own freewill, trust and lean to him, who, as
Paul says very well, is able to build farther.

33 I have desired no man's silver or gold or raiment.

34 Yea, ye your selves know how that these hands have ministered to my
necessity, and to those which are with me.

35 I have showed you all things, that so laboring you must receive the weak,
and remember the words of the Lord Jesus: because he said, It is a blessed
thing rather to give then to take.

36 And when he had thus spoken, he kneeled down and prayed with them all.

37 And there arose great weeping among them all: and falling upon Paul his
neck, they kissed him,

38 Sorrowing most for the words which he spoke that they should see his face
no more. And they brought him to the ship.

33 I have not. As he showed of late what an hurtful plague ambition is. So now
he shows that they must beware of covetousness: and he makes himself an
example again, even in this point, that he did cover no man's goods: but did
rather get his living with the work of his hands. Not that it was sufficient to
find him without some help: but because in applying his handiworke he spared
the churches, that he might not be too chargeable to them, so much as in him
lay. We must note that he does not only deny that he did take any thing
violently, as hungry fellows do importunately wring out preyes oftentimes,
but also he affirms that he was clean from all wicked desire. Whence we
gather that no man can be a good minister of the word, but he must also
contemn money. And surely we see that nothing is more common, than that those
corrupt the word of God to win the favor of men, who are altogether
filthily given to get gain. Which vice Paul does sharply condemn in Bishops,
elsewhere. 1. Tim. 3.3.


34 Yea, ye know. He does not in these words precisely set down a Law which
all the ministers of the word must needs keep: for he did not behave himself
so loftily and lordlike, Mat. 10.10 1. Co. 9.14. Galat. 6.6. 1. Tim. 5.17.
Phil. 4.10.16. 2. Cor. 11.8.
that he did take that away which the Lord had granted to his servants, but
does rather in many places maintain their right, which is, that they be
maintained with that which is common. Whereunto belongs that, that he
suffered many Churches to minister unto him food and raiment. Neither did he
only freely receive wages for the work which he did in any place, of those
who were there: but when he was in necessity at Corinthus, he says that he
robbed other Churches to relieve his poverty. Therefore he does not simply
command Pastors to maintain their life with their handywork: but immediately
after he declares how far forth he exhorts them to follow his example. Those
men of Corinthus did not deny him that which was due to him: but seeing that
the false Apostles did boast that they did their work freely, and gate thereby
praise among the people: Paul would not be behind them in this point, nor give
them any occasion to accuse him falsely: as he himself affirms. 1. Cor. 9.
1. Cor. 9.15, 1. Cor. 11.10.
and 2. Cor. 11. Therefore he warns that there be no stumbling block laid
in the way of the weak, and that their faith be not overthrown. For to
receive the weak imports as much as somewhat to bear with their rudeness
and simpleness, as it is Romans 14. Romans 14.1.


And to remember. We reed this sentence in no place word for word: but the
Evangelists have other not much unlike this, out of which Paul might gather
this. Again we know that all the sayings of Christ were not written. And he
repeateth that general doctrine of the contempt of money. Whereof this is a
true token when a man is more bent to give then to take. Neither did Christ
speak only politikelie, as if those who are liberal, are therefore blessed,
because they bind other men unto them with their benefits, and it is a kind
of bondage to owe any thing: but he had respect unto an higher thing, because
he which gives to the poor, Prou. 19.17
lends unto the Lord: that those be faithful and good stewardes of God, who
impart to their brethren some of that plenty which they have lent them: that
men draw nearer unto God in nothing then in liberality. We do also read
these titles of liberality in profane Authors: and a good part of the world
confess that these things are true, but they consent (as it is in the proverb)
with Asses ears. For the common life does show how few be persuaded that
nothing ought more to be wished, then that we bestow our goods to help our
brethren. For which cause the Disciples of Christ must more studiously think
upon this felicity, that abstaining so much as in them lies, from that which
is an other man's, they accustom themselves to give. And yet they must not do
this with an hawty heart, as if it were a miserable thing for them to be in any
man's danger: either through ambition, that they may bind other men to them:
but only that they may exercise themselves willingly in the duties of love:
and by this means make known the grace of their Adoption.

36 And kneeling down. The inward affection is in deed the chiefest thing in
prayer: yet the external signs, as kneeling, uncovering of the head, lifting
up of the hands, have a double use: the first is, that we exercise all our
members to the glory and worship of God: secondly that by this exercise our
sluggishnes may be awaked as it were. There is also a third use in solemn and
public prayer, because the children of God do by this means make profession
of their godliness, and one of them does provoke another unto the reverence of
God. And as the lifting up of the hands is a token of boldness and of an
earnest desire, so to testify our humility we fall down upon our knees. But
he seals up and concludes that sermon which he made before with prayer:
because we can hope for no profit of our doctrine save only from the blessing
of God. Wherefore if we be desirous to do any good by teaching, admonishing and
exhorting, let us always end after this sort: to wit, with prayer.

37 Great weeping. No marvel if all the godly did entirely love this holy man.
For it had been a point of too gross unthankfulness to despice him who^ the
Lord had so beautified with so many excellent gifts. And the chief cause of
their weeping was, as Luke notes, because they should see him no more. For
they did bewail their own condition, and the condition of all the whole
church of Asia not in vain, which they saw to be deprived of an inestimable
treasure. And when the Spirit comme^deth their tears by the mouth of Luke, as
witnesses of sincere godliness, he condemns the rashness of those who require
at the hands of the faithful hard and cruel constancy. For that is false
whereof they dream that those affections proceed only of corruption, which we
have naturally from God. Wherefore the perfection of the faithful consists
not in this, that they put off all affections: but that they be moved therewith
only for just causes, and that they moderate the same.

CHAP. XXI.
1 AND when it came to pass that we had loosed being pulled away from them,
we came with a straight course to Choos, and the next day to the Rhodes, and
thence to Patara.

2 And when we had gotten a ship, which sailed over to Phenice, when we were
entered into it we lanched.

3 And when Cyprus began to appear to us, leaving it on the left hand, we
sailed into Syria, and came to Tyrus: for here the ship did unload her
burden.

4 And when we had found disciples, we staid there seven days: who said to
Paul by the Spirit that he should not go up to Jerusalem.

5 And when the days were ended, we departed and went our way, and they all
with their wives and children accompanied us, until we were out of the city:
and when we had kneeled down upon the shore, we prayed.

6 And when we had taken our leave one of another, we went up into the ship:
and they returned home.

1 Luke reckons up briefly the course of his sailing: and that not only to
win credit to the history, that we may know what was done in every place,
but that the Readers may weigh with themselves the invincible and heroical
fortitude which was in Paul, who had rather be tossed and troubled with such
long, vnleauell, and troublesome iourneies, that he might serve Christ, then
provide for his own quietness. Whereas he says that they were drawn and
pulled away, it is not simply referred unto the distance of places: but because
the brethren stood on the shore, so long as they could see the ship wherein
Paul and his companions were carried. He names the havens where the ship
arrived for this cause, that we may know that they sailed quietly without
trouble of tempest. Let us search the describers of countries touching the
situation of the cities whereof he makes mention, it is sufficient for me to
show Luke his purpose.

4 And when they had found disciples. Though the number of the faithful was
but small, yet there came some seed of the gospel thither, according to the
prophesies of the prophets, least Tyrus should be altogether void of the
blessing of God. And here as in other places going before, Esai. 23.18.
Luke calls christians disciples, that we may know that those alone are
numbered in the flock of Christ, who have embraced his doctrine by faith. For
that is a vain and false profession for a man to give his name to Christ, and
not to understand what he teaches or speaks. And let the Readers mark, that
Paul stayed seven days at Tyrus for no other cause, saving that he might
strengthen them. So that we see, that whither soever he came, he foreslowed no
occasion to do good.

They said by the spirit. Namely with the approbation of speech, that Paul
might know that they spoke by the Spirit of prophecy. Surely this was no small
temptation, to cause him not to finish the journey which he had taken in hand,
seeing the holy ghost did disuade him from the same. And this was a very fair
color to fly from the cross, if he had cared for his own safety, to be
drawn back as it were with the hand of God. Notwithstanding he cease not to
hold on thither whither he knew he was called by the Lord. Notwithstanding
here arises a question, how the brethren can disuade him by the Spirit from
doing that, which Paul did testify he does by the secret motion of the same
spirit? Is the Spirit contrary to himself, that he does now loose Paul whom he
held bound inwardly? I answer that there be diverse gifts of the Spirit: so
that it is no marvel if those who excel in the gift of prophecy be some
times destitute of judgment or strength. The Lord showed to these brethren of
whom Luke makes mention, what should come to pass: yet nevertheless they
know not what is expedient and what Paul his calling does require, because the
measure of their gift does not reach so far. And the Lord would have his
servant admonished of purpose, partly that through long meditation he might be
better furnished and prepared to suffer whatsoever should come, partly that
his constancy might more plainly appear, when as being certified by
prophesies of the doleful event, he does notwithstanding wittingly and
willlingly make have to endure whatsoever things shall befall him.

5 With their wives and children. This was no small testimony of love, in that
they accompanied Paul out of the city with their wives and children: which
thing Luke does report, partly that he might commend their godliness according
as it deserved: partly that he might declare that Paul had that honor given
him which was due to him. Whence we do also gather, that he meant nothing
less, then to provide for his own commodity, seeing that he was not kept
back with so great good will, which was a pleasant bait to entice him to stay.
And we must also note the solemn custom of praying in weightier affairs,
and that being certified by God of the danger, they are more stirred up to pray.

7 And when we had finished our course, from Tyrus we came down to
Ptolomais: and after that we had saluted the brethren, we aboade with them
one day.

8 And on the morrow we which were with Paul, departed and came to Cesarea. And
entering into the house of Philip the Evangelist, which was one of the seven we
abode with him.

9 And this man had four daughters virgins which did prophecy.

10 And when we abode many days, there came a certain prophet from Jury named
Agabus.

11 When he was come to us, he took Paul his girdle, and binding his own
feet and hands, he said: Thus says the holy ghost, The man which owes this
girdle, shall the Jews thus bind at Jerusalem, and shall deliver him into the
hands of the Gentiles.

12 And when we had heard these things, both we and also the rest which were of
that place requested him, that he would not go up to Jerusalem.

13 Then Paul answered and said, What do you weeping and afflicting my heart?
I truly am ready not to be bound only, but also to die at Jerusalem for the
name of the Lord Jesus.

14 And when he would not be persuaded, we were quiet, saying, The will of the
Lord be done.

7 Luke does briefly declare that Paul was also received at Ptolomais by the
brethren. This is a city of Phenicia, standing upon the sea coast, not far
from the borders of Judea, from which Paul and his companions had no long
journey to Cesarea. But if the readers be disposed to know farther touching
the situation of regions, let them resort unto the describers of places and
countries. Furthermore he says, that when he came to Cesarea, they lodged with
Philip, whom he calls an Evangelist. Though he were one of the seven deacons,
Chapter 6.5.
as we may see in the sixte chapter. By this we may easily gather, that that
Deaconshippe was an office which continued but for a time; because it had not
otherwise been lawful for Philip to forsake Jerusalem, and to go to Cesarea.
And in this place he is set before us not as a voluntary forsaker of his
office, but as one to whom a greater and more excellent charge was committed.
The Evangelists in my judgment were in the midst between Apostles and
docters. For it was a function next to the Apostles, to preach the Gospel in
all places, and not to have any certain place of abode: only the degree of
honor was inferior. For when Paul describes the order of the Church, he does
so put them after the Apostles that he shows that they have more roomth
given them where they may teach, than the Pastors, Ephesians. 4.11.
who are tied to certain places. Therefore Philip did for a time exercise the
office of a Deacon at Jerusalem: whom the Church thought afterward to be a
meet man, to whom the treasure of the Gospel should be committed.

9 Four daughters. This is added for the commendation of Philip: not only
that we might know that his house was well ordered, but also that it was famous
and excellent through the blessing of God. For assuredly it was no small gift
to have four daughters, all endewed with the spirit of prophecy.

By this means the Lord meant to bewtifie the first beginnings of the Gospel,
when he raised up men and women, to foretell things to com. Prophesies had
now almost ceased many years among the Jews to the end they might be more
attentive and desirous to hear the new voice of the Gospel. Therefore seeing
that prophesiyng which was in a manner quite ceased, does now after long time
return again, it was a token of a more perfect state. Notwithstanding it
seems that the same was the reason why it ceased shortly after: for God did
support the old people with diverse foretellings, until Christ should make an
end of all prophesies. Therefore it was meet that the new kingdom of
Christ should be thus furnished and beautified with this furniture that all
men might know that that promised visitation of the Lord was present: and it
was also expedient that it should last but for a short time least the
faithful should always wait for some farther thing, or least that curious
wits might have occasion given to seek or invent some new thing ever now and
then. For we know that when that ability and skill was taken away, there were
notwithstanding many brainsicke fellows, who did boast that they were
prophets, and also it may be that the frowardnes of men did deprive the Church
of this gift. But that one cause ought to be sufficient, in that God by taking
away prophecies, did testify that the end and perfection was present in
Christ: and it is uncertain how these maids did execute the office of
prophesying: saving that the spirit of God did so guide and govern them, that
he did not overthrow the order which he himself set down. And for as much as
he does not suffer women to bear any public office in the church, it is to be
thought that they did prophecy at home, or in some private place without the
common assembly.

10 A certain Prophet. Though Luke does not plainly express the same, yet do
I coniect that this Agabus was the same of whom mention is made in the xi.
chapter, who foretold that there should be famine under the reign of Claudius
Caesar. Sap. 11.28.
And whenas Luke calls him a prophet as of late he called the four daughters
of Philip, he signifies that it was not a common but a peculiar gift. Now we
must see to what end the persecution which was at hand was now again showed by
Agabus. As concerning Paul he was sufficiently told already. Therefore I do
not doubt but that this confirmation was added for other men's sake: because the
Lord meant every where to make known the bonds of his servant partly that they
might know that he entered the combat willingly partly that they might perceive
that he was appointed of god to be a cha^pion to fight for the gospel. It was
surely a profitable example of invincible constancy, seeing that he offered
himself willingly and wittingly to the violence of the adversaries: and no
less profitable is it for us at this day, that his apostleship should be
confirmed with this voluntary and no less constant giving over of his life.

The man who owes this girdle. It was an usual thing among the prophets to
represen^ those things which they spoke by signs: Ies. 20.2.
neither did they confirm their prophesies by using signs, through their own
motion, but at the commandment of the spirit: Ier. 27.2. and 32.7. Ez. 12.5.
as when Isaias is commanded to go barefoot. Jeremy to put a yoke upon his
neck, to sell the possession and to buy it: and Ezechiel to dig through the
wall of his house privily, and in the same night to carry forth burdens.
These and such like might seem to the common sort to be toies: but the same
spirit who did apply signs to his words, did inwardly touch the hearts of
the godly, as if they had bin brought to the very thing it self. So this
spectacle mentioned by Luke, did no less move Paul his companions, then if
they had seen him bound in deed. The false prophets did afterward assay to
delude the simple by this policy, as Satan is in a manner Gods ape: and his
ministers do envy the servants of God. Zedechias made himself horns,
wherewith he promised Syria should be pushed. Ananias by breaking Ieremies
yoke, put the people in a vain hope of deliverance, GOD has suffered the
reprobate to be deluded with such delusions, that he might punish their
unbelief.

But forasmuch as there was in them no force of the Spirit, their vanity did
no whit hurt the faithful. This is also worthy to be noted, that Agabus does
not set before their eyes a dumb spectacle, but he coupleth therewith the
word, whereby he may show to the faithful the use and end of the ceremony.

12 Both we. Because they had not al one revelation, it is no marvel if their
judgments were diverse. For seeing these holy men knew, that there consisted
much in the life or death of one man, they would not have him to come in danger
rashly. And their desire is worthy praise, in that they desired to provide for
the common safety of the church, by keeping back Paul. But on the otherside
Paul his constancy deserves so much the more praise, when as he continues so
steadfast in the calling of god. For he was not ignorant what great trouble he
should suffer, by reason of his bands. But because he knows the will of God,
which was his only rule in taking counsel, he makes no account of all other
things, that he may follow it. And assuredly we must be so subject to the
will and pleasure of God, that no profit, no kind of reason may remove us from
obeying him. When Paul does reprehend the brethren, because they afflict his
heart with weeping, he does sufficiently declare that he was not hardened, but
that he was brought unto some feeling and suffering together with them.
Therefore the tears of the godly did wound his heart: but that softness did
not turn him out of the way, but that he proceeded to follow God with a
straight course. Therefore we must use such courtesy toward our brethren, that
the beck or will of God have always the upper hand. Now Paul does again
declare by his answer, that the servants of Christ cannot be prepared to do
their duty, unless they despice death: and that none can ever be well
encouraged to live to the Lord, but those who will willingly lay down their
lives for the testimony of the truth.

14 We ceased saying. If they had thought that he run rashly unto death, they
would not have ceased so. Therefore they yield least they resist the holy
Spirit, whereby they understand that Paul is governed: for that which they had
heard before by the mouth of Paul, that he was drawn as it were by the bands
of the Spirit, was quite out of their heads by reason of the sorrow which they
had conceived: but when they be taught again that it was the will of God that
it should be so, they think it unlawful for them to resist any longer: and
with this bridle must al our affections be kept in, that nothing be so bitter,
or doleful, or hard which the will of God may not mittigate and mollify. For
so often as any thing which is hard or sharp does fall out, we give God
small honor, unless this cogitation prevail with us, that we must obey him.

15 And after these days, having taken up our burdens we went up to Jerusalem.

16 And there came together with us certain of the Disciples from Cesarea,
bringing with them one Mnason of Cyprus, an old disciple, with whom we should
lodge,

17 And when we were come unto Jerusalem, the brethren received us gladly.

18 And on the morrow Paul went in with us unto James and all the Elders were
present.

19 Whom after we had saluted, he told by order all things which God had done
among the Gentiles by his ministry.

20 But when they had heard, they glorified the Lord: and said to him, Thou
see brother how many thousand Jews there be which believe, and they all are
earnest followers of the law.

21 And it has been told them concerning thee, that thou teach all the
Jews which are among the Gentiles to forsake Moses, saying, that they must
not circumcise their children, nor live according to the customs,

22 What is it then? The multitude must needs come together: for they shall
hear that thou art come.

23 Therefore do this which we say to thee: we have four men which have a vow
upon them.

24 Them take and purify thy self with them, and do cost on them that they
may shave their heads, and that all men may know that those things which they
have heard concerning thee are nothing: but that thou thy self also walk an
keep the law.

25 And as concerning those which among the Gentiles have believed, we have
written, decreeing, that they observe no such thing, but that they keep
themselves from things offered to Idols, and from blood, and from that which is
strangled, and from fornication.

15 When we had taken up our burdens. Paul his companions declare, that when
they went about to call back Paul from danger, they did rather care for the
common safety of the church, then every man for his own life. For after they
had taken the repulse they do not refuse to take part with him in the same
danger: and yet this was a plausible excuse that they were bound by no law to
be halled to suffer death, through one man's stubbornnes. And this is truly to
bring our affections in subjection to God, when we are terrified with no fear,
but every one of us indeuoureth so much as he is able, to further that which we
know does please him. Also it appears more plainly, what great ferue^tnes of
godliness was in the rest, who of their own accord accompany him, and bring
him an host: whereas notwithstanding they might well have feared many
discommodities.

17 They received us gladly. Luke recites this therefore that he may set
forth the equity of the brethren, who did not credit rumors and false
reports. Though many envious and wicked men did daily one after another
endeavor to bring Paul in contempt: yet because James and his fellows in
office were well persuaded of his uprightness, they were not estranged from
him. Therefore they receive him now courteously and brotherly as a servant of
Christ, and declare that he is welcome. This moderation must we observe
diligently, that we be not too hastye to believe wicked reports: efpecially
when those who have given some testimony of their honesty, and who^ we have
tried to serve God faithfully, are burdened with crimes unknown to us or else
doubtful: because Satan knows that nothing is more fit to lay waste the
kingdom of Christ, then discord and disagreeme^t among the faithful: he
ceasseth not to spread abroad false speeches, which may cause one to suspect
another. Therefore we must shut our ears against false reports, that we may
believe nothing concerning the faithful ministers of the word, but that which
we know to be true.

18 All the Elders were present. We may gather that out of this place, which we
had already in the fifteenth chapter. So often as any weighty business was to be
handeled, the Elders were wont to come together, to the end the co^sultatio^
might be more quiet without the multitude. We shall see anon, that the people
were likewise admitted in their order: yet after that the elders had had their
secret co^sultation among themselves.

19 And now Paul shows his modesty when he does not make him self the Author
of those things which he had done: but giving the praise to God, does call
himself only the minister, whose industry God had used. As we must grant,
that whatsoever thing is excellent and worthy praise, it is not done by our
own power, but for as much as GOD does work in us: and especially touching
the edifying of the church. Again, it appears how far off the elders were
from envy, when they glorify God for the joyful success. But because mention
is made of no other Apostle besides James, we may coniect that they were gone
into diverse places to spread abroad and preach the Gospel, as their calling
did require. For the Lord had not appointed them to stay still at Jerusalem: but
after they had made a beginning there, he commands them to go into Judea and
other parts of the world. Moreover, the error of those men, who think that
James was one of the disciples who^ Paul numbreth among the three pillars of
the church, is refuted before in the fifteenth chapter. And though the same
commandment was given to him which was given to the rest of his fellows in
office: yet I do not doubt but that they did so divide them selves, that James
stood still at Jerusalem, whither many strangers were wont daily to resort. For
that was all one as if he had preached the Gospel far and wide in strange
places.

Thou see brother how many thousands. This Oration or speech has two
members. For first the Elders say, that so many of the Jews as were converted,
seeing they be earnest folowers of the law, are evil affected toward Paul,
because they think that he indeuoureth with might and main to abolishe the
law. Secondly, they exhort him that making a solemn vow he purge himself,
that he may not be had in suspicion any longer. They object to Paul the
multitude of believers, that he may the more willingly yield to them. For if
they had been a few stubborn fellows, he would not have bin so much moved.
But now he may not neglect both much people, and the whole body of the Church.

Undoubtedly that zeal of the law which was in them was corrupt: and assuredly
eue^ the very elders declare sufficiently that they like it not. For though they
do not condemn it openly, neither sharply complain of the same, yet because
they separat themselves from their affection, they secretly confess that they
err. If it had been a zeal according to knowledge it ought to have begun at
them: but they contend not for the law it self, neither do they pretend the due
reverence thereof, neither do they subscribe to those who are earnest followers
of it. Therefore they both signify that they are of another mind, and also
that they do not allow the superstition of the people. Notwithstanding, it is
objected, that they say that Paul was burdened with a false report or
slander. Again, when they require at his hands satisfaction, they seem to
nourish that zeal. I answer, that though that were a true report in some
respect wherewith the Jews were offended, yet was it mixed with a slander.
Paul did so teach the abrogating of the law, that notwithstanding by this
means the authority thereof did not only continue sound and perfect, but it was
more holy. For as we said in the 7. chapter, the ceremonies should be vain,
unless the effect thereof had been showed in Christ. Therefore those who say
that they were abolished by the coming of Christ, are so far from being
blasphemous against the law, that they rather confirm the truth thereof. We
must consider two things in ceremonies: the truth, whereto is annexed the
efficacy: secondly, the external use. Furthermore, the abrogating of the
external use, which Christ brought depends hereupon, in that he is the sound
body, and that nothing was shadowed in times past, which is not fulfilled in
him. This diffreth much from the falling away from the law, to show the true
end thereof, that the figures may have an end, and that the spiritual truth
thereof may always be in force. Wherefore we see that they were malicious and
unjust interpreters, who laid Apostacy to Paul his charge, though he did call
away the faithful from the external woorshippe of the Law. And whereas they
command Paul to make a vow to that end, that he may prove himself to be a
keeper of the law, it tends to no other end, saving that he may testify
that he does not detest the Law like a wicked Apostata, who did himself shake
off the Lords yoke, and move others unto the like rebellion.

That they ought not to circumcise. It was so indeed. For Paul taught that
both Jews and Gentiles were set at liberty. For these sentences are general
with him. ^. Cor. 7.19.
Circumcision is nothing. Again, we be circumcised by Baptism in Christ, Col.
2.11.16
not with circumcision made with hands. Again, let no man judge you in meat
or drink, or in choice of feasts, which are shadows of things to come: ^.
Cor. 10.25.
but the body is in Christ. Again, whatsoever comes into the shambles, and
whatsoever is set before you, that eat, asking no question for conscience
sake. Again, Be not inwrapped again in the yoke of bondage. Seeing that he
spoke thus every where without exception, Gal. 5.1.
he freed the Jews from the necessity^ of keeping the Law.

And least I stand too long upon this, one place shall be sufficien^ where he
compares the law to a Tutor, under which the old church was, as in the
childhood thereof. But now knowing the grace of Christ it is grown up, that
it may be fre from ceremonies, in that place he speaks vndoutedlie both of the
Jews and Gentiles. Also when he says, Gal. 2.14.
that the handwriting of the law, which did consist in decrees, is blotted out
and nailed to the cross by Christ, he sets free the Jews as well as the
Gentiles from the ceremonies, which he calls in that place decrees. But
seeing that he did not precisely reiecte ceremonies, in teaching that the
coming of Christ did make an end of the observing thereof: that was no
reuolting, as the envious Jews thought it to be. Neither were the Elders
ignorant of Paul his liberty. Therefore seeing they understand the matter very
well, their meaning is to have this alone made known to the rude and
unskillful, that Paul meant nothing less, then to persuade the Jews to
contemn the law. Therefore they behold not the bare matter, but knowing what
the common sort thought of Paul by reason of the reports, which went about
concerning him, they seek to cure the same. Though I wot not whether this were
more importunate then equal, which they required at Paul his hands. And by this
it appears how preposterous the cruelty of men is in receiving false reports
and how fast a false opinion once rashly received, does stick. It is certain
that James and his fellows in office did endeavor to maintain and defend Paul
his good report, and to put away those lies which did hurt his estimation: yet
let them do what they can, they will speak evil of Paul. Unless
peradventure they were too slack in the beginning, that they might gratify
their country men: so that they were not their own men afterward.

22 The multitude must needs come together. The verb is a verb neuter, as if
they should say, the multitude must of necessity com together. For it had been
an absurd thing that an apostle of such rare report should not come before the
whole multitude of the faithful. For if he had eschewed the light and sight
of people, the sinister suspicion might have been increased. Nevertheless we
see how modestly the Elders behaved themselves in nourishing concord, when as
they prevent the offense of the people in time, saving that they bear too much
peradventure with their infirmity, in requiring a vow of Paul. But this
moderation must be kept in the church, that the pastors be in great
authority, and yet that they rule not proudly as Lords, neither despice the
rest of the body. For the distinction of orders, which is the bond of peace,
ought not to be any cause of discention.

23 Do that which we say to thee. The Elders seem (as I said even now) to be
fallen unto a foolish pa^pering through too much love of their nation. But the
manifest judgment of that thing depends upon the circumstances, which are
hid from us at this day: yet they knew the^ well. The whole body almost did
consist upon Jews, so that they needed not to fear the offending of the
Gentiles. For in other regions this was the cause of departure, because every
man was wedded to his own custom, and would prescribe a law to others.
Furthermore they had at Jerusalem many things which might provoke them to keep
the ceremonies of the law, so that they had a greater excuse, if they did more
slowly forsake them. And though their zeal were not void of fault, yet as it was
an hard matter to reform it, so it could not be don at a sudden. We see how
this superstition was scarce in long time pulled from the apostles: and because
new disciples came daily unto the faith, the infirmity was nourished in all
together. And yet notwithstanding we must not deny but that ignorance was
coupled with obstinacy, which the Elders did nevertheless tolerate, least
they should do more hurt by using violent remedies. I leave it indifferent
whether they did pass measure or no.

Having a vow upon them. Though these four be reckoned among the faithful, yet
their vow was superstitious. Whereby it appears that the apostles had much
trouble in that nation, which was not only hardened in the worship of the law
through long use: but was also naturally malipart, and almost intractable.
Though it may be that these men were as yet but nouices: and therefore their
faith was yet but slender and scarce well framed, wherefore the doctors did
suffer them to perform the vow which they had unadvisedly made. As touching
Paul, because he made this vow not moved thereunto by his own conscience, but
for their sakes, with whose error he did bear, the case stood otherwise with
him. Notwithstanding we must see, Sap. 18.18.
whether this were one of the indifferent ceremonies, which the faithful might
omit or keep at their pleasure. It seems indeed to have in it certain things,
which did not agree with the profession of faith. But because the end thereof
was thanksgiving (as we said before in the 18. cha.) and there was nothing in
the rite it self repugnant to the faith of Christ: 1. Cor. 9.20.
Paul did not dout to descend thus far, to make his religion known. Therefore
Paul did that which he says of himself elswher: because he made himself a
co^panio^ of those which followed the law, as if he him self were in subjection
to the law. Finally he was made all things to all me^, that he might win all:
to wit, even unto the altars, so that he might pollute himself with no
sacrilege under a color of love. It had not bin so lawful for him to go unto
the solemn sacrifice of satisfaction. But as for this part of the worship of
God, which consisted in a vow, he might do it indifferently: so it were not
done for religions sake, but only to support the week. But it was neither his
intent to worship God with this rite, neither was his conscience tied, but he
did freley submit himself to his weak brethren.

24 Which they have heard of thee are nothing. They seem to persuade Paul to
dissemble. For the rumor rose not upon nothing, that he did call away the Jews
from the ceremonies, and that he did not walk in observing the law. But we must
remember that which I said even now, that it was sufficient for Paul and the
Elders, if they could remove the slander which was unjustly raised, to wit,
that he was a revolt from the law: and there might a better opportunity be
offered shortly, that in purging himself he might call them back by little
and little from their error. Neither was it good or profitable that Paull
should be counted an obseruer of the law any long time, as the disciples were
then commonly: for by this means a thick veil should have been put before
their eyes, to darken the light of Christ.

Wherefore let us know that Paul did not dissemble, but sincerely profess, that
he did not hate the law: but that he did rather think reverently of it. They
will him to bestow cost together with them, because they were wont to put their
money together, that they might offer sacrifice together.

25 And as concerning those which have believed. They add this, least they be
thought to go about to take away or call back that liberty which they had
granted to the gentiles, so that they may be burdened with some prejudice.
But in the mean season they seem to keep the Jews in bondage, from which they
set free the gentiles alone in plain words. I answer, forasmuch as the estate
of al was like, like liberty was granted to both. But there is mention made of
the Jews, who were so addicted to their observations and ceremonies, that they
would not take to themselves, that liberty which they might well challenge. But
the Apostles did by name provide for the gentiles, lest the Jews after their
wo^ted custom, should reject them as profane and unclean, because they were
neither circumcised, neither nousled up in the worship of the law. Moreover,
least I lade the paper with a superfluous repetition, let the readers repair
unto the 15. chapt. Chapter 15.22.
where they shall find those things which appertain unto the exposition of
this decree.

26 Then when Paul had taken the men, on the morrow being purified with the^,
he entered into the temple, declaring the fulfilling of the days of
purification until an offering might be offered for every one of them.

27 And when the seven days were now almost ended, certain Jews of Asia,
when they saw him in the Temple, moved the people, and laid hands on him.

28 Crying, Men of Israel help: this is that man, which teaches al men every
where against the people, and the law, and this place. Moreover, he has also
brought Grecians into the Temple, and has defiled this holy place.

29 For they had seen Trophimus an Ephesian in the city with him, whom they
thought Paul had brought into the Temple.

30 And all the whole city was moved, and the people ran together, and when
they had caught Paul, they drew him out of the temple: and by and by the doors
were shut.

26 Whereas some accuse Paul of subtletie, as if he did play the Hypocrite,
I have before refuted this. Yet I do not deny but that he granted to do thus
much at the request of the brethren, being thereunto in a manner enforced.
Therefore it has more color, and is (as they say) more disputable, that he was
too easily entreated; and too ready to obey: and yet I do not admit that which
some men say, that it went not well with Paul, because taking upon him a new and
unwonted person, he did not so constantly as he was wont maintain the liberty
purchased by Christ. I confess indeed that God does oftentimes punish
foolish purposes with unhappy success: but I see not why this should be
applied to Paul, who through volu^tary subjection sought to win the favor of
the rude and such as were not thoroughly instructed, that he might do them
good: being about to do that, not willingly, but because he had rather yield
to the brethren, the^ stick to his own judgment Furthermore, when he was once
admitted, he might fitly have passed over to moderate that zeal. His courtesy
does rather deserve great praise, in that he does not only gently abase himself
for the unskillful peoples sake: but does also obey their foolishnes, who did
unworthily, and against reason suspect him. He might well have reproved the^,
because they had bin so ready to believe reports contrary to his estimation. In
that he abstaineth, he shows great patience: in that he wins their favor
so carefully, it is singular modesty. Moreover, he might have been more rough
and round with James and his fellows in office, because they had not bin more
diligent to root out errors from among the people. For though it be certain
that they taught faithfully: yet it may be that the sight of the temple, and
the very fear of the law did hinder them in defending the use of liberty.
But Paul whether he went from his right of his own accord, or whether he think
that they see better what is expedient, then he, does follow their counsel. And
whereas false Nicodemites following this example of Paul, go about to color
their treacherous dissimulation, whiles they pollute themselves with all
filthiness of popery, it needs no long refutation. They boast that they do
this to win the weak brethren, or that they follow their vein thus far, as
if Paul did yield to them in all things without choice. If being Jews they
should take upon them according to the prescript of the law, to fulfill among
the Jews a vow infect with no idolatry, then might they prove themselves to
be like Paul. Now for as much as they inwrappe themselves in gross and
altogether wicked superstitions, and that because they will escape the cross,
what likelihood is that which they imagine?

27 The Jews which came from Asia. It is certain that these men were enemies
to the name of Christ and of Christians, so that whiles Paul is bent to pacify
the faithful, he incurreth the rage of the enemies. Those of Asia are in deed
the raisers of the tumult* but the minds of all the peopeople were so corrupt
with the hatred of him, that they al became partners in the fury. But this
place teaches, that we must not take it impaciently, if at any time our hope
be frustrate, and our counsels which we have taken with a right and holy
affection fall not out well, that our actions may have an happy end. We must
attempt nothing, but with a good conscience and according to the Spirit of
God. But and if things come not to pass as we would even then, let that
inward feeling uphold us, that we know that God allows our desire, though it
be laid open to the reproaches and mockes of men: neither let it repent us of
our gentleness, if at any time the wicked reward us otherwise than we deserve.

28 Men of Israel, Help. They cry out as if they were in extreme danger, and
they call upon all men to help them, as if all religion were in hazard.
Whereby we see with what furious hatred they were inflamed against Paul, only
because in showing that the full and perfect truth is found in Christ, he
taught that the figures of the Law had an end. Now whereas they conceive a
false opinion having seen Trophymus, they do more bewray by this headlong
lightness how venomous they be. They accuse Paul of sacrilege. Why? because he
brought into the Temple a man which was uncircumcised. But they laid a most
cruel crime to the charge of an innocent through a false opinion. Thus the
boldness of those men uses commonly to be preposterous, who are carried away
with an opinion conceived before. But let us learn by such examples to beware
of the distemperature of affections, and not to let light preiudices have the
rain, least we run headlong upon the innocent, being carried with blind
force.

30 And the City was moved. We see in this place the vanity of the common
people, which count Paul a condemned man before ever they hear him. Whereas
the city is moved about godliness, it is no marvel: but this is a point of
perverse zeal and mad rashness, in that they set themselves against Paul
before they know his matter. For in this corruption of nature, frowardnes is
joined with foolishnes: so that those will readily of their own accord make
haste to maintain an evil cause, who can hardly be moved with many
exhortations to do well. This is a hard case, that the whole world should be
armed against us at a sudden through the persuasion of a few: but seeing it
pleases the Lord it should be so, let every one of us prepare himself by
this and such like examples to suffer all manner assaults and to bear and
abide albrunts.

31 And as they sought to kill him, it was told the captain of the band, that
all Jerusalem was on an uproar.

32 Who took with him streightway soldiars and under captains, and ran
down unto them. But they when they saw the chief captain and the soldiars,
left smiting of Paul.

33 Then the chief captain drew near, and took him, and commanded him to be
bound with two chains, and he asked what he was, and what he had done.

34 And some cried one thing and some another, among the people. And when he
could not know the truth by reason of the tumult, he commanded him to be
carried into the camp.

35 And when he came to the stairs, it happened that he was carried of the
soldiars, because of the violence of the multitude.

36 For the multitude of people followed crying, Away with him.

37 And when Paul began to be carried into the camp, he says to the captain,
May I speak to thee? who said can thou speak Greek?

38 Art not thou that Egyptian, which before these days made an uproar, and
leddest into the wilderness four thousand men, which were murderers?

39 And Paul said, I verily am a man which am a Jew, borne in Tharsus, a
citizen of no vile City of Cilicia. But I beseech thee suffer me to speak to
the people.

40 And when he had given him leave, Paul standing upon the stairs, beckoned
with the hand unto the people, and when there was made great silence, he spoke
in the Hebrew tongue, saying.

31 As they sought to kill him. Assuredly the force of satan appears therein,
in that he drives the people headlong into such rage, that when they have shut
the doares of the Temple, being not content with mean punishment, they
conspire to put Paul to death. We must thus think with our selves, that
Satan does prick forward the enemies of godliness, least their rage how
cruel and troublesome so ever it be, trouble us. On the otherside appears
the wonderful goodness of God, when as he raises up the chief captain at a
sudden, that he may deliver Paul from death. He himself thought upon no such
thing, but he came to appease the tumult which was raised among the people: but
the Lord shows a more evident token of his providence, because Paul his life
was delivered from such present danger without man's counsel. Thus does he
suffer the faithful not only to labor, but to be almost oppressed, that he may
deliver them from death more wonderfully. Luke calls him the chief captain
of the band improperly, seeing every chief captain was set over a thousand:
which does also appear by the text, where he says that the chief captain
took with him vndercaptaines.

32 And when they saw the chief captain. Those whose fury neither the
majesty of God, ne yet the reverence of the temple could once stay, begin to
relent when they see a profane man. Whereby it appears that theye were set on
fire rather with barbarous cruelty than zeal. Now whereas the chief
captain binds Paul with chains, he declares thereby sufficiently that he
came not to ease him. The unbelievers would attribute this to fortune: but the
Spirit has depainted out unto us the providence of God as in a table reigning
amidst the confused vprores of men. And though this be very hard that this holy
minister of God is so shamefully handled: yet the equity of the chief
captain is to be commended, if he be compared with the Jews. He binds
him with chains, as if he were some evil doer or some wicked person: yet does
he vouchsafe to hear him when he is bound, whom they did beat unmercifully:
neither does he determine to handle him hardly before he knew his cause. Yea
this was the best way to mitigate their cruelty, because they thought that Paul
should be punished immediately.

34 Some cried one thing and some another. The madness of the raging people,
does bewray it self on every side. They make horrible outcries, whereof one is
contrary to another. Nevertheless they desire with one consent to have him put
to death, who was convict of no offense. In the mean season we need not doubt
but that they were blinded with a color of holy zeal: but the truth of the
cause well known, makes me^ truly zealous, as it makes them true martyrs of
God: but rage bewraieth devilish madness. Whereas mention is made in this place
of the camp or fortress, we must know that the soldiars which were placed to
guard the City, had a place which was trenched and fortified on every side,
which they might defend as if it were a castle, and from which they might beat
back all assaults if any sedition were raised. For it had not been good for
them to have been dispearsed here and there in diverse Innes, seeing the people
were treacherous, and the City troublesome. And we gather by this that the
place was high, because Luke says, that when they came to the steps, Paul was
carried of the soldiers. And whether the soldiers did lift up Paul on high that
they might bring him safe to the station or camp, or he was thus tossed with the
violence of the crowde, this was no duty of favor. But the greater the
cruelty of those which followed him was, God did more plainly declare that he
was favorable to his servant in sparing his life, least if he should have
been murdered in the tumult, his death should have wanted due fruit.

37 May I speak unto thee. Paul offered himself to defend his cause which all
the servant of God must do. For we must do our endeavor to make our
integrity known to all men least through our infamy the name of God be
blasphemed. But when the chief captain demands whether Paul be not that
Egyptia^ which was a murderer, which a little before had led away a company
of men, let us learn that how modestly and quietly soever the ministers of
Christ, behave themselves, and howesoeuer they be void of all fault, yet
cannot they escape the reproaches and slanders of the world. Which thing we
must note for this cause, that we may acquaint our selves with rebukes: and
that in well dooyng we may be prepared too be evil spoken of. When he
asks him concerning the Egyptian, he means not Theudas the sorcerer, as
some men falsely suppose: of whom Gamaliel made mention before in the fifth
Chapter, Chapter 5.37.
and of whom Josephus speaks more in his twentieth of antiquities. For
besides that we read there that Theudas carried away only four hundred
men, and the chief Captain reckons up in this place four thousand, and
says that they were all murderers: that is more, in that Theudas raised that
faction during the reign of Tiberius or Augustus Caesar, whereof remained
only an obscure report: because so soon as a troop of horsemen was sent
after them, they were forthwith destroyed. Notwithstanding it seems to me
that Josephus is deceived in that where he says first that Cuspius Fadus was
sent by Claudius, and then he adds that Theudas was of him overcome: seeing I
have before showed that that former insurrection was made at such time as
Claudius was but a private man.

Though he disagree much with Lukes narration even in the number, seeing he
says that there were about thirty thousand made partners in the sedition:
unless happily we expound it thus, that after he was put to flight by Felix,
he fled into the wilderness with four thousand. And it had bin an absurd
thing that the number should be made ten times greater, as also that a troop
having no skill in war or being altogether without courage should have been
defamed with the name of murderers. For as Josephus does witness, that
seducer had deceived the simple and credulous common people with false
promises, boasting that he was a prophet of God which would lead the people dry
foot through the midst of Iordane. But the same Josephus puts the matter
out of doubt, when he says that an Egiptian a prophet did gather together a
band of men, under Foelix the president and did carry them into mount Oliuet:
whereof four hundred were slain, two hundred taken, and the residue
dispearsed. The history was fresh in memory. Again, forasmuch as the author
of the sedition was escaped: and the region filled with murderers, it is not
without cause that the chief captain demands of Paul, when he sees all
men so hate him, whether he were that Egiptian. Luke records no longer
conference had between the chief captain and Paul: yet it is likely,
forasmuch as both of them understood the Greek tongue, that they had farther
talk Whereby it came to pass, that so soon as Paul had well purged himself, he
had license granted him to speak to the people. For the chief captain would
never have suffered a wicked man to make any publik speech in a city, which
was so sore suspected.

CHAP. XXII.
1 MEN, Brethren and fathers, hear mine excuse which I make now before you.

2 And when they heard that he spoke to them in the Hebrew tongue, they kept
the more silence. And he said,

3 I truly am a man a Jew, borne in Tharsus a city of Cilicia, and brought
up in this city at the feet of Gamaliel, and taught according to the perfect
manner of the Law of the fathers, and was zealous toward God as ye all are
this day:

4 And I persecuted this way unto death, binding and delivering into prison
both men and women:

5 As the chief priest does bear me witness, and all the order of Elders. Of
whom also I received letters unto the brethren, and went to Damascus, to bring
them which were there, bound to Jerusalem that they might be punished.

2 Though we may guess by the beginning of this speech, what was Paul his
drift: yet because he was interrupted, we know not certainly what he was
about to say. The sum of that part which is resited is this, that, Forasmuch
as he was well and faithfully instructed in the doctrine of the Law, he was a
godly and religious worshiper of God in the sight of the world. Secondly that
he was an enemy to the Gospel of Christ, so that he was counted among the
priests one of the principal maintainers and defenders of the Law. Thirdly
that he did not change his sect unadvisedly: but that being tamed and convict
by an Oracle from heaven, he gave his name to Christ. Fourthly that he did not
embrace unknown things, but that God appointed him a faithful teacher, of whom
he learned al things perfectly. Lastly that when he was returned to Jerusalem,
and sought to do good to his countrymen, God did not permit him. So that he
brought not the doctrine of salvation unto foreign nations without good
consideration, or because he hated his own nation, but being commanded by God
so to do.

Men, Brethren and fathers. It is a wonder that he gives so great honor yet
to the desperate enemies of the Gospel: for they had broken al bond of
brotherly fellowship, and by oppressing the glory of God, had spoiled
themselves of all titles of dignity. But because Paul speaks in this place
as some one of the people, he speaks so lovingly unto the body it self, and
uses toward the heads words honorable, without dissembling: and surely
because their casting off was not made known as yet, though they were
unworthy of any honor, yet it was meet that Paul should reverently
acknowledge in them the grace of Gods adoption. Therefore in that he calls
them Brethren and Fathers, he does not so much regard what they have deserved,
as into what degree of honor God had exalted them. And all his Oration is so
framed, that he goes about to satisfy them freely in deed and without
flattering, yet humbly and meekely. Therefore let us learn so to reverence
and honor men, that we impair not Gods right. For which cause the Popes
pride is the more detestable, who seeing he has made himself an high Priest
without the commandment of God, and the consent of the Church: he does not
only challenge to himself all titles of honor, but also such tyranny that
he goes about to bring Christ in subjection, as if when God does exalt men,
he did resign up his right and authority to them, and did stoop down to
them.

2 That he spoke Hebrew. This is in deed an usual thing, that when men which
speak diverse languages are together, we hear those more willingly who speak
our own language: but the Jews were moved with an other peculiar cause,
because they imagined that Paul was offended with his own kindred, so that he
did even hate their tongue, or that he was some roge which had not so much as
learned the speech of that nation whereof he said he came. Now so soon as
they heard their own language, they begin to have some better hope.
Furthermore it is uncertain whether Paul spoke in the Hebrew or in the Syrian
tongue: for we know that the speech of the Jews was corrupt and degenerate
after their exile, for as much as they had much from the Chaldeans and Syrians.
For mine own part I think, that because he spoke as well to the common sort
as unto the Elders, he used the common speech which was at that day usual.

3 I am a Jew. As all things were out of order at that day among the Jews,
many roges and vagabounds, to the end they might have some shroud for their
wickedness, did falsely boast that they were Jews. Therefore to the end
Paul may acquit himself of this suspicion, he begins at his birth: that
done he declares that he was known in Jerusalem, because he was brought up
there of a child: though this latter thing seems to be spoken not only for
certainties sake: but because it skilled much that this should also be known,
how well he had bin instructed.

There is nothing more bold to cause trouble than unlearned men. And at that
day the government of the Church was so decayed, that religion was not only
subject to sects, but also miserably mangled and torn in pieces. Therefore
Paul names his master least any man may think that he had not been nousled
up in learning, and therefore had he forsaken the worship of the fathers. As
many men who are not trained up in learning, forget their nature and grow out
of kind. But Paul says chiefly that he was well taught in the Law, that the
Jews may understand, that it was not through ignorance (as it falls out
oftentimes) that he causes such ado, and does counterfaite their monsters.

Chap. 5.34.
It is to be doubted whether this be that Gamaliel of whom mention is made
before. Scholars are said to sit at their masters feet: because forasmuch as
they be not as yet of strong and sound judgment, they must bring such
modesty and aptness to be taught, that they must make all their senses
subject to their masters, and must depend upon their mouth. So Marie is said
to sit at Jesus his feet, Luke 10.39.
when she gives ear to his doctrine. But and if such reverence be dew to
earthly masters, how much more ought we to prostrate our selves before the
feet of Christ, that we may give ear to him when he teaches us out of his
heavenly throne? This speech does also put boys and young men in
remembrance of their duty, that they be not stout nor stubberne, or that
they be not puffed nor lifted up against their masters through some foolish
confidence, but that they suffer themselves quietly and gently to be framed by
them.

Taught in the Law of the Fathers. The old interpreter does translate it
word for word, Taught according to the truth of the Fathers Law: saving
that (...) is rather a perfect way than truth. Notwithstanding the question
is, What he means by this perfect way, seeing all of them had one and the
same form of the Law. He seems to me to distinguish that purer form of
knowledge wherein he had been trained up, from the common instruction, which
did more disagree with the true and natural meaning of the Law. And although
the Law of the Lord was then corrupt by many additions even among the best
Docters: yet because religion was altogether there corrupt among many; Paul
does for good causes boast that he was both well and also diligently
instructed in the Law of the Fathers: or (which is all one) Exactly or
perfectly, least any man should think, that he had forgotten only some small
smattering, as if he were one of the common sort.

But because many who are well taught, are notwithstanding full stufte with
Epicurish contempt of God, he declares that he was zealous toward God: as
if he should say that the serious study of godliness was annexed to
doctrine, so that he meant not to dally in holy things, as profane men do
of set purpose confound all things.

But because this his zeal was altogether rash, he makes himself like to the
other Jews for that time. Notwithstanding this may be taken in good part, that
he did long ago no less worship god from his heart then they did then.

4 I persecuted this way. This is the second point, that he was an enemy to
Christ his doctrine: and that he was more fervent in resisting the same then
all the rest, until he was pulled back by the hand of God: which thing he
says the chief Priest and Elders can testify. Therefore there can be no
suspicion in such a sudden change. Whereas he says, that he had letters
given him to deliver to the brethren, it must be referred unto the Jews, as
if he had called them his country men: but he meant to appease them with a
more honorable title. For this is Paul his drifte, that he may declare his
natural and lawefull beginning which he took of that nation: and also how
desirous he was to be linked with them in friendship.

6 And it happened that as I iourneyed and drew near to Damascus about noone,
that suddenly a great light shone round ahout me from Heaven.

7 And I fell to the ground, and heard a voice saying to me, Saul, Saul, why
persecutest thou me?

8 And I answered, who art thou Lord? And he said to me, I am Jesus of Nazareth
whom thou persecutest.

9 And they which werewith me saw indeed the light, and were afraid, but they
heard not the voice of him which talked with me.

10 Then I said, what shall I do Lord? And the Lord said to me, Arise,
and go to Damascus, and there it shall be told thee, what things be
ordained for thee to do.

11 And when I saw not by reason of the glory of the light, being led by the
hand by those companions which were with me, I came to Damascus.

6 And it happened. Because this history was expounded more at large in the
ninth Chapter, I will only briefly touch those things which were there
spoken. But this is peculiar to this present place, that Paul reckons up his
circumstances, that by them he may prove that he was converted by God. And
this is the third member of the Sermon: otherwise this change should have
been thought to have proceeded of inconstancy, or rashness, or else it
should not have been void of some infamy. For nothing is more intolerable
than to start aside from the course of godliness which men have once entered:
and also not to do that which they are commanded to do. Therefore least any
man might suspect Paul his conversion, he proves by many miracles which he
brings to light, that God was the author thereof. In the night season there
appear oftentimes lightnings, which come of the hoate exhalations of the
earth: but this was more strange, that about noone a sudden light did not
only appear, but did also compass him about like a lightening, so that
through fear thereof he fell from his horse, and lay prostrate upon the
ground. Another miracle, in that he hard a voice from heaven: another, in that
his companions heard it not as well as he. Also there follow other things, that
after that he was sent to Damascus the event is correspondent to the oracle:
because Ananias comes to meet him. Also in that his sight is restored to him
in a moment.

I fell to the earth. As Paul was puffed up with Pharisaical pride, it was meet
that he should be afflicted and thrown down, that he might hear Christ his
voice. He would not have despiced God openly, neither durst he refuse the
heavenly oracle: yet his mind should never have been framed unto the obedience
of faith, if he had continued in his former state: therefore he is thrown down
by violence, that he may learn to humble himself willingly. Furthermore,
there is in Christ his words only a brief reprehension, which serves to
appease the rage of Paul being so cruelly bent. Nevertheless we have thence
an excellent consolation, in that Christ taking upon him the person of all
the Godly, does complain that whatsoever injury was done to them, was done
to him. And as there can no sweeter thing be imagined to lenifie the
bitterness of persecution, then when we hear that the son of God does
suffer not only with us, but also in us: so again the bloody enemies of the
Gospel, who being now besotted with pride, do mock the miserable Church,
shall perceive whom they have wounded.

9 They which were with me. I showed in the other place that there is no such
disagreement in the words of Luke, as there seems to be. Luke said there,
that though Paul his companions stood amazed, yet heard they a voice. But in
this place he says they heard not the voice of him which spoke to Paul, though
they saw the light. Surely it is no absurd thing to say that they heard some
obscure voice. Yet so that they did not discern it as Paul himself, whom
alone Christ meant to stay and taime with the reprehension. Therefore they
hear a voice, because a sound does enter into their ears, so that they know
that some speaks from heaven, they hear not the voice of him that spoke to
Paul, because they understand not what Christ says. Moreover they see Paul
compassed about with the light, but they see none which speaks from heaven.

10 What shall I do Lord? This is the voice of a tamed man, and this is the
true turning unto the Lord, when laying away all fearcenesse and fury, we
bow down our necks willingly to bear his yoke, and are ready to do
whatsoever he commands us. Moreover this is the beginning of well doing, to
ask the mouth of God. For their labor is lost who think upon repentance
without his word. Furthermore in that Christ appoints Ananias to be Paul
his master, he does it not for any reproach, or because he refuses to teach
him: but by this means he means to set forth and also to bewtifie the
outward ministry of the Church.

And even in the person of one man he teaches us that we must not grudge to
hear him speak with the tongue of men. To the same end tends that which
follows immediately, that he was blind, until offering himself to become a
scholar, he had declared the humility of his faith. God does not in deed make
blind all those whom he will lighten: but there is a general rule prescribed to
al men, that Those became foolish with themselves, who will be wise to him.

12 And one Ananias a godly man according to the Law, approved by the
testimony of all the Jews which dwelt there,

13 Coming unto me and standing by me, said to me, Brother Saul, receive thy
sight. And I receiving my sight the same hour saw him.

14 But he said to me, The God of our fathers has prepared thee that thou
might know his will, and see the just, and hear a voice from his mouth.

15 Because thou shall be his witness before all men of those things which
thou have seen and heard.

16 And now why stayest thou: Arise and be baptized, and wash away thy sins, in
calling upon the name of the Lord.

12 One Ananias. Paul proceeds now unto the fouerth point: to wit that he did
not only give his name to Christ being astonyed with miracles: but that he
was also well and thoroughly instructed in the doctrine of the Gospel. I have
already said that Ananias met Paul not by chance, but through the direction of
Christ. And whereas he gives him the title of godliness as concerning the
Law, and says that he was well reported off by the whole nation, in these
words he preuenteth the wrong opinion which they might conceive. As they
loathed the Gentiles so they would never have allowed any teacher coming from
them. And one that had revolted from the Law should have been most detestable.
Therefore he witnesses that he worshipped God according to the Law, and that
his godliness was known and commended among all the Jews, so that they ought
not to suspect him. These words according to the Law are ignora^tly by some
coupled with the text following, that he was approved according to the Law. For
Ananias his religion is rather distinguished by this mark from the
superstitions of the Gentiles. Though we must note, that the Law is not
mentioned to establish the merits of works, that they may be set against the
grace of God: but Ananias his godliness is clearly acquitted of al evil
suspicion which might have risen among the Jews. And seeing that he restores
sight to Paul with one word: it appears thereby that he was sent of God, as I
have said before.

14 The God of our fathers. As nothing is more fit to provoke us joyfully to
go forward toward God, than when we know that God does prevent us with his
free goodness, that he may call us back from destruction to life: so Ananias
begins here. God says he, has ordained thee to know his will: for by
this means Paul is taught that God had respect unto him at such time as he
went astray, and was altogether an enemy to his own salvation: and so Gods
predestination does abolish all preparations which Sophisters imagine, as if
man did prevent Gods grace by his own free will. In calling him the God of the
Fathers, he renews the rembrance of the promises, that the Jews may know
that the new calling of Paul is joined with them: and that those fall not away
from the Law, who passover unto Christ. Therefore Paul confirms that by
these words which he avouched before in his own person, that he had not
made any departure from the God of Abraham, whom the Jews had in times passed
worshipped: but that he continues in the ancient worship which the Fathers
did use, which he had learned out of the Law. Wherefore when the question is
about religion, let us learn by the example of Paul, not to imagine any new
God (as the Papists and Mahometistes have done, and as all heritikes use to
do) but let us retain that God who has revealed himself in times past to
the Fathers, both by the Law, and also by diverse Oracles. This is that
antiquity wherein we must remain, and not in that whereof the Papists boast
in vain, who have invented to themselves a strange God, seeing they have
forsaken the lawful Fathers.

The same is to be said at this day of the Jews, whose religion seeing it
disagreeth with the Law and the Prophets, their God must also be degenerate
and feigned. For he who would in times past be called the God of Abraham and
of the fathers, appeared at length in the person of his son, that he may
now be called by his own name or title the Father of Christ. Therefore he
which rejects the son, has not the father, who cannot be separated from
him. And Ananias says that it comes to pass through the free Election of
God, that the truth of the Gospel does now appear to Paul: whereupon it
follows that he did not attain unto this by his own industry, which the
experience of the thing did also declare. For nothing was more stubberne than
Paul, until Christ did tame him. And if we desire to know the cause and
beginning, Ananias calls us back unto the counsel of God, whereby he was
appointed and ordained, and assuredly it is a more precious thing to know the
will of God, then that men can attain unto it by their own industry. That
which Ananias affirms of Paul ought to be translated unto all, that the
treasure of faith is not common to all: but it is offered peculiarly to the
Elect. Furthermore it appears more plainly by the next member what this will
of God is: for God spoke at sundry times and many ways by his Prophets; but
last of all he revealed and made known his will and himself wholly in his
son.

To see the just. Seeing all the Greek books in a manner agree together in
the Masculine gender: I wonder why Erasmus would rather translate it in the
Neuter, Which is Just: which sense the readers see to be cold and far fet.
Heb. 1.1.
Therefore I do not doubt but that Just is taken in this place for Christ: and
the text runs very finely thus: because it follows immediately after, and
Hear a voice from his mouth. And it is certain that all the godly and holy
men did most of all desire that they might see Christ. Thence flowed that
confession of Simeon, Lord now let thou thy servant depart in peace:
because mine eyes have seen thy salvation. Therefore this seeing, which godly
kings and prophets did most earnestly desire, as Christ himself does
witness, Luke. 2.29. Luke 10.24.
is not without cause extolled as a singular benefit of God. But because the
sight of the eyes should profit little or nothing, which we know was to
many deadly, he adioyneth the hearing of the voice. Ananias sets down the
cause why God did vouchsafe Paul of so great honor, to wit, that he might be
to his son a public witness: and he does so prepare him, that he may
learn not only for himself alone: but that he may have so much the more care
to profit, because he shall be the teacher of all the whole Church.

16 And now why tarriest thou? It is not to be doubted but that Ananias did
faithfully instruct Paul in the principles of godliness: for he would not have
baptized him if he had been void of true faith. But Luke passes over many
things, and does briefly gather the sum. Therefore seeing Paul does
understand that the promised redemption is now given in Christ: Ananias says
for good causes that nothing ought to stay him from being Baptized. But when
he says, why tarriest thou? he does not chide Paul, neither does he
accuse him of slackenesse: but he does rather amplify the grace of God by
adding Baptism. The like sentence had we in the tenth Chapter, Cha. 10.47.
Can any man let those from being Baptized with water, who have the holy Ghost
given them even as we? But when he says, Wash away thy sins: by this
speech he expresses the force and fruit of Baptism: as if he had said,
Wash away thy sins by Baptism. But because it may seem that by this means
more is attributed to the outward and corruptible element than is meet. The
question is whether Baptism be the cause of our purging. Surely for as much
as the blood of Christ is the only means whereby our sins are washed away:
and as it was once shed to this end, so the holy Ghost by the sprinkling
thereof through faith does make us clean continually, this honor cannot be
translated unto the sign of water, without doing open injury to Christ and
the holy Ghost: and experience does teach how earnestly men be bent unto this
superstition. Therefore many godly men, least they put confidence in the
outward sign, do overmuch extenuate the force of Baptism. But they must
keep a measure, that the Sacraments may be kept within their bounds, least
they darken the glory of Christ: and yet they may not want their force and
use. Wherefore we must hold this, first that it is God alone who washes us
from our sins by the blood of his son: and to the end this washing may be
effectual in us, he works by the hidden power of his Spirit. Therefore when
the question is concerning remission of sins, we must seek no other author
thereof, but the heavenly Father: we must imagine no other material cause,
but the blood of Christ, and when we be com to the formal cause, the holy ghost
is the chief: but there is an inferior instrument and that is the preaching of
the word and baptism it self. But though God alone does work by the inward
power of his Spirit, yet that does not hinder, but that he may use at his
pleasure such instruments and means as he knows to be convenient, not that
he includes in the element any thing which he takes either from his spirit
or from the blood of Christ, but because he will have the sign it self to be
an help for our infirmity.

Therefore forasmuch as Baptism does help our faith that it may reap
forgiveness of sins by the blood of Christ alone, it is called the washing
of the soul. So that the washing spoken of by Luke, does not note out the
cause: but is referred unto the understanding of Paul, who having received the
sign, knew better that his sins were done away. Though we must also note
this, that there is no bare figure set before us in Baptism, but that the
giving of the thing is thereto annexed: because God promises nothing
deceitfully, but does indeed fulfill that which under the signs he does
signify Notwithanding we must again beware that we tie not the grace of God to
the sacraments, for the external administration of baptism profits nothing,
save only where it pleases God it shall. By this there is also an other
question aunsweared which may be moved. For seeing Paul had the testimony of
the grace of god, his sins were already forgiven him. Therefore he was not
washed only by baptism, but he received a new confirmation of the grace which
he had gotten.

In calling upon the name of the Lord. It is out of question that he means
Christ, not because the name of Christ alone is called upon in baptiswe, but
because the father commands us to ask of him whatsoever is figured in
baptism: neither does the operation of the Spirit tend to any other end saving
that it may make us partakers of his death and resurrection: Therefore Christ is
appointed to excel in baptism: yet in as much as he is given us of the father,
and in as much as he powers out his graces upon us by the holy Ghost. Whereby
it comes to pass that the calling upon the name of Christ, contains both
the Father and the Son.

Wherefore Ananias does not mean, that the name of Christ must only be
named: but he speaks of prayer, whereby the faithful do testify, that the
effect of the outward sign is in the power of Christ alone. For the
sacraments have neither any power of salvation included in them, neither are
they any thing worth of themselves. Wherefore this member is as it were a
correction of the former saying, because Ananias does in plain words send Paul
from reposing confidence in the external sign, unto Christ.

It is well known how much the Papists differ from this rule, who tie the
cause of grace to their exorcismes and inchauntments: and they are so far
from studiyng to direct the miserable people unto Christ, that they rather
drown Christ in Baptism, and pollute his sacred name by their enchantments.

17 And it came to pass that when I was returned to Jerusalem, and prayed in
the Temple, I was in a trance.

18 And saw him say to me, Make haste, and get thee quickly out of Jerusalem:
because they will not receive thy testimony concerning me,

19 Then I said, Lord, they know that I did cast into prison, and did beat in
every synagogue those which did believe in thee,

20 And when the blood of thy witness Steephen was shed, I did also stand by
and consented to his death, and kept the raiment of those which slew him.

21 And he said unto me, Go: because I will send thee far hence unto the
Gentiles.

22 And they heard him unto this word, then they lifted up their voice saying,
Away with such a fellow from off the earth: for it is not meet that he should
live.

17 And it came to pass. This had not been the last conclusion, if Paul had
not been cut off with their outrageous outcries. Notwithstanding his drift and
purpose does plainly appear by the former text: for he begins to entreat
of his ministry, that he may show that he departed not from the Jews of
his own accord, as if he withdrewe him of malice from taking pains with
them: but he was drawn unto the Gentiles contrary to his expectation and
purpose. For he came purposely to Jerusalem, that he might impart with his
own nation that grace which was committed to him. But when the Lord cutteth
off his hope which he had to do good, he drives him thence. But there was a
double offense which Paul goes about to cure: for they both thought that the
covenant of God was profaned, if the Gentiles should be admitted into the
Church together with them, and nothing did grieve the proud nation so much, as
that other should be preferred before them, or so much as made equal with
them. Therefore Paul his defense consists in this, that he was ready, so
much as in him laid, to do them the best service he could: but he was
afterward enforced by the commandment of God to go to the Gentiles, because
he would not have him to be idle at Jerusalem. Whereas Erasmus translateth
it, That I was carried without my self, is in Greek word for word, That I
was in a trance: whereby he meant to purchase credit to the Oracle. Also the
circumstance of the time and place does confirm the same, in that the Lord
appeared to him as he prayed in the Temple: which was an excellent preparation
to hear the voice of God. Concerning the manner of seeing, read that which
we touched about the end of the seventh Chapter.

18 Because they will not. Though the commandment of God alone ought to be
sufficient enough to bind us to obey: yet to the end Paul might be the more
willing to follow, Christ shows him a reason why he will have him depart
out of Jerusalem: to wit, because he should loose his labor there: but he
was not chosen to that end, that he might be idle, or do no good by teaching:
though this were a sore trial, and such as we may think did sore shake him.
Not long before the function of preaching the Gospel was enjoined him, that his
voice might sound throughout the whole world: now even at the first entrance he
is inhibited: yea his labor seems to be condemned of peculiar reproach, when
his witness is rejected, because his person is hated. But it was meet that
the holy servant of the Lord should be thus humbled, that all the preachers of
the Gospel might learn to give over themselves wholly to obey Christ, that
when they be excluded from one place, they may be ready immediately to go to
another, and that they may not be discouraged nor cease off from doing their
duty though they be undeservedly loathed.

19 Lord they know. By this speech Paul does testify that he was not beside
himself or brought into perplexity, but that he did assuredly believe the
Oracle. For without doubt he knew Christ whom he calls Lord. And Paul
obiecteth, that it cannot almost be, but that when they see him so suddenly
changed, such a spectacle will move them. Whence he gathers that he shall
not be unfruitful. He thought so in deed: but Christ answers flatly that
he has appointed him another charge: and he takes from him the hope which
he had in vain conceived touching the Jews. The question is whether it were
lawful for Paul, to object these reasons to Christ: for it is as much as if he
did avouch that that is probable, which Christ said could not be. I answer,
that God gives his saints leave, familiarly to utter their affections before
him: especially when they seek no other thing but the confirmation of their
faith.

If any man stand in his own conceit, or stubbernely refuse that which God
commands, his arrogancy shall be worthily condemned: but God vouchsafes
his faithful servants of a singular privilege, that they may modestly object
those things which may call them back from the desire to obey: to the end that
being free from lets, they may wholly addict themselves to serve God: as Paul,
after that he was taught that it pleased the Lord that it should be so, he does
not gainesay nor contend any longer: but being content with that one exception,
and making an end there, he makes himself ready to take his journey, which he
seemed to be loath to take. In the mean season whereas the Jews are not
touched with so many miracles, their stubbernes and pride which can not be
tamed, is discovered. Which vpbraiding did undoubtedly cause them to rage.

22 Away with such a fellow. Luke shows here how outragiouslie Paul his
sermon was interrupted. For they do not only opppresse him with their crying,
but they desire to have him put to death: where it does also plainly appear
how frenzy pride is. The Jews conceived so great good liking of themselves,
that they did not only despice all the whole world in comparison of
themselves, but they stood also more stoutly in defense of their own dignitye
then of the Law it self: as if al religion did consist in this, that Abraham
his stock might excel all other mortal men. So now they rage against and
rail upon Paul, because he said that he was sent to be the Apostle of the
Gentiles: as if God were bound by his own liberality to suffer the contempt
of his power in the wicked and unthankful, on whom he bestowed excellent
graces above all other. And it is no marvel if there were such fierceness
and fury at that day among the Jews, seeing that being by all means wasted,
and accustomed to suffer extreme reproaches at this day, they cease not
notwithstanding to swell with servile pride. Romans 11.5.
But these be fruits of reprobation, until God gather together the remnant
according to Paul his prophecy.

23 And as they cried, and cast off their garments, and threw dust into the
air:

24 The chief captain commanded him to be led into the camp: and he
commanded that he should be scourged, and examined, that he might know for
what cause they cried so on him.

25 And when they had bound him with thonges, Paul said to the Centurion that
stood by: Is it lawful for you to scourge a man that is a Roman and
uncondemned?

26 When the Centurion heard that, he went to the chief captain, and told him
saying, what will thou do? For this man is a Roman.

27 And when the chief captain came, he said to him, Tell me, art thou a
Roman? And he said, yea.

28 And the chief captain answered, with a great sum I purchased this
freedom. And Paul said: I was so borne.

29 Then those who were about to examine him, departed from him immediately. And
the chief captain also was afraid, after that he knew that he was a Roman,
and that he had bound him.

30 And on the next day when he would know the truth, he loosed him from his
bonds and commanded the high priests and all the Counsel to come together, and
he brought Paul and set him before them.

24 The chief captain. It was well and wisely done of the chief captain,
thus to withdraw Paul from the sight of the people: forasmuch as his presence
did move and more provoke them who were already too much moved. For by this
means he provides for the life of the holy man, and partly appeaseth the
madness of the people. But when he commands him to be scourged, to whose
charge he heard no certain crime laid, he seems to deal unjustly: and
yet this injury was not without color: because it was likely that it was not
without cause, that all the people had conspired to put one manne to death.
Therefore a vehement presumption was the cause of so strait examination. But
we must note that this is a common custom among politic men, that they be
just judges so far as is expedient for them: but if they be called away by
profit, then they go out of the way. Nevertheless it is sufficient for them
to color this their wickedness with the title of wisdom, because they hold
that general principle, that the world cannot be governed without some show
or color of justice. But in all actions that subtlety whereof I spoke does
prevail, that they consider rather what is profitable, then what is equal and
right.

25 Is it lawful. He alleges first the privilege of the city, then he
defends himself by common law. And though there were more weight in the
second point (to wit, that it is not lawful to scourge a man before his cause
is heard) yet should he have prevailed nothing, unless the centurion had been
more moved with the honor of the Roman Empire, for nothing was then more
heinous the^ to do any thing which was contrary to the liberty of the people
of Rome. Valerius his law, the law of Porcius and of Sempronius and such like
did forbid that no man should do any violence to the body of the city of Rome
without the commandment of the people. The privilege was so sure and holy
that they thought it to be not only a deadly offense: but also such an offense
as could not be purged, that a citizen of Rome should be beaten.

Therefore Paul escaped rather by the privilege then by common equity, yet did
he not dout in a good cause to bear of the injury which was prepared for him,
with this buckler of the city. But we must know that he did so allege the
right and privilege of the city, that the chief captain was brought to
believe him: because his words should not have been credited unless he had
used some proof. Moreover it was no hard matter for a man who was well known
to bring forth witnesses. We alleged a cause in the sixteenth chapter, Cha.
16.37.
why he suffered himself to be scourged at Philippos, which he now preuenteth
by his own declaration: to wit, because he should not have been heard in a
tumult raised among the common people. But because he has now to deal with
the soldiers of Rome, who did behave themselves more moderately and gravely,
he uses the opportunity.

26 This man is a Roman. Some man may marvel that he was so credulous, who was
appointed to be chief in examining Paul, that he does affirm the thing, as if
he knew it to be so. For if he ought to believe Paul his words, every
malefactor might by this shift have escaped punishment. But this was their
manner of dealing, he which did say that he was a citizen of Rome, unless he
could bring in some which knew him, or prove it lawefullie, he was punished.
For it was death for any man to pretend the freedom of the city falsely.
Wherefore the Centurion refers the matter unto the chief captain, as
doubting thereof: and he (as we have said) does streightway examine the matter
more thoroughly. And though Luke does not express by what testimonies Paul did
prove himself to be a citizen of Rome: yet undoubtedly the chief captain
knew the truth of the matter before he loosed him.

28 With a great sum. The chief captain obiecteth this to refute him: as if
he should say, that the freedom of the city is not so common, and easily to
be obtained. How can it be that thou being some base fellow of the country
of the Cilicians, should obtain this honor, for which I paid sweetly?
Whereas Paul makes answer, that he was free borne, who never saw the city,
yea whose father it may be, was never there, there is no cause why this should
trouble any man. For those who are skillful in the Roman history, know that
certain were made free of the city, who dwelt in the provinces, if having
deserved well of the common wealth, or in war, or in other weighty affairs,
they did desire and crave this reward of the deputies: so that it is no
absurdity to say that he was borne a Citizen of Rome, who discending by his
ancetors of some province far distant from Rome, did never set foot in
Italy. Notwithstanding the question is how this can hang together, that the
chief captain was afraid, because he had bound a Citizen of Rome, and yet
he did not loose him from his bonds until the morrow. It may be that he
deferred it till the next day, least he should show some token of fear.
Notwithstanding, I think that the chief captain was afraid because Paul was
bound at his commandment, that he might be scourged, because this was to do
injury to the body of a Citizen of Rome, and to break the common liberty:
and that it was lawful to put a Roman in prison.

CHAP. XXIII.
1 ANd Paul beheld the Council steadfastly and said: Men and brethren, I have
served God until this day in all good conscience.

2 And the high Priest Ananias commanded those that stood by him, to smite him
on the face.

3 Then Paul said to him: God will smite thee thou painted wall. And thou
sit judging according to Law: and transgressing the Law. Commaundest thou
me to be smitten?

4 And those which stood by, said: Railest thou on Gods high priest?

5 And Paul said, I wist not brethren* that he was the high priest: for it is
written, Thou shall not speak evil of the ruler of thy people.

1 Looking earnestly. Paul begins with the testimony of a good conscience:
that all the whole multitude may understand, that he is unjustly charged with
such an heinous offense, as if he had gone about to overthrow the woorshippe of
God. It may be indeed that a man may offend of ignorance, who will not
otherwise be a contemner either of God or of religion: but Paul meant at the
first only with this excuse to mollify their netled minds, that he might the
better be heard. For it had been in vain for him to have defended himself, so
long as that opinion did stick in the minds of the priests, that he was a
wicked revolt. Therefore before he enter the cause, he excuses him self of
that crime: not only that he may purchase favor by that desire which he had
to live godlily, but also that he may prevent false accusations, or at least
that he may refute unjust preiudices which might have made against him,
wherewith he saw the whole multitude infected and corrupted. We know not what
he meant to say besides. Notwithstanding this preface teaches that no man can
rightly handle the doctrine of godliness, unless the fear of God reign and
bear the chief sway in him. And now though he give not the priests so
honorable a title here, as he did a little before when he stood upon the
steps of the fortress: yet he calls them brethren, giving them that
honor: not because they deserve it, but that he may testify that he is not
the cause of the breach of friendship.

2 And the chief priest. Luke his narration seems not to agree with the
usual history. For Josephus writes thus concerning the high priests of that
time, that Quadratus deputy of Syria deposing Cumanus from the government of
Judea, commanded him to answer for himself before Caesar, and sent Ananias
the highest priest bound with him, into whose place who was chosen he makes no
mention: saving that it is likely that Ionathas had the honor given him, who
as he reports, was afterward slain by the subtlety and treachery of Felix
Deputy of Judea, wh succeeded Cumanus. For when he had oftentimes told Felix
part of his mind, and he could not away with the constancy of the man: he
made a compact with one Doras, that he should privily convey in murderers to
slay him. Then, as the same Josephus does witness, King Agrippa made Ismael
the son of Phebeus priest. But when he was sent by the people to Rome about a
certain suite, and was kept there by Popea wife to Nero, Agrippa puts in
his place one Josephus, whose name was Chabus, the son of Simon. But
immediately being also weary of him, he appoints Ananus the son of Ananus to
be high priest.

Futhermore, he says, that this last thing happened at such time as after the
death of Festus, Albinus did succeed him. And I see not why some call this
Ananus Ananias. That has indeed some color, in that he is called a pharisie:
also in that it is said that he was bold and stout, who without any lawful
authority caused James the Lords brother to be stoned. But if we give
credaunce to Josephus, he could not be that Ananias of whom mention is made
in this place by Luke, who was then made priest, when many years were past
and gone, after that Felix departed out of the province. I have another
conjecture in my head. For there flourished during all that time one Ananias an
high priest, who excepting the title of honor, was almost chief in the
order. And because Josephus leaves some void time between Ananias and
Ismael, it may be that this manne had the room of the highest priest in the
mean time. But though this were not so, it appears out of Josephus, that
Ananias who died when the City was besieged, was in the reign of Claudius
Caesar and Nero equal in dignity with the chief priests which were then.

Yea his authority is so highly extolled, as if he had had the chief
government, howsoever other men did bear the insignes of honor. Again he
is called archiereus confusedly, as those who were the highest Priests. Now let
the readers ponder and consider, whether the word archiereus does not rather
signify in this place Chief, than Highest, as it does in many other places.
For the Evangelists do every where call the Priests who were of the Course of
Aaron, archiereis, that they may distinguish them from the Levites, who had a
more inferior degree of Priesthood. Moreover it may be that that Ananias who
was counted stout and courageous, did supply the high Priests room in his
absence. Those things which we have recited out of Josephus, are recorded
partly in the twentieth book of Antiquities, from the third Chapter, until
the eight: partly in the second book of the wars of the Jews.

He commanded him to be smiten. We see that there was in this assembly great
distemperature. For whereas the high Priest was in such rage that he
commanded Paul to be smiten for nothing, he did it undoubtedly with the
consent of all the rest: yea to the end he might win the favor of mad
men. The Lord does suffer the wicked to be so carried away by Satan, that
they fall from all show of equity and temperance. For hypocrites would feign
bear some show of moderation: and undoubtedly this high Priest went about to
pretend such gravity as did beseem his person. But the Lord did pluck this
visure from his face, so that there was not found in him so much as the
modesty of a mean man, but he powered out his furious force like a beast.

In the mean season we see what horrible and filthy disorder there was at
that day in the Church. Ananias, who was the chief of the council, whereas he
ought to have stayed others by his gravity: forgetting all modesty, he
enforces them unto violence and savageness. Therefore they had at that day no
regard of discipline: but there remained among them confused barbarism. And
no marvel for they had estranged themselves from God: they had most
reprochfully rejected Christ: all their religion was set to sale: therefore it
was meet that they should run headlong into furious madness, which might be
loathsome even among profane men, that they might be punished in their own
shame, for their ungodliness.

3 God shall smite thee. Paul cannot put up that injury, but he must at least
with sharp words reprehende the high Priest, and denounce Gods vengeance unto
him. For it is no curse as appears sufficiently by the Greek text: but
rather a reprehension, joined with the denouncing of a punishment. If any man
object, that Paul did not use that modesty, which Christ commands his to
use, when he commands them after they have received a blow on the left
cheek to turn the right cheek also: we may readily answer, Mat. 5.39.
that Christ does not in these words require silence, whereby the wickedness
and frowardness of the wicked may be nourished: but he does only bridle
their minds, that they may not take that injury which they have already
received, impaciently. Christ will have those that be his to be ready to
suffer another injury, after that they have already received one: and by this
means he represseth all desire of revenge. This is a brief and true
definition of patience which beseems all the faithful, that they break not
out into wrathfulnesse, that they do not one evil turn for another: but that
they overcome evil with goodness. But this is no let but that they may
complain of those injuries which they have suffered, but that they may reprove
the wicked, and cite them to the judgment seat of God: so they do this with
quiet and calm minds: and secondly without evil will and hatred: as Paul
appealeth in this place unto gods judgment seat, that the high priest may not
flatter him self in his tyranny. Therefore he accuses him, because he
breaks the Law, from which (as he pretends) he has his authority: whence
he gathers, that he shall not escape unpunished. If any man being overcome
with impatience, do but murmr, he shall not be blameless: But a manifest and
sharp accusation, if it proceed from a quiet mind, does not pass the bounds
set down by Christ. If any man say, that it is mixed with railing. I answer,
that we must always mark with what affection the words be uttered. Christ
pronounces that man to be worthy to be punished by the council, who shall
only say to his brother, Racha: Mat. 5.22.
and as for him who shall say, thou fool, he makes him subject to a more
heavy judgment. But if opportunity be offered to reprove, we must oftentimes
reprehend sharply. Whereby it appears, that this only was Christ his drift, to
keep back his, first from al indignation, secondly from speaking any thing in
despite of any man. Therefore let us beware of railing, and then we may not
only note in our brethren foolishlishnesse, but also it shall be I we full for
us to express their offenses by their names when need shall be. So Paul did
not speak for his own sake, that he might with sharp words requite the
injury done to him by the high priest: but because he was a minister of the
word of god, he would not wink at an offense which did deserve sharp and serious
reprehension: especially seeing it was profitable to bring to light the gross
hypocrisy of Ananias. Therefore so often as we have any dealings with the
wicked, if we be desirous to handle a good cause well, we must beware that
there break out in us no motion of anger, that no desire of revenge provoke us
to break out into railing. But if the spirit of meeknes reign in us; we may
handle the wicked according to their deserts, as it were out of the mouth of
God: yet so that it may appear that we be rather prophets, then that we
blunder out any thing rashly through immoderate heat.

4 Those which stood by said. By this it appears that they were al sick of
one disease. For why do they not rather blame Ananias, when they saw that he
had quite forgotten al modesty, and that he brake out into violence, and
stripes after a barbarous manner; for even this did turn to the reproach of
them all. But this is a solemn thing among hypocrites, they look narrowly
into other men's faults, and wink at their own. Again, this pride is coupled
with tyranny, so that their subjects and those who are under them may do
nothing, but as for themselves they may do whatsoever they will. So fares it at
this day in popery, the more liberty that impure clergy does grant to it
self, and the more carelessly it waxes wanton, and polluteth the whole world
with the sins which flow thence, the more straightly do they rule, and stay
the tongues of the people. Therefore if any man dare be so bold as once to
whisper: a little liberty does cause them to make outrageous outcries as if it
were heinous sacrilege.

5 I knew not brethren. Those who think that this excuse of Paul has in it no
figure, do not well mark the contrary objections wherewith their error is
refuted. They say that Paul knew not the high priest, because he had bin absent
long time. As if he were ignorant, that he was chief priest, who is the
chief in the counsel, and has the uppermost room. Neither was Ananias so
base and obscure, that Paul was ignorant of his degree. But his words cut off
all occasion of disputation, when as he chideth him, because occupying the
place of a judge under color of the law, he does in his rage that which is
contrary to law. Therefore Paul knew what place he had, when he said that he
abused his power. Othersome invent a more subtle answer, that he spoke not
here of the man, but of the office and public person. But first the exposition
is far fet, because if Paul did reverence the priesthood, he must needs have
given some honor to the man which had the same. And now it is not to be
thought (forasmuch as the majesty of the priesthood was abolished by the
coming of Christ, and that there followed such filthy profanatio^,) that Paul
did honor those as he was wont (as if their perfect and lawful authority did
continue) who under the title of the high priests did reign as Lords without
any law or right. Therefore subscribing to Augustine, I do not doubt but that
this is a tanting excuse. Neither does that any whit hinder because plain
speech becomes the ministers of the word. For seeing there be 2. sorts of
Ironiaes, one which is covered, with subtletie and means to deceive, another
which does so figuratively note out the thing which is in hand, that it does
prick sorer: in this second there is nothing which does not well beseem the
servants of Christ. Therefore this is the meaning of the words, Brethren, I
acknowledge nothing in this man, which belongs to the priest. Also he adds
a testimony of the 22. chap. of Exodus Exo. 22.28.
in which place though Moses speak of judges, yet the sentence is extended
properly unto any lawful order. Therefore all dignity which is appointed for
maintenance of civil government, ought to be reverenced and had in honor. For
whosoever he be that rebelleth against or resists the magistrate and those
who are appointed to rule, and are promoted unto honor, he would have no
government. And such desire te^deth to the disturbing of order. Yea it shakes
and overthrows all humanity. Therefore Paul purges himself of this crime: yet
so, that he denies that Ananias is to be counted a priest of God, who has
corrupted and perverted all the order of the church. But here rises a question,
whether we ought not to obey a ruler, though he exercise tyranny. For if that
man be not to be deprived of honor, which executes his office amiss, Paul
offended in robbing the high priest of his honor. Therefore I answer that there
is some difference between civil magistrates, and the prelates of the church.
For though the exployting of earthly or civil rule be co^fused or perverse: yet
the Lord will have men to continue still in subjection. But when the spiritual
government does degenerate, the consciences of the godly are at liberty, and
set free from obeying unjust authority: especially if the wicked and profane
enemies of holiness do falsely pretend the title of priesthood to overthrow the
doctrine of salvation, and challenge to themselves such authority, as that
they will be thereby equal with God. So it is not only lawful for the faithful
at this day to shake off from their shoulders the popes yoke, but they must do
it of necessity: seeing they cannot obey his laws, unless they forsake God, 6
And when Paul knew that the one part were of the Sadduces, and the other of the
Pharisees, he cried out in the Council, Men and brethren, I am a Pharisie,
the son of a Pharisie: I am judged of the hope and resurrection of the dead.

7 And when he had thus said, there was a dissension among the Pharisees and
Sadduces, and the multitude was divided,

8 For the Saduces say there is no resurrection, neither Angel, neither
Spirit: but the Pharisees confess both.

9 And there was a great cry: and the Scribes of the Pharisees sect arose, and
strove saying, we find no evil in this man, but if the Spirit or an Angel
have spoken to him, let us not fight against God.



6 And when Paul knew. The policy of Paul whereof Luke makes mention,
does seem not to beseem the servant of Christ. For the subtilty which he
used, was inwrapped in dissimulation, which was not far from a lie. He says
that the state of his cause did consist in the resurrection of the dead. But
we know that the strife arose about other matters. Because he disanulled the
ceremonies, because he admitted the Gentiles into the covenant of salvation.
I aunsweare, that, though these things be true, yet did not he lie. For he
does neither deny that he was accused of other matters, neither does this
make the whole controversy to consist in one point: but he says truly that
the Sadduces were therefore offended with him, because he did hold the
resurrection of the dead. He knew that those who had conspyred together
against him, were enemies also one to another. He knew that his own
conscience was clear: and it had been an easy matter for him to prove his
cause good before just judges. Yet because he sees them cry out on him
clamorously, and that he had no place granted to defend himself, he sets
his enemies together by the ears. Whereby it does also appear, that they
were carried away through ignorance and blind zeal. Therefore we must note
that Paul did so begin, as that he was desirous truly and plainly to unfold
the whole matter: and that he did not craftily refuse to make a pure and sound
confession, such as the servants of Christ ought to make: but because the way
was stopped before him, neither could he be heard, he used the last remedy, to
declare that his adversaries were carried headlong with blind hatred. For the
end does show, that those are not guided with reason or judgment, who are
carried out of the way by mutual discord. Now if any man which darkneth the
light of doctrine, excuse his craft, by the example of Paul, he is easily
refuted. For it is one thing for a man to provide for him self alone with the
loss of truth: and another, to lead the professed enemies of Christ from
resisting him, that they may strive among themselves.

Furthermore, we see the nature of the wicked, though they disagree among them
selves like enemies, yet when they are to make war against the Gospel, they
forget their own garboiles. For Satan the father of discord, does procure
this one consent only among his, that they may be of one mind and of one
affection, to extinguish godliness. So we see that the factions which are in
popery whot, are quiet only so long as they join hand in hand to oppress the
Gospel. For which cause the disciples of Christ must be more courageous to
foster and nourish truth, that being joined together, they may the better
resist. Also we gather by this what manner of peace the Scripture commends
unto us. Christ says that the peace makers are the children of God, and this
is true, that they must do what they can, Mat. 5.9.
to bring all me^ that they may grow together under the Lord. Yet this does not
hinder, but that we may (fighting under the banner of the same Lord) as it
were with the sound of the trumpet stir up the wicked, that they may like
Madianites one slay another: so that both simplicity of zeal, Iud. 7.22.
and the wisdom of the spirit direct us hither.

One part were Sadduces. We see here again as in a glass, how deformed and
confused the ruin of the Church was at that day. Faith is the soul of the
Church: nothing is more proper to faith then agreement, nothing more contrary
then sects. And this thing must needs follow, when every man (setting aside
the word of God) did draw his disciples unto his own inventions. For there is
no other holy bond of unity, then the natural and plain truth of God. So sone
as men depart from that, no marvel if they be despearsed, and drawn hither
and thither like members pulled a sunder.

Therefore the beginning of sects among the Jews was the corruption of the law:
like as the Lord did revenge the profanatio^ of his word, which was corrupt
with diverse inventions of men with like punishment in popery. Wherefore we must
the more fear, least horrible, and more lamentable scatterings hang over our
heads, then was that which was in time of popery: whereof there appear some
tokens. And no marvel seeing we provoke the Lord to wrath so many ways with
our unthankfulness. But though the face of the church be blotted and blurred
with many spots and blottes: and what manner of deformity soever fall out
hereafter, let us comfort our selves with this: that, as God was careful then
to deliver the church wonderfully from destruction, so through his grace there
shall always some seed continue. It cannot be in deed but that godly minds
will somewhat despair, when they see things so far out of order: but let us
learn streightway to hold up that buckler, that the Lord who in such a thick
mist of errors, in such an heap of superstitions, in the unbridled
licenciousnes of sects, did preserve his Church among the Jews, will never
suffer the same to be quite put out wholly in the world. The same thing did
likewise happen in popery. For when as the worship of God was overthrown
there, the doctrine of salvation was oppressed, the kingdom of Christ was
thrown down, and ungodliness did openly reign: yet God did save certain
hidden remnants, and there was always some wheat in the chafe. It is very
profitable to confer these examples together. When as we inueigh at this day
against popery, the hired patrons thereof cry out on the otherside, that
nothing is more absurd, tha^ that we should imagine that the Church of God was
extinguished during many ages: as if we did imagine that God had no people
left, when those had forsaken him who ought to have maintained his pure
worship. Yea we complain that those tyrants did corrupt the church, that the
temple was by them profaned, so that it did not greatly differ from an hogstie,
that the flock of Christ was scattered abroad, and his sheepfold broken down.
Finally that the church was hidden from the eyes of men, yet so that the Lord
knew his elect, though they were dispearsed, and did browd them under his
wings. And by this it appears how foolishly the Papists brag and boast of the
titles of honor, in that not the common sort, or any private men, but the
priests them selves did in times past divide the Iewishe church by deadly
dissension.

Wherefore there is no cause why we should be afraid stoutly to resist the
pride of the Pope and of all his adherents, with whom we have the same cumbate,
which the prophets and apostles had with the priests of their time. And as
the reverence of the church did not keep back holy men, but that they did
molest the tyranny of the wicked priests, so we must not be terrified with
vain visures, under which the Papists do vainly boast: seeing they have
notwithstanding cast from them the doctrine of godliness. It is certain, that
the people were then divided into three sects: but Luke does only make mention
of the pharisees and Sadduces, omitting the Essenes: because it was most fit
for his purpose thus to do. And though this be the common opinion concerning
their names, that the former took their name of separating, because they
withdrew themselves from the company of other men, by reason of their feigned
holiness: and that the second sort took their name of righteousness, as if they
were called Zeduchim: notwithstanding for mine own part as I have said
elsewhere, I am rather of their mind, who s^y that the pharisees took their name
of interpreting. For Phrus signifies exposition: whereupon also interpreters
are called phruschim: and we know that the pharisees being not content with the
natural doctrine of the law and prophets, did put in many inuentio^s, which
they said they received of the fathers.

8 The Sadduces say. Though Luke makes mention of 3. points wherein these
sects did dissent: yet shortly after he brings them to 2. because there is
like respect to be had of spirits and of Angels. Therefore he says that the
Pharisees did confess both: to wit, that the dead shall rise again, and that
humane and angelical spirits are immortal. And here Luke declares in what
sense the Apostle professed himself to be a Pharisee: not because he did
subscribe to all their inventions, but only in the resurrection of the dead. We
know how sharply Christ reproves their errors, therefore it had been good
that some exception had been added, least any man might think that Paul was one
with them in all things. Now though the Saduces did deny the resurrection,
yet may we not think that they were altogether like to the Epicures. Mat.
22.29.
For they did confess that the world is governed by the providence of God, and
that every man is rewarded for his works. In this point they were sounder then
the Epicures. But they did dote too grossly, when they included the rewards of
righteousness, and the punishments of wickedness in this life. For that I may
omit the scripture, experience does teach, that as well the godly as the
ungodly are either punished with many miseries, or else gently dealt withal:
and that the wicked do oftentimes live in wealth and pleasures, when as the
worshippers of God are oftentimes miserably tormented, as it is Psalm. 73.
Psalm. 73.4.
Therefore whosoever esteems the judgment of God by the present estate of
men, whether it be good or bad, he must needs fall away from faith at length
unto Epicurish contempt of God.

Now this is beastly blockishnesse to rest in an uncertain and transitory
life, and not to be wise above the earth. For which cause we must flee from
that error as from a detestable monster. For though godliness have the promises
of the earthly life also: yet because we be most miserable if our hope stay
still in this world, the children of God must begin with this, that they may
lift up their eyes toward heaven, and think continually upon the glory of the
last resurrection.

Neither angel nor spirit. This place is expounded two manner of ways. Many
refer it unto the holy Ghost: which seems to be unlikely. For howsoever
the Saduces be to be holden excused in other errors: yet because the scripture
does so often repeat the name of the Spirit, I will scarce believe that they
denied that which the Pharisees believed only lightly and obscurely. For even
these men had no distinct faith concerning the holy Spirit, that they did
acknowledge the proper person of the Spirit in the substance of God. Some will
have Angel and Spirit to signify one thing, as if one thing were spoken
twice. But to what end was it to repeat a thing which was plain enough? I
warraunt you that member which follows did deceive them, where Luke seems
to make no distinction. But we showed the reason before: because seeing the
souls of men and Angels are of one and the same nature and substance, they be
both placed in one order. Therefore I do not doubt but that this is Luke his
true meaning that the Saduces did deny Angels, and also all manner of Spirits.

Now for as much as Paul cries that he is a Pharisee in this point of
doctrine, he does flatly condemn all brainsicke fellows who at this day are
in the same error. For there be certain profane and unlearned men who dream
that Angels and Devils are nothing else but good and evil inspirations: and
least they want some color, they say that all that came from the Heathen, which
the scripture has concerning good and evil angels: whereas that opinion which
was common in the world had his beginning from the heavenly doctrine. But the
Heathen did with their lies pollute that doctrine which they had from the
fathers. As touching men's souls, because even at this day, certain miscreants
do feign that the souls do vanish away in death until the day of the
resurrection, their madness is likewise refuted by the testimony of Luke.

9 There was a great cry. That sedition whereof Luke spoke a little before, is
more plainly expressed in this place: to wit, that they were not only of diverse
opinions, but did strive clamorously with outcries. Wherefore stasis does
signify somewhat more then dissension. Furthermore this place does teach what
mischief disagreementes bring with them. For because they take their beginning
for the most part of ambition, men proceed thence unto contention, and
straightway stubbornness breaks out. When they be come thither: because
there is no place left either for judgment or moderation, they can no longer
judge of the cause. Those who did detest Paul, begin at a sudden to defend
him. It was well done, if they had done it with judgment. But because they
inueigh against the Sadduces, they are so inflamed with hatred against them,
that they be blind in Paul his matter. For which cause we must beware of heat
of contention, which disturbeth all things.

If the spirit. This ought undoubtedly to be expounded of the holy Ghost. And
nothing could be spoken either more godlily or modestly. For so soon as it is
apparent that any doctrine is revealed from heaven, those do wickedly resist
God, who do not receive the same. But how is it that the Scribes do so
suddenly count Paul a prophet of God, whom they were once ready to have
murdered: whom they had condemned with their prejudice, until the contention
arose? Furthermore as they did cut their own throtes with these words as with
a sword: so God would have them to be to us teachers to instruct us that we
despice not the oracles which come from heaven. Notwithstanding we see again,
that those stand in doubt, who take not good heed and are not careful to
mark the word of God: and that they waver so often as any thing is brought
to light, because they be unworthy to understand the certain truth.
Wherefore if we be desirous to have our studies governed by the spirit of
discretion, let us apply our selves to learn.

10 And when there arose a sore dissension among them, the chief captain
feared least Paul should have bin pulled in pieces by them, and he commanded
the souldiars to go down, and to take him from them, and to bring him into
the camp.

11 And the night following the Lord stood by him and said, Be of good courage
Paul: for as thou have borne witness of me at Jerusalem, so thou must bear
witness of me at Rome also.

12 And when it was day, certain of the Jews gathered themselves together,
and bound themselves with a curse, saying that they would neither eat nor
drink, until they had killed Paul.

13 And they were more then forty men, which had made this conspiracy.

14 And they came to the chief Priests and Elders, and said, we have bound
our selves with a curse that we will taste nothing, until we have killed
Paul.

15 Now therefore signify ye to the chief captain and council, that he
bring him forth to you to morrow, as if ye would know somewhat more
certainly of him. And we before he come near, are ready to kill him.

16 But when Paul his sisters son heard of the laying in wait, he came and
entered into the camp, and told Paul.

10 We see again what a cruel mischief contention is, which so soon as it
does once wax whot, has such violent motions, that even most wise men are
not well in their wits. Therefore so soon as any beginning shall show it
self, let us study to prevent it in time, least the remedy be too late in
brideling it when it is in the middle: because no fire is so swift as it. As
for the chief captain, as he was appointed to be the minister of Gods
providence to save Paul's life: so he delivers him now the second time by
his souldiars from death. For though the chief captain defend him so diligently
for no other purpose, save only that he may prevent vprores and murder: yet the
Lord who from heaven provided and appointed help for his servant, does
direct his blind hands thither.

11 And the night following, Luke declares that Paul was strengthened with an
oracle, that he might stand courageously against terrible assaults, when
things were so far out of order. Surely it could not be but that he was sore
afraid, and that he was sore troubled with the remembrance of things to come.
Wherefore the oracle was not superfluous. Those former things, whereby he was
taught that God cared for him, ought to have sufficed to nourish his hope, and
to have kept him from fainting: but because in great dangers, Satan does
oftentimes procure new fears, that he may thereby (if he cannot altogether
ouerwhelme Gods promises in the hearts of the godly) at least darken the same
with clouds: it is needful that the remembrance of them be renewed, that
faith being helped with new proppes and stays, may stand more steadfastly. But
the sum is, that Paul may behave him self boldly, because he must be
Christ his witness at Rome also. But this seems to be but a cold and
vain consolation: as if he should say: Fear not, because thou must abide a
sorer brunt: for it had been better according to the flesh, once to die and
with speed to end his days, then to pine away in bands and long time to
lie in prison. The Lord does not promise to deliver him, no he says not so
much as that he shall have a joyful end: only he says that those troubles
and afflictions wherewith he was too sore oppressed already, shall continue
long. But by this we gather better of what great importance this confidence is,
that the Lord has respect unto us in our miseries, though he stretch not
forth his hand by and by to help us. Therefore let us learn even in most
extreme afflictions to stay our selves upon the word of God alone: and let
us never faint so long as he quickneth us with the testimony of his fatherly
love. And because Oracles are not now sent from heaven, neither does the
Lord himself appear by visions, we must meditate upon his innumerable
promises, whereby he does testify that he will be nigh unto us continually. If
it be expedient that an angel come down unto us, the Lord will not deny even
this kind of confirmation. Nevertheless we must give this honor to the word,
that being content with it alone, we wait patiently for that help which it
promises us.

Moreover, it did profit some nothing to hear Angeles which were sent down
from heaven: but the Lord does not in vain seal up in the hearts of the
faithful by his Spirit those promises which are made by him. And as he does
not in vain beat them in and often repeat them, so let our faith exercise it
self diligently in the continual remembrance of them. For if it were
necessary that Paul's faith should be oftentimes set and shoared up with a new
help there is none of us, which needs not many more helps. Also our minds must
be armed with patience, that they may pass through the long and troublesome
circuits of troubles and afflictions.

12 And when it was day. By this circumstaunce Luke shows how necessary it
was for Paul to gather new and fresh strength of faith, that he might nor quake
in most great and sudden danger. For being told of this so desperate madness
of his enemies, he could not otherwise think but that he should loose his life.
This vow whereof Luke speaks, was a kind of curse. The cause of the vow was,
that it might not be lawful for them to change their purpose, nor to call back
that which they had promised. There is always in deed in an oath a secret
curse, if any man deceive or forswear: but sometimes to the end men may the
more bind themselves, they use certain forms of cursing: and they make
themselves subject to cruel torments, to the end they may be thee more
afraid. This history does teach that zeal is so blooddy in hypocrites, that
they weigh not what is lawful for them: but they run carelessly whither
soever their lust does carry them. Admit we grant that Paul was a wicked man,
and worthy to die: yet who had given private men leave to put him to death?
Now if any man had asked why they did so hate Paul, they would quickly have
answered because he was a revolt and schismatike but it was but a foolish
opinion, and an opinion conceived of an vnc^rtaine report concerning this
matter, which had rashly possessed their minds.

The same blindness and blockishnes does at this day prick forward the
Papists, so that they think nothing unlawful for them in destroying us.
Hypocrisy does so blind their eyes, that as men freed from the laws of God
and men, they are carried by their zeal sometimes unto treachery, sometimes
unto guile, sometime unto intolerable cruelty: and finally, to attempt
whatsoever they will. Moreover we see in this history how great the rashness
of the wicked is. They bind themselves with a curse, that they will eat no meat
till they have slain Paul: as if his life were in their hands. Therefore these
brainsick men take to them selves that which the Lord does so often in
Scripture say is his, to wit, Deuteronomy. 32.39
to have the life and death of those men whom he has created in his hand.
Moreover there be not only two or three who are partners in this madness,
but more then forty. Whence we do also gather how willing and bent men are
to do mischief seeing they run together thus on heaps.

Furthermore, seeing Satan does drive them headlong into their own
destruction: how shameful is then our sluggishnesse, when as we scarce move
one finger in maintaining the glory of God? We must use moderation, that we
attempt nothing without the commandment of God: but when God calls us
expressly, our loitring is without excuse.

14 They came to the chief priests. Seeing that the priests agree to such a
wicked and ungodly conspiracy, by this they prove that there was in them
neither any fear of God, neither yet any humanity. They do not only allow
that which is brought before them concerning the murdering of the man by
laying awaite: but also they are ready to be partners in the murder, that they
may deliver him into the hands of the murderers, whom they would have made
away some way, they pass not how. For what other thing was it to take a man
out of the hands of the judge and to slay him, then like murderers to rage
even in the very place of judgment? The priests surely would never have allowed
such a wicked purpose if there had been in them any drop of godly and right
affection, or of humane feeling. Moreover they did what they could to bring
destruction upon all the people and themselves also. But the Lord did by this
means disclose their wicked impiety, which lay hid under a color of honor.

16 Paul his sisters son. We see in this place how the Lord does cross the
purposes of the ungodly. He permits them to attempt many things, and he
suffers their wicked endeavors, but at length he shows even in the
twinkling of an eye that he does from heaven deride whatsoever men go about
upon earth. There is no wisdom, says Solomon, there is no counsel against
the Lord. Whereto, that of Isaias does aunsweare, Take counsel together, Pro.
21.30. Esa. 8.10.
and it shall come to naught: speak the word and it shall not stand. This is
set before our eyes to be considered, in this present history, as in a glass.
The matter was almost dispatched, that Paul should come out on the morrow to
be slain, as a vowed sacrifice. But the Lord does show that his life is most
safely kept, so that whatsoever men go about all is in vain. As for us, let
us not fear, but that his providence whereof he showed some token then,
reaches even unto the defending of us, because this promise continues sure:
Luke 21.18.
There shall not an hair fall from your heads, etc. Moreover it is worth the
noting that he woorketh sometimes by means unlooked for, to save those that
be his, that he may the better exercise our faith: who would have thought that
a boy would have disclosed their laying await, which those who were partners
in the conspiracy thought was known to none but to themselves? Therefore let
us learn to lean unto and stay our selves upon the Lord, though we see no
ordinary way to save our selves, who shall find a way even through places where
nothing can pass.

17 And when Paul had called unto him one of the Centurions, he says, Bring
this young man unto the chief captain: for he has a certain thing to show
him.

18 And he took him and led him unto the chief captain, and said, Paul the
prisoner called me unto him, and desired me to bring this young man unto thee
who has somewhat to say to thee.

19 And the chief captain took him by the hand, and went aside with him, and
asked him, what is it that thou have to say to me?

20 And he said, the Jews have co^spired together to desire thee, that thou
bring forth Paul into the council to morrow, as if they would know somewhat
more certainly of him.

21 But do not thou obey them: for more then forty of them lay in wait for him
who have bound themselves with a curse, that they will neither eat nor drink
until they have slain him. And now they be ready waiting that thou should
promise.

22 Therefore the chief captain let the young man go, and commanded him, tell
no man that thou have told me these things.

23 And when he had called unto him two under captains, he said, make ready
two hundred souldiars that they may go to Cesarea, and horse men seventy, and
two hundredth Or Iauelings.
with darts at the third hour of the night.

24 And make ready beasts that they may set Paul thereon, and bring him safe
to Foelix the governor.

17 Calling unto him. Paul was not so desirous of life, but he would have made
have to die, if the Lord had thought it good so to be: but because he knows
that he serves Christ upon that condition, that he may no less live then die
to him, he does not neglect to avoid the danger which was revealed to him. And
though he be fully persuaded that God is the keeper of his life: yet he does
not wait until God put forth his hand out of heaven to work a miracle, but
does rather use the remedy which is offered him: nothing douting but that it is
appointed by God.

Thus must all the ministers of Christ deal, that being furnished with
invincible constancy, so far as their calling requires, they fear not
danger, and yet that they cast not away themselves through rashness. Let them
call upon the name of the Lord, cheerfully even amidst the pikes: and yet let
them not contemn those helps which are offered. Otherwise they shall be
injurious to God, in that they are not only not moved with his promises, but
also despice the means which he has appointed for their deliverance.

19 Taking him by the hand. In that the chief captain did show himself so
courteous to the young man, in that he lead him by the hand into a secret
place, in that he vouchsafed to hear him so gently, all this must be
attributed to the grace of God, who promised to give his people favor in the
sight of the Egyptians, who uses to mollify hard hearts, to tame fierce
spirits, and to fashion those unto al humanity, whom he has determined to
use as means to help those that be his. A man trained up in the wars might
no less have given this young man the repulse, whom he knew not, then have
despiced Paul his suit. Therefore the Lord who has in his hand the hearts of
men, did frame the profane man to give ear unto him. Also it was well that he
knew before how furiously they raged against Paul, that he might the more
willingly succor a miserable and forsaken man. Those who are in authority are
taught by this example what a great virtue courtesy is. If it had bin an hard
matter to come to him, he might through ignorance have delivered Paul to the
Jews to be put to death. So often times Magistrates do fall into many and
great offenses through their own pride, because they will not admit those who
would give them good counsel.

Calling unto him. And here we see the providence of God yet more manifestly.
For though this be the drift of the chief captain, to prevent a public
uproar, whereof he should have given an account before the Governor: yet he
executes the counsel of God in delivering Paul. For he was to gather
souldiars together: also the city must needs be stripped of the garrison, and
the voyage required some cost. Therefore we must so consider the wisdom of
the chief captain, that our faith lift up her eyes into heaven, and
understand that God does guide the heart of a profane man by a secret instinct,
and that he is at length a guide to Paul and the souldiars, that he may come
safe to Cesarea. The third hour of the night was the end of the first watch.
Therefore it is all one as if the chief captain did command that the
souldiars be in readiness at the second watch. Exodus 3.21.
Luke calls those who carried darts Lancearios, who being more lightly
weaponed, were placed in the wings, when as the souldiars which pertained unto
the legions were more fit for set war.

25 And he wrote a letter after this sort,

26 Claudius Lysias to the most mighty Ruler Foelix sends greeting.

27 This man being taken of the Jews, and almost killed of them, did I rescue
coming upon them with souldiars, after that I knew that he was a Roman.

28 And being desirous to know the cause for which they did accuse him, I
brought him into their council.

29 Whom, I perceived they accused of questions of their law, having in him no
crime, worthy of death or of bonds.

30 And when I was certified of the laying await of the Jews, I sent him
straight way unto thee, and gave commandment to his accusers, that they
should tell those things before thee which they have against him. Fare well.

31 And the soldiers as they were commanded, took Paul and brought him by
night unto Antipatras.

32 And on the morrow when they had sent away the horsemen that they might go
with him, they returned to the camp.

33 When they were come to Cesarea, and had delivered the epistle to the
governor, they presented Paul also before him.

34 And when the governor had read it, and had asked of what province he was
and had known that he was of Celicia,

35 I will hear thee, says he, when thine accusers are come. And he commanded
him to be kept in Herod's judgment hall.

25 And he wrote a letter. First, we must briefly admonish the Readers, who
have not bin conversant in histories, that this Foelix was brother to Pallas,
who being Caesar's freema^, became equal with the chief of the city in wealth
and power. Yea moreover the Senate gave him the ornaments of the Praetor not
without titles of filthy and shameful flattery. Therefore seeing the servant
of Claudius abusing his folly did rule the Roman Empire at their pleasure, and
chiefly Narcissus and Pallas, no marvel if this latter did appoint his brother
to be governor of Judea. The sum of the Epistle tends to this end, that
the chief captain may help Paul with his prejudice: and may admonish Foelix
of the injuries of his adversaries, and may so discredit them that they may
not be able to do him any hurt.

27 This man being taken. This was spoken odiously concerning the Jews that he
might purchase more favor for Paul, that a man being a Roman was by them sore
beaten and almost slain: also he commends him for the right and privilege
of his freedom, that he may be the more courteously handled. Furthermore this
commendation was not purchased by prayer or flattery, neither was it bought
with money. How came it to pass then that the chief captain did show
himself so courteous freely to an obscure man and whom al men did hate, save
only because the Lord had appointed him to be his servants patron? Therefore we
see how he governs the tongues and hands of the infidels to the profit of
those that be his.

29 Whom I perceived. In this place he acquitteth Paul, so far as his
judgment could reach. But let us note that a profane man speaks. For among
the people of god, it is an offense worthy of no less punishment, to corrupt
the doctrine of godliness with wicked and false opinions, than to do injury
too, or commit wickedness among men. The Romans would not have suffered their
superstitions or feined worshipings of their gods to be freedom; but forasmuch
as they made no account of the Law of God, yea seeing they were desirous to have
the same quite put out, it was among them no fault to believe Moses and the
Prophets no more, or to trouble the Church with false opinions. Therefore there
was a Law that the governors should not meddle with such matters: but that
those who were abiding in the provinces should so retain their religion, that
if any thing were done contrary to the same, the Roman Magistrates should not
meddle with the punishing thereof. This is the reason why the chief captain
thinks it no offense, to have moved questions concerning the law. And under
color hereof unlearned men will have leave granted to themselves and others
amiss to cause trouble. The Lord says far otherwise, who does more sharply
punish the violating of his worship, than any injuries done to men. And surely
nothing is more absurd than to let those who rob God of his honor escape
scotfree, seeing theft is punished. But as the chief captain cares not for
the Jewish religion: so the false accusations and slanders of the Jews are
refuted, wherewith they would gladly have burdened Paul.

40 When it was showed to me. The second part of the Epistle where the chief
captain does bring the adversaries into contempt, because they went about to
kill Paul trecherously. Whence it is also gathered, that they trouble Paul
unjustly, and that they sought so sore after his life without any cause. For if
they had persecuted him lawfully, they would have trusted to the goodness of
their cause, and not have suffered him to be judged according to Law. Now when
as they seek to kill him, it appears that they have no reason.

32 And the next day. Though Luke did not express before that the soldiars
were commanded to return before they came at their ways end, yet it is
certain, that they were appointed to accompany him only unto that place, where
the chief Captain thought Paul would be safe: for he went out privily in the
night. And the Chief Captain knew that so soon as they had finished some part
of their journey, there was no farther danger: because the adversaries could
have no hope to overtake him: and that it was no point of wisdom to send part
of the garrison far away.

CHAP. XXIIII.
1 ANd after five days the chief Priest Ananias came down with the Elders
and one Tertullus a Rhetorician, who came before the Governor against Paul.

2 And when Paul was called forth Tertullus began to accuse him, saying, Seeing
that we live in great peace by means of thee, and seeing many things are
restored in this nation by thy providence:

3 That allow we ever and in all places most noble Felix, with all thanks.

4 But least I become tedious unto thee, I pray thee hear us a little of thy
courtesy.

5 For we have found this man a pestilent fellow, and a mouer of debate unto
all the Jews throughout the whole world, and an author of the sect of the
Nazarites.

6 Who did also go about to pollute the Temple: whom when we had taken, we
would have judged him according to our Law.

7 But the chief Captain Lysias came upon us, and with great violence took
him from us.

8 Commanding his accusers to come down unto thee, of whom thou may, if
thou will enquire, know the certainty of all these things, whereof we accuse
him.

9 And the Jews added, saying, that these things were so.

1 Seeing Ananias goes down to Cesarea to accuse Paul, it makes the
conjecture more probable, which I brought before touching his Priesthood. For
it was not meet for the highest Priest to take such a journey: Therefore some
other man was highest Priest at that time: and Ananias being one of the chief
Priests, forasmuch as he was in great authority and was withal a stout man,
did take this embassage upon him. He brings with him a train and that of the
worshipful company of Elders, that the Governor might be moved with their
very pomp to condemn Paul. But forasmuch as Paul did use no eloquence, they
had no need to hire a Rhetorician, to contend with him in eloquence. Moreover
they did exceed both in dignity and also in multitude, so that it was an
easy matter for them to oppress a poor man, and such a one as was destitute
of man's help. Therefore it was a sign of an evil conscience, in that seeing
they were men of great experience, exercised in public affairs, and skillful
in matters pertaining to courts, they hyre a Rhetorician. Eloquence is I
confess, the gift of God: but in this matter they went about nothing else but
to deceive the judge therewith. And Luke declares this therefore, that we may
know that the Jews did omit nothing, whereby they might oppress Paul: and
that they might not only prove him guilty, but so dash him out of
countenance, that he might not be able to defend himself: and so let us
consider that it came to pass by the wonderful providence of God, that Paul
did so stoutly endure such sore assaults. Wherefore if it so fall out at any
time that a godly man being alone be beset with a great number of enemies, let
him call to mind this history, and let him be of good courage. Psalm. 27.3.
As David does likewise exhort us by his own example, If tents were pitched
about me, I will not fear, because thou art with me.

2 Seeing we live in great peace. Tertullus uses a preface nothing
appertinent to the matter, because he commends Felix his wisdom and
virtues, that he may purchase favor. Therefore it is a filthy and flattering
Exordium not that I am of their mind who reprehende Tertullus for speaking the
judge fair, and for seeking to win his favor. For it is not always
disagreeing with the right and lawful form of pleading, to commend the
judge: and there may reasons be brought on both sides (as they say) touching
this matter. But I mislike nothing but this which is altogether corrupt. For
the Rhetorician does insinuate himself under false praises, that he may
darken the matter which is called in question. For to what end does he speak
of peace and a well ordered state, save only that Felix may think that the
safety of Judea consists in condemning Paul, and that he may examine the
matter no further? Moreover it appears by Josephus how couetously, cruelly,
and voluptuously Felix behaved himself in that province. The unworthy and
tragical murdering of the highest Priest Ionathas, because he set himself
against his dissolute tyranny, was already past: and finally almost at the
very same time Claudius Caesar was enforced with the complaints of the whole
nation, to put Festus in his place, and to call him to answer for himself.

Therefore we see how shamefullie this orator did lie. And seeing all Paul's
adversaries sing the same song, we see that they be blinded with hatred and
malice, and that they trecherously betray the state of their country: neither
do they pass what befall them so Paul may die the death. Where Erasmus
translateth it, Many things are well done, the old interpreter seems to
come nearer unto Paul his meaning, who says, that catorthomata are wrought,
which signifies as much as reformations or dressings. Therefore Tertullus
commends the industry of Felix, because he had cleansed Judea from many
corruptions, and he restored many things, which would otherwise have decayed.
To wit, to the end he may the more greedily seek to purchase the favor of
the nation (which he knew was otherwise offended with him) by the death of one
man.

5 For we found this man. Tertullus does aim at a double mark. The first
is this, that Paul may be delivered to the Jews, because they be very skillful
in matters which concern the worship of God and the Law of Moses. But and if
he deny this, he lays to his charge a crime worthy of death, because he
procured contention among the people. They knew that the Romans did hate
nothing more: therefore they urge that the sorest against Paul. This does
Tertullus amplify when he says, that Paul had moved the Jews throughout
the whole world. But I wonder why he adds that he is the author or chief
of the sect of the Nazarites: which we know was rather a praise than a
dispraise among the Jews. I think that they mean not those who according to
the old and lawful custom of the Law did consecrate themselves to God: but
those troublesome murderers, who did also vaunt and boast that they were
zealous men. Some think that Nazarites are here put for Christians: which may
very well be. But if we like the former exposition better, he does
craftily lay to Paul his charge that he was one of that sect which the
Romans did hate. For where as these zealous men would above all other have
been counted for notable obseruers of the Law, they advanced a color of
zeal as a banner to stir up the minds of the common people. Nevertheless
these good men who are so zealous over their liberty, do not spare the
chiefest maintainers thereof, so they may cause Paul to be hated by means of
them. They would have commended the Nazarites as courageous defenders of the
Law, if it had not bin in this matter, but now, as if they did infect the
whole world, they seek to bring upon Paul great reproach by saying that he is
one of them. Moreover they slander Paul impudently, for no man did think that
he was guilty of that crime. Therefore they lay to his charge no less
wickedly than maliciously a crime which they take up at their foot and invent
without all color. But such is the careless security of hypocrites, that they
think they may do whatsoever they will, so they color their doings with zeal.

6 Who went about to pollute the Temple. It was a light and almost a frivolous
accusation to lay this to his charge before the Roman Governor, who could
have wished that the Temple had bin turned topsituruie. But because nothing was
more fit for procuring vprores than the polluting of the Temple, he does
craftily accuse Paul thereof: as if he should say, that it was no thanks to
him that Jerusalem was not on an uproar: and that he carried such a firebrande
as might have procured sore hurt, if he had not been prevented. Also he
includes that other thing, that because Paul had offended in matters of
religion, it did belong properly to the Jews, to give judgment in that
matter. And here he complains also of the chief captain Lysias, because
he robbed them of their right. Therefore his drift is to obtain at the hands
of the Ruler that he will restore to them that which Lysias had taken from the^.
This is also not void of subtlety, in that Tertullus does discredit the
chief captain, because he dealt more courteously toward Paul than the
Priests would he should: and glauncingly he brings him in suspicion, because
he dare not openly accuse him. But the question is whether they could hope
that the Governor would grant them so much, seeing the Roman magistrates
alone were to sit upon life and death. I answer that he makes in this place
some semblance of equity, as if they were purposed to handle him more gently
than he deserved. For though they might not condemn any man to death, yet
they might use some light chastisement as was scourging. Nevertheless
Tertullus does not cease to desire before the president to have him put to
death.

8 Having made inquiry. A good request, that the Governor do not give
sentence before he thoroughly examine and know the matter: and that he do not
condemn Paul before he be lawfully convict. But how dare they put in these
conditions, seeing their own consciences do accuse them of unjust dealing? I
answer that they had witnesses in readiness: and that they do not offer
themselves to prove the matter until they do call the^ though there were
another end. For they did hope that Felix would be so persuaded with such
glorious words, that he would turn over unto them the man whom they did
accuse, for a condemned man, whom they might handle at their pleasure. In
sum, the more fierce they be upon him, and the more they were puffed up with
some affiance they had in themselves, they think they shall get the upper hand
by this means: because the party arreigned shall have no license granted to
defend himself. Thus do false accusars boldly boast, that their matter is
plain that they may blind the eyes of the judges.

10 And Paul answered, after that the Governor had beckened to him that he
should speak, with a better mind do I speak for my self, forasmuch as I know
that thou have judged this nation this many year:

11 Seeing that thou may know that there are yet but twelve days since th^^ I
came up to Jerusalem to worship.

12 And they neither found me in the Temple disputing with any man, or causing
any concourse of people, neither in the Synagogues, neither in the City:

13 Neither can they prove those things whereof they accuse me.

14 But this I confess to thee, that according to the way which they call
heresy, so worship I the God of my Fathers, believing all things which are
written in the Law and the Prophets:

15 And have hope toward God, that the same resurrection of the dead which
they wait for, shall be both of the just and unjust.

16 And herein I study always to have a clear conscience toward God and
toward men.

17 And after many years I came and brought alms to my nation, and offerings.

18 Wherein they found me purified in the Temple, neither with multitude,
neither with unquietness.

19. 20 And certain Jews out of Asia, who ought to have bin present here, and
to accuse, if they had any thing against me,

21 Or else let these same here say if they have found any iniquity in me, Or
seeing I stand.
when I stood in the Council:

22 Except it be for this one voice that I cried standing among them, I am
judged of you this day of the resurrection of the dead.

10 And Paul. The state of Paul his defense is not conversant in the quality:
but he denies the crime that was laid to his charge, not that he was ashamed
of the Gospel, or affraied of the Cross: but because that was no place to
make any full confession of fath in. Therefore omitting the cause of the
Gospel, which his accuser had not touched, he answers simply unto the
crimes whereof he was accused. But before he come thither, he says that he
does the more willingly answer for himself before Felix, because he had long
time been governor of Judea: because peradventure some new governor would
have bin sore moved hearing such things laid to his charge. He does not commend
the virtues of the governor, but he says that he is glad, because he is of
great experience, that he may judge more justly. This is surely a sincere and
free manner of defending, to set matter against words. Yet Paul seems to
gather amiss, that Felix can know the time of his coming, because he had been
governor many years. I answer that this is said therefore, because it is
likely that he will deal more moderately: as if he should say, Because thou
have bin acquainted with their conditions long time, I have the better hope
that they shall not deceive thee. For want of skill does make judges too
credulous, and does enforce them to make too much haste.

11 To worship. First it is certain that he came for other causes, and he will
afterward confess that this was the chief, that he might bring alms for the
sustentation of the brethren. But we may well excuse him, because it was not of
necessity that he should give an account of his coming, only he meant by
the way to excuse himself of corrupt religion. Wherefore though he came to
Jerusalem for some other cause, yet this is always true, that he came with no
other mind, but to profess himself to be a worshipper of God, and to approve
the holiness of the Temple by his worshipping. The other question is more
hard, how he says that he came to worship, seeing the religion of the temple
was already abolished, and all difference of the temple taken away. I answer
in this place likewise, that though he do not make his purpose known, yet he
does not lie or dissemble. For the faithful servants of Christ were not
forbidden to worship in the Temple, so they did not tie holiness to the
place: but did lift up pure hands freely without making choice of places. ^.
Tim. 2.8.
It was lawful for Paul to enter into the temple after he was come to
Jerusalem, that he might make his godliness known, and there to use the
solemn rites of the worship of God, because he was void of superstition: so
he did not offer any propitiatory sacrifices which were contrary to the
Gospel. Therefore religion did not compel him to come to Jerusalem according to
the appointment of the law, as if the sanctuary were the face of God as in
times past: yet he does not abhor the external worship which was unto men
a testimony of godliness.

12 Disputing with any man. Paul had no need to deny any of these things if
he had done them: because he might have answered for himself that it was well
done. He had bin one of the Scribes which disputed daily: neither were they
forbidden either by the Law or by custom, but that they might assemble
themselves together to be taught. Yea to this end there were in diverse places
of the City Synagogues, wherein they met together. Moreover he knew that
both Christ and also his Apostles had done the same thing. Also he might easily
have turned back upon his adversaries the crime which they did object to him,
who did daily use the very same things. But because he aims at no other thing
at this present, but to refute the false accusations of his adversaries, and to
prove that importunate men had unadvisedly molested him for no cause: he
entreats not of the lawfulness of the fact (as they say) but only of the
fact. And he stands chiefly upon this point to refute that slander,
because he was burdened to be a raiser of tumultes. Therefore he concludes
that he was falsely and unjustly accused: because the adversaries had never
proved those things which they had alleged. This ought to have been
sufficient to discharge him, seeing he was thus burdened with wicked lies,
whereas there rested in him not the very least suspicion that could be devised.

14 But I confess. Because they had laid to Paul his charge impiety and the
polluting of the Temple, he purges himself of both now, that Felix may
understand that his adversaries were moved with evil will. For though the
religion which is pretended be false and preposterous, yet the study thereof
did oftentimes find favor with men, who took no great heed. Wherefore it
was to be feared least Felix, if he had conceived any sinister suspicion of
Paul, should not only have pardoned the zeal of the Priests, but also have
granted their requests. Wherefore Paul does also refute this point of the
accusation: and that so, that he does not touch the faith of the Gospel:
because (as we have said) that was no fit place for making confession
thereof. But what is this, that he says that he worshippeth God according
to the way which they call heresy? Some think that this is added like to a
concession: because the enemies take that in evil part which ought to be
attributed to judgment and right Election: as if Paul had said; that that
form of religion which he had followed is in deed called heresy, but
unworthily. But seeing that name was not infamous either among the Jews or
Gentiles, it is unlikely that he makes answer before a profane man
touching that which they counted every where rather a commendation than any
vice. When Christians have conference together, the Spirit of God commands
that heretics be counted detectable: and he teaches us to beware of
heresies, because they bring upon the Church plague, dissension and
waistnesse. Therefore it is a thing not to be suffered among the people of God,
whose safety consists in the unity of faith. But because the Jews did then
openly boast of their sects, that excuse whereof we spoke of late was
superstuous. Therefore it remains that he do either mean that he is a
Pharisie, or that he call the Jewish religion or the profession of the Gospel
(without infamy) heresy: because they were distinguished from the use and
custom of all nations. Seeing he did before confess himself to be a
Pharisie, there shall no inconvenience ensue, if we say that he does repeat
the same now: especially seeing he speaks shortly after of the resurrection
of the dead. But because this first point does only contain a confession
concerning the worship of the God of the fathers, I th^nke that he does
rather speak generally of the Jewish religion, or of the Christian faith which
did flow thence. Paul was a Citizen of Rome, notwithstanding as he came of the
Jews by his auncestrie, he confesses that he continues in the religion
which he had learned of the fathers. And to this end does the aduerbe of
likeness tend: for it shows a known thing, namely, the manner of worship
whereunto the Jews were addicted. He makes express mention of the God of
his fathers, because it was not lawful for a man that was a Roman to receive
the doctrine of the Law unless he had come of the Jews. Also he touches
his adversaries, which handle him so cruelly: whereas notwithstanding they
both worship one God. I (says he) worship the same God (according to the
manner delivered by mine ancestors) which they themselves worship, and even as
they worship him. Neither does that hinder because he was fallen from the
ceremonies of the Law, and was content with the spiritual worship of God. For
Paul thinks it sufficient for him to wipe away that blotte of impiete which
his adversaries had falsely cast upon him. Therefore the Papists are
ridiculous, who feign that Paul allows all manner antiquity. We say they
worship the God of our fathers with Paul, as the custom was delivered to us
from hand to hand: as if (even they themselves being judges) it were
sufficient for the Jews or Turks to hold up the same buckler against the faith
of Christ. But the apostle meant nothing less tha^ simply to ground religion
in the authority of ancestors, and to defend his godliness with that defense,
which might have bin common to all the superstitions of the Gentiles: he meant
only to stop the mouth of his adversaries. Nevertheless he takes this for
a plain matter, that the Fathers from whom the Jewish religion came, were good
and sincere worshippers of God: so that the Jews which were not degenerate
might well boast, that the God of their fathers whom they worshipped, was the
only creator of heaven and earth: and that the country gods of all the rest of
the world, were mere and vain inventions.

Believing all things. A short exposition of the sentence next going before.
For because he had not simply affirmed that he worshipped God, but did add
this word outos or so: he does now set down how he worshippeth God. Whereby
it appears what great heed he takes for fear he entangle himself in those
accidental superstitions which reigned among the Jews. As if any of us do at
this day answer the papists that he worshipeth the God whom they profess, as
we be taught out of the Law and out of the Gospel. By this let us learn that
God is not rightly worshipped: so that our obedience can please him, unless it
be of faith, which is the only groundwork of godliness. For he (to the end
he may prove himself to be the servant of God) does not thrust upon them
bare ceremonies: but he says flatly, that He believes. Furthermore this place
contains a profitable doctrine, that this is the only foundation of right
and true faith, for a man to submit himself to the Scripture, and reverently
to embrace the doctrine thereof. Furthermore Paul does in this place divide the
scripture into the Law and the Prophets, that he may the more plainly prove
that he does not dissent from the universal consent of the Church.

15 Hoping in God. We must note the course of his speech. For after that he
has professed that he believes the scripture, he does now add the hope of
the resurrection to come, that it may appear that it comes not from the
understanding of the flesh, or from the decrees of men, but it is conceived out
of the word of God. Thus does the reuerance of the Scripture go before, that
it may hold us fast bound, and it is the beginning of faith. After that the
knowledge of those things which God has revealed there, does follow, being
coupled and linked with sure hope. And whereas he makes them his fellows, it
is referred unto the sounder sort. Though it be not to be doubted, but that he
seeks by this means and policy to bring them out of their lurking places
into the clear light and that before Felix: as it shall again appear by the
conclusion of the defense. But in this place the general resurrection is
defended against certain brainesicke fellows, who restrain the same unto the
members of Christ. But as Paul does in this place say that al men shall rise
again, so by the plain voice of Christ al are cited: some unto judgment, some
unto life. John. 5.29.

16 And herein do I study. There is no sharper prick to prick men forward
with all desire to lead a godly and holy life, then the hope of the last
resurrection, as the scripture teaches in many places. Therefore when Paul will
effectually exhort the faithful any where, he calls them back to remember the
same. Phil. 3.20.
Wherefore it is not without cause that he says in this place, that staying
himself upon this faith he has endeavored to live purely before God, and
righteouslie among men. And surely an evil conscience is as good as a
thousand witnesses to accuse men of blockishnesse: that they may gather for a
certainty that they do not earnestly and thoroughly believe eternal life,
after which they never long. He calls it a conscience aproscopon that is
without offense: where the servants of God labor to remove al lets which
hinder their course. And he puts two parts of the conscience. For there is a
certain inward sense or feeling, which beholds God alone: and thence comes
faithfulness and integrity, which we use toward men. At length when he sath
that he has constantly followed as well godliness in worshipping god, as just
dealing among men, he signifies unto us that those do in deed hope for the
last resurrection, who are never weary of well doing. For this word Always
does signify perseverance in a straight course.

17 And after many years. His meaning is that he had not of long time bin at
Jerusalem, but was conversant in other countries far distant, and that after
long time he came now to bring alms and to offer to God the sacrifice of
thanks. Whereby does also appear their want of good nature and their
unthankfulness, because seeing he had by all means deserved the goodwill of all
the whole nation, they recompense him so evil. This place does expound the
former, where mention was made of worshipping. For it is certain that Paul
came not purposely to offer in the Temple: because he purposed to do that after
he was come. But he does only recite what the Jews found in him, which was
of greatest weight for the matter which was now in hand. At length when he
says that he was found in the Temple doing this, and that, having first used
solemn purging, and secondly, quietly without raising any tumult, he clears
himself again of both crimes. For his purifying did witness that he did not
pollute the Temple. And secondly for as much as he did it quietly without any
multitude, there was no suspicion of tumult.

20 Certain Jews. This is an imperfect speech: yet the sense is pla^ne, that
these men of Asia as it should seem, had caused a tumult without cause, of
whose absence he complains: as if he should say, Ye which lay so many things
to my charge, cannot tell how the matter stands: but you bring before the
judgment seat of the governor a tale which was rashly believed. But those who
are to be blamed for the matter, and who were as fannes to set all on fire,
appear not. After that Paul has turned back the crime upon others, taking
to himself a good courage, he does now appeal unto the adversaries which are
present, willing them if they know any thing by him, freely to utter it: though
I dissent from Erasmus and the old interpreter in the participle stantos, for
they translate it in the present tence: and they expound the word sunedrion or
Council, of the sitting of the Governor, which I think, is far from Paul
his meaning. For his meaning is in my judgment, that he was ready to give an
account of all things in their council. And that they knew nothing then which
they can lay to his charge: because they began to stir only for this one
voice, when he said that he was judged of the resurrection of the dead: that
is, that he suffered all this trouble for no other cause, save only because
he did hope for the resurrection of the dead. Whereby it appears that they
now coin a new accusation for no cause: because if there had been in him any
fault, they would not have consealed it then. It is likely that they had
farther talk, and that they came nearer together: because we shall see
elsewhere that they did contend about Christ: but it was Luke his drift only
to declare how well Paul had cleared himself of the false accusations of his
accusers.

23 And when Felix heard these things, he deferred them, certainly knowing
those things which did appertain unto that way, and said, When the chief
captain Lysias shall come I will thoroughly know your matter.

24 And he commanded a Centurion to keep Paul, and that he should suffer him
to have ease, and that he should forbid none of his acquaintance to minister to
him, or to come to him.

25 And after certain days, came Felix with his wife Drusilla, which was a
Iewesse, and he called Paul, and heard him concerning the faith which is in
Christ.

26 And as he disputed of righteousness and temperance, and of judgment to
come, Felix trembled, and answered, For this time go thy way: and when I have
conuen^ent time, I will send for thee.

27 He hoped also that Paul would have given him money, to loose him. Wherefore
he sent for him the oftener, and communed with him.

28 And when two years were expyred Portius Festus came into Felix room. And
because Felix would do the Jews a pleasure, he left Paul bound.

23 When Felix. It appears that Felix (though he pronounced nothing
concerning the matter) did perceive that Paul was burdened with no fault of his
own, but with the malice of the Priests. For when Luke says that the matter
was deferred until the coming of Lysias, he puts in this in steed of a
reason, that The ruler did perfectly know those things which did appertain
unto the way: by which words I think is signified either that through long
experience he had been acquainted with the conditions of the Priests, and
knew full well how they were wont to behave themselves: or else that he saw
by these things which had been spoken on both sides, how frivolous the
accusation was: which is confirmed by the courteous and remiss usage of Paul:
for he puts a Centurion in trust with him, that he may have the more
liberty. Others had rather read it in one text in the person of Felix: When
Lysias, who does better know the truth of this matter is come, I will then
give judgment. But they set and gather this racked sense from a reason which
is scarce firm. They say that this word Way, is no where taken for the
doctrine of the Law without some addition. But I do not interpret it of the
Law, but of those sects whereof no strangers were ignorant. No man did doubt,
but that the Pharisees did hold the immortality of the soul. Therefore seeing
it was a thing so common, no marvel if Felix do acquit Paul. Furthermore it
were hard to take Way, for the knowledge of the fact. And I see not how this
can hang together that the Governor does confess that Lysias was more expert
in the Law than he. But his innocence is made more famous and evident by this,
because a profane man did streightway give such a prejudice thereof, that he
did suffer him to be visited and helped by his friends, being as it were
exempted from the order of prisoners. Also we gather by this that Paul his
companions and the residue of the Church had not forsaken him. For to what end
had it bin to grant liberty to his friends and acquaintance to have access
unto him, unless they had bin present, had showed themselves to be careful
for him, and had bin desirous to do their duty? Therefore let us learn by
this example, that so long as we may and are able, we must not defraud the
martyrs of Christ of any manner of comfort, whiles they labor for the Gospel.

25 Felix with his wife Drusilla. We said somewhat already concerning the
covetousness and corruptions of Felix. Now as touching his wife Drusilla, the
readers must understand that she was daughter to Agrippa the elder, of whose
filthy death Luke spoke before Chapt. 12. Chap. 12.23
She was betrothed to Epiphanis the son of Antiochus. But for as much as the
young man would not take on him the rites which the Jews did use, which he
promised to do, her brother Agrippa the younger (of whom mention shall be
made in the next Chapter) after the death of his father gave her to wife to
Azizus king of the Emesenes: from whose company she was enticed by the flattery
of Felix. For Felix being taken with her singular beauty, did persuade one
Simon a Iewe-borne in Cyprus to persuade and allure her to make a new match.
Therefore it came to pass that this voluptuous woman having broken promise
with her former husband, did marry with an uncircumcised man, contrary to
the Law. But though she had polluted her self with profane wedlock, yet we
may easily coniect by this place that she had not quite abandoned that feeling
of religion which she had of a child.

For Felix would neither have desired to hear Paul, neither would he have
vouchsafed to speak to him, unless it had been for his wives sake. Luke does
not express thus much, but in that he names Drusilla, we may well gather that
Paul was called for her sake, that he might dispute of the gospel. Though such
reuolts be rather tickled with curiosity, than moved with a sincere desire to
learn.

He heard him touching the faith. This confession of Paul does witness that
he did not spare to speak of Christ before, because he was afraid, or because
he would escape the trouble of the cross: but because it was not yet time to
speak. Seeing he was cited unto the judgment seat to answer for himself,
it stood him upon to answer concerning the crimes which were objected to
him, that he might afterward frankly and freely profess the faith of Christ.
Therefore when he now sees the gate set open and opportunity offered for
speaking, he is not affraide to offend the Governor, neither is he terrified
with danger, that he does craftily make as if he were not a Christian.
Therefore we see that he was as well furnished with invincible constancy, as
with wisdom and judgment: neither did he ever of set purpose suppress the
light of the Gospel, but did only make choice of the time.

Now the wonderful counsel of God is worth the noting in this place, who
will have the Gospel offered sometimes to the reprobate: not that they may
profit thereby, but rather that they may be made inexcusable. It had bin
better for Felix and Drusilla never to have heard any thing concerning Christ:
because they did not escape without punishment for refusing the grace of
salvation which was offered to them, or for neglecting the same with
loathsomeness. Furthermore we must note this, that certain by reason of that
seed of godliness which is in them engendered, do desire to hear the Gospel
preached, which so sone as they have heard, they do by and by either loath or
else they cannot suffer it. Nevertheless the preaching of the Gospel, (what
success so ever it have) is a good and sweet savor to God: whether it
quicken, or kill men. 2. Cor. 2.15.


26 And as he disputed. Felix hoped that he should take some delight in Paul's
sermon: as men who are desirous of new things, do willingly feed their ears
with subtle disputations: also he meant to satisfy his wives desire without
his own trouble: now he is enforced to feel that force of the word of God
whereof he never thought, which drives away all his delights. Paul out of
bonds disputes of the judgment of God: he which had power to put him to
death or to save his life, is afraid and quaiketh as if he stood before his
own judge: neither does he find, any other comfort, but to send him away out
of his sight. Let us first learn by this, what great force of the Spirit of
God there was both in the heart and also in the tongue of Paul, because he
sees that he must speak in the name of Christ, he does not behave himself
like an underling: but he declares the embassage which was enjoined him, with
a grace, as from on high, and having forgotten that he was in bonds, he
denounces the heavenly judgment in the person of Christ. And now seeing Felix
his heart is so pricked with the voice of a prisoner, the majesty of the
Spirit does show it self in that also, which Christ extolleth: when the
Spirit shall come he shall judge the world etc. and that force of
prophesying, 1. Cor. 14.24.
which the same Paul sets forth elsewhere. Also that is fulfilled which he
says in another place, that The word of God was not bound with him: which
he did not only stoutly maintain and affirm to be true, but which did
effectually pearce into the hearts of men (and that of such as were proud of
their greatness) as if it did lighten from heaven. Again we must note that
although the reprobate be stricken with the judgment of God, yet are they not
renewed unto repentance by that terror alone. Felix is touched in deed when he
hears that God shall be the judge of the world: yet he flies therewithal
from his judgment seat: (whereof he is afraid) so that this is feigned sorrow
which does not work salvation. Therefore repentance requires such fear as
may both engender a voluntary hatred of sin, and may also present a man
before God, that he may willingly suffer himself to be judged by his word.
And this is a token of true profiting when the sinner seeks for medicine
there, from whence he received his wound. Furthermore this place does teach
that men are then examined and tried to the quick, when their vices wherewith
they are infected are brought to light, and their consciences are called back
unto the judgment to come. For when Paul disputes of righteousness and
temperance, he did rub Felix sore upon the gall: forasmuch as he was both a
man given to filthy pleasure, and also to dissolute riot, and given over unto
iniquity.

27 Hoping that money. Though Felix had thoroughly tried Paul's integrity, so
that he was ashamed to take money of the Jews for condemning him: yet
forasmuch as he was a covetous man, and a man given to corruptions, he would
not acquit him for nothing: for this cause he does often call Paul, that he
may with fair words put him in some hope of deliverance. For judges which gape
after money do insinuate themselves thus, when as they will make way for
corruptions. Whence we gather that it was but a vain and transitory fear,
wherewith Felix was taken when he heard Paul dispute: seeing hope of gain
does compel him to call for him, whom he was enforced with fear to send
away. How did Felix hope for some reward at the hands of a poor man, and
one that was destitute? for that goulfe would not have been content with a
small pray. I do not doubt but that (as those who have the Law and right to
sell are witty and can perceive things) when he saw the Jews did make such
earnest suite to have Paul put to death, he smelled somewhat a far off
touching him: to wit, that he was none of the common sort; but such a man as
was in great favor with many. Wherefore he did not doubt but that many of his
friends would willingly bestow cost, to redeem him.

28 And when two years were expired. Seeing Paul knew that the Judge who did
gape for gain, would be favorable to him so sone as he should offer him
money, and seeing he had sufficient time to gather the same: it is likely that
he did not only bear with the Brethren, but also detest such briberie,
wherewith the holiness of civil order is shamefully polluted. Now whereas
governors use to let lose such prisoners as they know are not guilty when
they go from the province: Felix took the contrary way to win favor. The
Jews had often complained of his filthy gain, of his extortion, cruelty, and
unruly government. Claudius Caesar being wearied with so many complaints, did
call him out of Judea. To the end the Jews may not spite him so sore, he
leaves Paul bound. So that he makes the guiltless servant of God as it
were an offering for his evil deeds, that he may therewithal appease the
Priests.

CHAP. XXV.
1 THen when Festus was come into the province, after three days he went up to
Jerusalem from the City of Cesarea.

2 And the high Prists and the chief Jews informed him of Paul, and besought
him,

3 Desiring favor against him, that he would send for him to Jerusalem:
laying await to kill him by the way.

4 But Festus answered, that Paul should be kept at Cesarea, and that he
himself would go thither shortly.

5 Therefore let them (says he) which are able among you, go down with me:
and if there be any fault in this man let them accuse him.

6 And after that he had staid more than ten days among them, he went down
to Cesarea: and on the morrow he sat down in the judgment seat, and
commanded Paul to be brought.

7 Who being come, those Jews which came, from Jerusalem stood about him,
laying many and great crimes to Paul his charge, which they could not prove.

8 For as much as he answered that he had neither offended any thing against
the Law of the Jews, neither against the Temple, neither against Caesar.

1 Then when Festus. The second action is described in this place, wherein
Paul has as hard a cumbate, and is in no less danger then in the first.
Seeing he was left in bonds, Festus might suspect that the cause was doubtful,
and so gather an unjust prejudice. But there was another thing which was cause
of greater danger. We know that new rulers, because they will win the
favor of those who are in the provinces, use to grant them many things at
their first coming: so that it was to be thought that the death of Paul,
should be to Festus a fine means to win favor withal. Therefore the faith
of the holy man is assailed afresh with a new trial, as if the promise had
been vain whereto he had hitherto trusted: but the grace of god does so much
the more plainly show it self in delivering him, because, contrary to all
hope, he is delivered out of the jaws of death. The Jews prevent the
governor with their false accusations: yet they do not as yet seek to have
him punished, but they do only desire, that he may not be brought into any
foreign court to plead his cause. They desire that ambitiously as a great
benefit, which was to look to equal. How is it then that they do not obtain,
save only because God does hold the mind of Festus, so that he does stoutly
deny that, which he was afterward ready to grant? And as the Lord did then
hold his mind bound with the secreat bridle of his providence: so when he
granted him freedom of will, he bound his hands, that he could not execute
that which he would. Let this confidence support us in dangers, and let it
also stir us up to call upon God: and let this make our minds quiet and
calm, in that the Lord in stretching forth his hand and breaking such a strong
conspiracy, did show an eternal example of his power in defending his.

5 Those therefore. It is in the Greek word forward, Those who are mighty or
able: yet he means those who can conveniently. Also we may easily coniect,
that they did object the trouble and charges, and besought the Governor that
he would not make weary with a superfluous journey so many of their chief men,
and also certain which were very aged: b^t would rather (which he might
easily do) command Paul to be brought by a few keepers. Therefore least they
complain that he is burdenous unto them, he vnloadeth them of this
necessity, and gives them leave to choose out from among themselves such as
they will. In the mean season he does sufficiently declare, that he does not
believe their false reports: and he professes that he will be an upright
judge, and will do nothing but according to the truth of the matter. The next
sentence also is diversely read among the Grecians. For some books have the
same which is in the old interpreter, But eight or ten days. If this
reading like us, the sense shall be, that The governor came shortly after to
Cesarea, least the Jews should be importunate upon him under color of his
long tariance. The other reading which is more usual among the Grecians, shall
have another meaning: Though he stayed long enough at Jerusalem to hear the
matter, yet did he not harken to their requests, who would have Paul
brought thither, whence we may gather a probable conjecture, that he already
knew of their laying await.

7 Many and grievous crimes. So long as Paul lived under the Law his
integrity was well known and famous. Again when he was converted to Christ,
he was a singular pattern of innocence. Yet we see how he is subject to
many slanders, cruel and false accusations. And this is almost always the
estate of the servants of Christ: wherefore they must be the more courageous to
pass valiantly through evil report and good report: neither let them think
it strange to be evil reported of where they have done good.

In the mean season they must do their endeavor, that they may not only have
a clear conscience before God, but that they may be very well able to defend
themselves before men, when they have time and place. For Paul does not fail
in his cause: but courageously sets the defense of his innocence against
their false crimes. Furthermore let us note that the wicked can never be
bridled, but they will speak evil of good men, and will impudently slander
them: for they resemble the nature of Satan, by whose spirit they are led.
Therefore where as we be commanded to stop the mouth of the wicked, it must
not be so taken, as if he shall be free from all backbiting, whosoever shall
behave himself uprightly: but that our life may answer for us, and may wipe
away al blots of false infamy. So we see the adversaries of Paul, though they
had a favorable judge, yet their slanders were all in vain, seeing he did
defend and avouch his innocence by his deeds. And yet it is likely that they
wanted not false witnesses, neither were they slack in suborning them: but
because the Lord gives his servants invincible strength, so that the
brightness of honesty does drive away their vain clouds: they are ashamed,
and at length they depart from the judgment seat with this infamy, that they
were false accusars. But the defense of Paul does show what things the Jews
laid principally to his charge. The first crime was ungodliness against God,
that he overthrew the Law and polluted the Temple: the other, rebellion
against Caesar, and the Roman Empire, because he raised tumultes eueriewhere.
He was helped by the singular grace of God to answer and refute both, who
makes the innocence of his as bright as the morning.

9 And Festus being willing to do the Jews a pleasure, answered Paul and
said, will thou go up to Jerusalem and there be judged of these things
before me?

10 But Paul said, I stand before Caesar's judgment seat, where I must be
judged. To the Jews have I done no wrong, as thou thy self know full well.

11 And if I do injury, or have committed any thing worthy of death, I refuse
not to die: but if there be nothing of these things whereof they accuse me,
no man can deliver me to them. I appeal to Caesar.

12 Then spoke Festus with the Council and said, Have thou appealed to
Caesar? To Caesar shall thou go.

9 And Festus. Whether Festus knew somewhat of their laying awaite (which we may
well coniect,) or whether he were altogether ignorant thereof: he deals
unjustly with Paul: and we see how soon those are drawn unto all corruption,
which are not guided by the spirit of God. For Festus does not openly
contemn or hate Paul: but ambition, and peradventure also desire of gain got
the upper hand, so that for pleasing the other part, he does unjustly bring him
in danger of death: also it is likely that he was enticed with the smell of some
reward to harke^ so courteously to the priests. Notwithstanding I marvel that
he gives Paul leave to choose, and does not rather according to this
authority command them to carry him whether he would or no. Surely we gather
that he was kept back with fear, least he should infringe the privilege of
the city of Rome, which was a very odious crime. Notwithstanding he studieth
craftily to persuade Paul not to refuse to be judged at Jerusalem. For he was
not ignorant of that which indeed came to pass, that a citizen of Rome might
lawfully appeal, so that he could then go no farther. Nevertheless it was no
thank to him that he was not delivered into the hands of murderers.

10 I stand at Caesar's judgment seat. Because Paul sees that he is betrayed
into the hands of the Jews through the ambition of the governor, he
obiecteth the privilege of the city of Rome. He had submitted himself
modestly, if he had cmomaunded him to do that which was just and equal. Now
because the governor does not his duty willingly: necessity compels the
holy man to defend himself by law: and by this means the Lord delivers him
now again even when he was almost given over into the hands of the enemies.
And whereas he desires to have his matter handled before Caesar's judgment
seat: he does not therefore make the doctrine of the Gospel subject to the
judgment of a profane and wicked man: but being ready to give an account of
his faith every where: he appealeth from that court where he could no longer
hope for equity. Furthermore though the Citizens of Rome did retain their
privilege: yet the order was then altered: because the Cesars had taken into
their own hands the judging of the people, as if they would be good
maintainers and patrons of common liberty.

To the Jews have I done. Because those whose consciences do accuse them, and
which mistrust their matter, fly unto certain odd excuses and exceptions.
Paul turns away from himself this opinion. And surely the ministers of
Christ, ought to have no less care to make their innocence known, then to
save their life. If Paul had flatly denied to answer for himself, the enemies
would have triumphed, and the doubtfulnesse of an evil conscience should have
been objected to him to the reproach of the Gospel. But now when he cites the
governor himself to be a witness of his integrity, and does refuse no
punishment, if he shall be found gyltie, he cutteth of all occasion of
slanderous reports. Therefore he shows that he does not seek to save
himself by turning his back, but flies unto the fortress of a just defense,
that he may there save himself from injury, seeing his adversaries have
hitherto handeled him unjustly: and now refusing to deal with him any longer
by law they go about to have him murdered. Neither does Paul go behind the
Presidents back to tell him that he does unjustly, in that he does so dally
with his accusers: and therewithal he does as it were bridle his lust so that
he dare go no further.

11 I appeal unto Caesar. After that he has professed that he does not
refuse to die if he be found guilty, he freely uses such helps as he
could find at the hands of men. Wherefore if we be at any time brought into
like straits, we must not be superstitious, but we may crave help of the laws
and pollitike order. Because it is written that magistrates are made and
appointed by God to the praise of the godly. Neither was Paul afraid to go to
law under an unbelieving judge: Romans 13.3. and 1. Pet. 2.14.
for he which appealeth commenceth a new action.

Therefore let us know that God who has appointed judgment seats does also
grant liberty to his to use the same lawfully. Therefore those mistake Paul,
1. Cor. 6.1.
who think that he does flatly condemn the Corinthia^s, because they require
help of the magistrate for defense of their right, seeing he reproves in that
place a manifest fault, to wit, because they could suffer no wrong, and because
they were too much set upon sueing one another, whereby they caused the gospel
to be evil spoken of.

12 Festus having talked with the council. The governors did use to have
certain of the chief citizens which did attend upon them, and sat with them in
judgment: that they might decree nothing without the consent of the council.
Furthermore it does seem that Festus pronounced this with indignation, when
he said interrogatiuely, have thou appealed to Caesar? to wit, because it
grieved him that he could not do the Jews such a pleasure as he desired:
though I leave that indifferent because it is neither of any great importance,
and it leans only to a conjecture.

13 And after certain days, king Agrippa and Bernice came to Cesarea, to
salute Festus.

14 And when they had stayed there many days, Festus rehearsed Paul's cause to
the king, saying, There is a certain man left in bonds of Felix.

15 About whom, when I came to Jerusalem, the high priests and Elders of the
Jews informed me, requiring judgment against him,

16 To whom I answered, It is not the custom of the Romans, for favor to
deliver any man, that he should perish, before he that is accused have his
accusers face to face, and have license to answer for himself, concerning the
crime laid against him.

17 Therefore when they were come hither without delay, on the morrow I sat on
the judgment seat, and commanded the man to be brought.

18 Against whom when the accusers stood up, they brought none accusation
concerning such things as I supposed:

19 But they had certain questions concerning their Or Religion.
superstition against him, and concerning one Jesus which was dead, whom Paul
affirmed to be a live.

20 And because I doubted of this question, I asked him if he would go to
Jerusalem, and there be judged of these things.

21 And when Paul had appealed, that he might be kept unto the knowledge of
Augustus, I commanded him to be kept until I might send him unto Caesar.

13 And after certain days. This long narration tends to this end, that we
may know, that though the handeling of the cause were broken of, yet were Paul's
bands famous: and that he was nevertheless brought out of prison, that he
might make profession of his faith, and dispute touching the Gospel before a
famous auditorie, and again that though he were contemned, yet was he not
counted a wicked person, least the glory of Christ should be abased by his
slander and reproach, yea that he had more liberty to preach the gospel being
in prison, then if he had lived free in a private house.

King Agrippa and Bernice, It is certain that this Agrippa was son to
Agrippa the elder, whose filthy and detestable death was set down in the
twelfth chapter. When this man was made king of Chalcis in his uncles steed
after the decease of his father: he did afterward obtain a more large
dominion. Bernice, of whom mention is made in this place, was his own natural
sister, which was first married to Herod king of Chalcis her uncle, and did
keep her self widow a certain season after his death, yet she did not live
honestly and chastely during that time: for her too great familiarity with her
brother Agrippa was suspected. And to the end she might not be counted an
incestuous person, she married with Polemon king of Cilicia. Notwithstanding
because she gave herself more to lust than chastity, she forsook him. The
historiographers do no where say, that she was her brothers wife: and Josephus
in his life assigns her a dominion of her own in a part of Galilee.
Therefore it is to be thought that forasmuch as they were hardened in their
wickedness, they dwelt together not regarding what men did say: yet did they
abstain from marriage, least their incestuous marriage should bewray and also
augment their crime. Neither is it any marvel that he came for honors sake
to salute the governor, who did reign only at the will and pleasure of
another, and did depend upon the neck and favor of the Emperor of Rome,
which he was to retain and nourish by means of the governor.

14 When many days. Therefore when (after some time was spent) they wanted
matter of talk, as idle men use to invent somewhat whereon they may talk,
mention was made of Paul, for Luke meant to note that, when he said that after
many days were idly spent, Festus told the king of a certain man which lay
bound. And although he does here both touch the malice of the Priests, and
also make a show of wonderful equity on his part, yet in that he shortly
after clears the party which was accused, he condemns himself unawares,
when as he confesses that he was enforced to appeal that he might not be
carried to Jerusalem.

But when Festus commends the Romans, he shows what does beseem judges.
And if nature did tell profane men thus much, that they must admit no such
favor as may oppress the giltlesse: how much more must judges, (who have
the light of the word of God) be careful to avoid all corruption.

18 They laid no such crime to his charge. I marvel why Festus does say that
there was no such crime objected to Paul as he supposed, seeing he was
accused of sedition: but we may again coniect by this, yea, plainly know that
their accusations were so vain, that they ought not to have been brought
before the judgment seat: as if a man did utter a slanderous speech
unadvisedly. For which cause he says that the state of the cause did consist
in questions of the law. Therefore we see that he puts a difference
between those offenses which were wont to be punished by man's laws, and the
controversy which was between Paul and the Jews: not that religion ought to
be corrupted freely, or that their malapartnesse is tolerable, who overthrow
the worship of god with their own inventions: but because the man being a
Roman, cared not for Moses law: therefore he speaks so disdainfully when
he says, that they did strive about their superstition. Though this word
deisidaimonia be taken of the Grecians as well in good as evil part: to wit,
because the choice of worshippings of false gods were common in all places.
Notwithstanding his meaning is that he cares not what manner religion the Jews
have. And no marvel if a man which was an Ethnic and had not learned that the
rule of godliness must be fet from the mouth of God, know not how to
distinguishe between the pure worship of God and superstitions.

Wherefore we must hold fast that mark whereby we may discern the one from
the other, that there is no godliness but that which is grounded in the
knowledge of faith, least we grabble in darkness. Moreover the Romans were so
drunke^ with prosperous success, that they thought that they were more
acceptable to God then any other: as at this day the Turks by reason of their
manifold victories deride the doctrine of Christ. This was a lamentable case,
that a man being an unbeliever and idolater, sits as judge amidst the Jews,
to give judgment of the sacred oracles of God according to his ignorance, but
all the fault was in Paul his adversaries, who did not care for the majesty of
God, so they might satisfy and obey their own madness. Nothwithstanding
there rested nothing for Paul to do, but to clear himself of those crimes
which were laid against him. So at this day though inward brawles which are
among Christans, do defame the name of Christ and his Gospel among the
Turks and Jews, yet the defender of holy doctrine are unworthily blamed,
which are enforced to enter the combat.

Of one Jesus. It is not to be doubted but that Paul entreated both gravely
and with such vehemency as became him of the resurrection of Christ: But
Festus by reason of his pride, thought it no meet matter for him to occupy his
head about. He does not in deed openly deride Paul* but he shows plainly how
negligently he hard him when he disputed of Christ. Whereby we see, how little
preaching avails, yea that it avails nothing at all, unless the Spirit of
God do inwardly touch the hearts of me^. For the wicked do lightly pass over
whatsoever is spoken, as if a man should tell them a tale of Robin Hood.
Wherefore there is no cause why the carelessness of many should trouble us at
this day, seeing Paul prevailed nothing with Festus. But this place does
witness that many speeches did pass in the handeling of the matter, whereof
Luke makes no mention. For he had spoken nothing as yet of Christ: and yet
this latter narration does show that Paul entreated seriouslye before the
Jews of his death and resurrection. Which could not be, but he must needs
entreat of the principal points of the Gospel. Therefore I guess that Paul
did so handle the matter, that when he had refuted the false accusations of the
Jews, wherewith they went about to burden him before the governor, having
gotten a fit occasion, he began afterward to speak freely of Christ.

22 And Agrippa said unto Festus, I would also my self hear the man. To morrow
says he, thou shall hear him.

23 And on the morrow when Agrippa was come and Bernice with great pomp, and
was entered into the common hall with the chief captains, and the principal
men of the city: at Festus commandment Paul was brought.

24 And Festus says, king Agrippa, and all men which are present with us, ye
see this man, about whom all the multitude of the Jews has called upon me,
both at Jerusalem and here, crying that he ought not to live any longer.

25 Yet have I found that he has committed nothing worthy of death. And
because he has appealed unto Augustus, I have determined to send him.

26 Of whom I have no certain thing to write unto my Lord. Wherefore I have
brought him forth unto you, and chiefly unto thee O king Agrippa, that after
examination had, I may have somewhat to write.

27 For it seems to me an unmeet thing to send a prisoner, and not to show
the crimes whereof he is accused.

22 I would also. By this we may gather that Agrippa did so desire to hear Paul
that he was ashamed to make his desire known, least Festus should think that
he came for some other end then to salute him. And it may be that not only
curiosity did move him to be desirous to hear Paul: but because he did hope
to profit by hearing him. Notwithstanding we may easily gather by this, how
cold his desire was, because he suffered many days to pass before he shows
any sign of his desire: because he was more in love with earthly commodities
which he counted better. Neither durst he make any words, neither did he pass
for uttering any speech until such time as Festus did of his own accord will
him so to do. So that the holy minister of Christ is brought forth as on a
stage, that a profane man may cheer up his guest: save only that Festus will
be helped with the advice of Agrippa and his company, that he may let Caesar
understand how diligent he is. But the matter was turned to another end by the
secret providence of God: neither ne^d we doubt, but that such report went
abroad, as made much for the confirmation of the godly, and it may be also that
some of the hearers were touched, and did conceive seed of faith, which did
afterward bring forth fruit in due time. But admit none of them did embrace
Christ sincerely and from his heart, this was no small profit, that the
vnskilful^ were appeased after that the malice of the enemies was discovered,
that they might not be enflamed with such hatred against the gospel: impiety
was made ashamed, and the faithful did gather new strength, so that they were
confirmed more and more in the gospel.

23 And on the morrow. Agrippa and his sister do not come like humble disciples
of Christ: but they bring with them such pomp and gorgeousness, as may stop
their ears and blind their eyes: and it is to be thought that like hautinesse
of mind was joined with that gorgeous and great pomp. No marvel therefore if
they were not brought to obey Christ. Notwithstanding it seems that Luke
makes mention of the pomp, that we might know that in a great assembly, and
before choice witnesses whose authority was great, Paul had leave granted not
only to plead his matter as a party defendant, but also to preach the
gospel. For he comes forth as in the person of a teacher, that he may set
forth the name of Christ. So that the truth of God brake out of his bands,
which was forthwith spread abroad every where with a free course: yea it came
even unto us. By this word phantasia Luke understands that which we call
commonly preparation or pomp. But there must other furniture be brought unto
the spiritual marriage of Jesus Christ.

26 That after examination had. We cannot tell whether the gouerner in
acquitting Paul before them, does seek by this policy to entice him to let
his appeal fall. For it was a thing credible, that he might easily be
persuaded to lay away fear, and to submit himself to the judgment and
discretion of a just judge, especially if Agrippa should give his friendly
consent. To what end soever he did it, he condemns himself of iniquity by
his own mouth, in that he did not let a giltlesse man go free, whom he is now
ashamed to send unto Caesar, having nothing to lay against him. This did also
come to pass by the wonderful providence of God that the Jews themselves
should give a former judgment on Paul's side. Paraduenture the Governor goes
subtly to work that he may pick out what the king, and the chief men of
Cesarea do think: that if it so fall out that Paul be set at liberty, he may
lay the blame on their necks. For he would not have the priests to be his
enemies for nothing, upon whom a good part of Jerusalem did depend, and that
was the best way that he could take in writing to Caesar, to intermingle the
authority of Agrippa. But the Lord (to who^ it belongs to govern events
contrary to man's expectation) had respect unto another thing, to wit, that when
the clouds of false accusations were driven away, Paul might more freely
avouch sound doctrine.

CHAP. XXVI.
1 AND Agrippa said unto Paul, Thou art permitted to answer for thy self.
Then Paul stretched forth his hand, and answered for himself.

2 I think my self happy, O king Agrippa, because I shall answer this day
before thee, of all the things whereof I am accused of the Jews.

3 Seeing thou art most expert in all those customs and questions which are
among the Jews. Wherefore I beseech thee hear me patiently.

4 My life which I have led from my youth, which was at the first in mine own
nation at Jerusalem, know all the Jews.

5 Who knew me before since the beginning, if they would testify, that after
the most straight sect of our religion I lived a Pharisee.

6 And now I stand subject to judgment for the hope of the promise which God
made to our fathers.

7 Whereunto our twelve tribes serving God instauntly day and night, hope to
come for which hope, O king Agrippa, I am accused of the Jews.

8 Why does it seem to you a thing incredible, if God raise the dead.

2 We have declared to what end Paul was brought before that assembly: to wit,
that Festus might write unto Caesar as he should be counseled by Agrippa and
the rest. Therefore he does not use any plain or usual form of defense, but
does rather apply his speech unto doctrine. Luke uses in deed a word of
excusing: yet such a one as is nothing inconvenient whenever there is any
account given of doctrine. Furthermore, because Paul knew well that Festus did
set light by all that which should be taken out of the law and prophets, he
turns himself unto the king, who he hoped would be more attentive, seeing he
was no stranger to the Jewish religion. And because he had hitherto spoken to
deaf men. He rejoices now that he has gotten a man who for his skill and
experience can judge aright. But as he commends the skill and knowledge,
which is in Agrippa, because he is a lawful judge in those matters whereof he
is to speak: so he desires him on the other side to hear him patiently. For
other wise contempt and loathsomeness should have been less excuseable in him.
He calls those points of doctrine which were handeled among the Scribes,
questions: who were wont to discuss religion more subtly. By the word
customs he means those rites which were common to the whole nation.
Therefore the sum is this, that king Agrippa was not ignorant either in
doctrine, either in the ceremonies of the law. That which he brings in or
concludes, wherefore I pray thee hear me patiently, (as I said even now)
does signify that the more expert a man is in the Scripture, the more
attentive must he be, when the question is about religion. For that which we
understand does not trouble us so much. And it is meet that we be so careful
for the worship of god, that it do not grieve us to hear those things which
belong to the defining thereof: and chiefly when we have learned the
principles: so that we may readily judge, if we list, to take heed.

4 My life which I have led. He does not as yet enter into the state of the
cause: but because he was wrongfully accused and burdened with many crimes,
least king Agrippa should envy the cause through hatred of the person, he
does first avouch his innocence. For we know that when a sinister suspision
has once possessed the minds of men, all their senses are so shut up, that
they can admit nothing. Therefore Paul does first drive away the clouds of an
evil opinion, which were gathered of false reports, that he may be heard of
pure and well purged ears. By this we see that Paul was enforced by the
necessity of the cause, to commend his life which he had lead before. But he
stands not long upon that point: but passes over straightway unto the
resurrection of the dead, when he says, that he is a Pharisee. And I think
that that is called the most straight sect, not in respect of holiness of life,
but because there was in it more natural sincerity of doctrine, and greater
learning. For they did boast that they knew the secret meaning of the
scripture. And surely forasmuch as the Sadduces did vaunt that they did stick
to the letter, they fell into filthy and gross ignorance, after they had
darkened the light of the scripture. The Essenes contenting themselves with an
austere and straight kind of life, did not greatly care for doctrine. Neither
does that any whit hinder, because Christ inueigheth principally against the
Pharisees, as being the worst corrupters of the scripture. Mat. 23.13.
For seeing they did challenge to them selves authority to interpret the
scripture according to the hidden and secret meaning: hence came that
boldness to change and innouate, wherewith the Lord is displeased. But Paul
does not touch those inventions, which they had rashly invented, and which
they urged with tyrannous rigor. For it was his purpose to speak only of the
resurrection of the dead. For though they had corrupted the law in many points:
yet it was meet, that the authority of that sect should be of more estimation
in defending the sound and true faith, then of the other which were departed
farther from natural purity: Moreover Paul speaks only of the common
judgment, which did respect the color of more subtle knowledge.

6 For the hope of the promise. He does now descend into the cause, to wit,
that he labors for the principal point of faith. And though he seem to
have spoken generally of the resurrection, yet we may gather out of the text,
that he begins with a farther point: and that he did comprehend those
circumstances, which did properly appertain unto the faith of the gospel. He
co^plaineth that the Jews did accuse him, because he maintained the hope of
the promise made to the fathers. Therefore this was the beginning and also the
issue of the matter, that the covenant which God had made with the fathers, is
referred unto eternal salvation. Wherefore this was the sum of the
disputation, that the Jewish religion was nothing worth, unless they took
heed to the heavens, and did also lift up their eyes unto Christ the author
of the new life. They did boast that they were chosen from among all people of
the world. But their adoption did profit them nothing, unless they did trust
to the promised Mediator, and look unto the inheritance of the kingdom of
god. Therefore we must conceive much more then Luke does plainly express. And
surely his narration tends to no other end, save only that we may know of
what things Paul entreated. But what this was, and in what words he uttered
it, we cannot tell, Nevertheless it behooves us to gather out of a brief sum
those things which appertain unto this disputation: which was freely handeled
before Agrippa, when Paul had free liberty granted to him to plead his own
cause.

7 Whereunto our twelve tribes. Paul complains before Agrippa, that the state
of the church is come to that pass that the Priests set themselves against
the common hope of all the faithful: as if he should say, to what end do
those of our nation, who worship God carefully, and spend both days and
nights in the duties of godliness, sigh in their prayers, save only that
they may at length come unto eternal life? But the same is the mark whereat I
aim in all my doctrine: because when the grace of redemption is set before
men, the gate of the kingdom of heaven is set open therewithal. And when I
preach the author of salvation raised up from the dead, I offer the first
fruits of immortality in his person. So that the former confirmation of his
doctrine was taken out of the word of God, when he cited the promise made to
the fathers. Now in the second place he adds the consent of the church. And
this is the best way to maintain and avouch the opinions of faith, that the
authority of God go foremost: and that then the consent of the church come
next. Though we ought therewithal wisely to make choice of the true church: as
Paul does teach us in this place by his own example: for though he knew
that the Priests did pretend the visure of the church against him: yet he
does boldly affirm that the sincere worshippers of God are on his side, and
he is content with their defense. For when he means the twelve tribes he
does not speak generally of al those which came of Jacob according to the
flesh: but he means those only, which did retain the true study of
godliness. For it had been an unmeet thing to commend the nation generally for
the fear of GOD, which was only in a few.

The Papists deal very disorderedly in both: who by the voices and consents of
men, oppress the word of God, and give also the name and title of the
catholic church, to a filthy rabblement of unlearned and impure men, without
any color or shame: but if we will prove that we think as the true church
thinks, we must begin with the Prophets and Apostles: then those must be
gathered unto them whose godliness is known and manifest. If the Pope and his
Clergy be not on our side, we need not greatly to care. And the true
affection of true religion is proved by continuance and vehemency: which was
of singular force at that time, principally when the Jews were in greatest
misery.

8 Why should. I do not doubt but that he proved that both by reason and also
by testimonies of scripture, which he taught concerning the resurrection and
the heavenly life. But for good causes does he callbacke those unto whom he
speaks, unto the power of God, least they judge thereof according to their
own weak capacity. For nothing can more hardly sink into men's brains, then
that men's bodies shall be restored when as they be once consumed. Therefore
seeing it is a mystery far surpassing man's wit, let the faithful remember
how far the infinite power of God does reach, and not what they themselves
comprehend: Phil. 3.21.
as the same Paul teaches in the third chapter to the Philippians. For when
he has said that our vile bodies shall be made like to the glorious body of
Christ, he adds immediately, according to the mighty working whereby he is
able to subdue all things to him self. But men are for the most part
injurious to God, who will not have his arm reach any farther, then their
understanding and reason can reach: so that so much as in them lies they
would desire to restrain the greatness of his works (which surpasses heaven
and earth) unto their straites. But on the otherside Paul commands us to
consider what God is able to do, that being lifted up above the world, we may
learn to conceive the faith of the resurection not according to the weak
capacity of our mind, but according to his omnipotency.

9 And I verily thought that I ought to do many things against the name of
Jesus of Nazareth.

10 Which thing I also did at Jerusalem, and I shut up many of the Saints in
prison, having received power from the high priests: and when they were put to
death I gave sentence.

11 And punishing them oftentimes throughout all Synagogues I enforced the^ to
blaspheme: and being yet more mad upon them, I did persecute them even into
strange cities.

12 And as I went to Damascus for this intent with authority and commission of
the high priests:

13 At midday, O king, I saw in the way a light from heaven, passing the
b^ightnesse of the Sun, shine round about me, and those which iourneied
with me.

14 And when we were all fallen to the earth, I heard a voice speaking unto me
and saying in the Hebrew tongue, Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? It is
hard for thee to kick against pricks.

15 And I said: who art thou Lord? But he said unto me, I am Jesus whom thou
persecutest.

16 But rise and stand up upon thy feet, for to this end did I appear unto
thee, that I may make thee a minister and witness both of those things which
thou have seen, and also of those things wherein I will appear unto thee.

17 Delivering thee from the people, and from the Gentiles, unto whom now I
send thee.

18 That thou may open their eyes, that they may be converted from
darkness to light, and from the power of Satan unto God, that they may
receive forgiveness of sins, and an inheritance among those who are
sanctified, by the faith which is in me.

9 And I truly, If Paul had not spoken more things then those which Luke has
hitherto recited, his speech had not hanged well together. Whence we prove that
which was said before, that after that he had spoken of the covenant of God,
he entreated of the grace and office of Christ, as the matter required. And
he repeateth the history of his conversion for this cause, not only that he
may remove from him self all suspicion of lightness: but that he may
testify that God had called him, and that he was even enforced by a
commandment coming from heaven. For seeing that he was, contrary to his
expectation, suddenly made a sheep of a woolfe, such a violent change is of no
small importance to purchase credit to his doctrine.

Therefore he amplifieth that his heat and vehement desire which he had to
punish the members of Christ, and also that stubbornness whereunto he was
wholly given over. If he had been nousled up in the faith of Christ from
his youth, or if he had been taught by some man, he should have embraced it
willingly and without resistaunce, he himself should have been sure of his
calling, but it should not have been so well known to others. But now seeing
that being inflamed with obstinate and immoderate fury, being moved with no
occasion, neither persuaded by mortal man, he changes his mind; it
appears that he was tamed and brought under by the hand of God.

Therefore this contrariety is of great weight, in that he says that he
was so puffed up with pride that he thought he should get the victory of
Christ: whereby he teaches that he was nothing less, then made a disciple of
Christ through his own industry. The name of Jesus of Nazareth is taken in
this place for the whole profession of the Gospel, which Paul sought to
extinguish, by making war ignorantly against God, as we may see.

10 Which thing I did. He proves by his very factes with what force of zeal
he was carried away to strive against Christ, until greater force did pull
him back, and made him go the quite contrary way. Furthermore his adversaries
were witnesses of this his vehemency: so that it was most certain that he was
suddenly changed: and undoubtedly the priests would never have put him in
any such office, unless he had behaved himself courageously in exercising
cruelty: and it was meet that he should be very courageous who should
satifie their fury. This is also to be noted, that Paul was not ashamed to
confess how sore he had offended against God, so that that might turn to the
glory of Christ. It was to him undoubtedly reproachful, to have been carried
away with blind zeal, so that he enforced those to blaspheme which did desire
to serve God: to have troubled the good and simple diversely: to have given
sentence of the shedding of innocent blood: finally to have lifted up his
horns even unto heaven, until he was thrown down. But he does not spare
his own estimation, but does willingly utter his own shame, that the mercy of
God may the more plainly appear thereby.

Wherefore there could no sinister suspicion rest in his speech, seeing that
(without having any respect of himself) he says, that he did utterly offend
in those things whereby he gate the praise of all the people. Therefore he
condemns his very zeal of madness, which others did honor. Whereby it
appears how filthy the ambition of those men is, who are ashamed simply to
confess if they have offended through ignorance or error. For although they do
not altogether excuse the same, yet they go about to lessen or paint these
things, for which they ought humbly with sorrow and tears to crave pardon.
But though Paul might have retained the same of a courageous man, yet he
confesses that he was a mad man. For the participle which Luke uses imports
thus much, that he compelled many to blaspheme. By this we know that there
was great corruption even in the very first fruits of believers, seeing that
having first professed themselves to be disciples of Christ, and being
afterward discouraged with fear or stripes, they did not only deny him,
but also spoke evil of his blessed name. Though the very denial it self
contains an horrible blasphemy.

13 At midday, O king. The narration tends to this end, that king Agrippa may
understand that it was no vain visure or ghost, neither was it any such
trance as brought him into some madness, so that he was destitute of
judgment. For though he fell to the earth for fear, yet he hears a plain
voice: he asks who it was that spoke: he understands the answer which was
made: which are signs that he was not beside himself. Hereupon it follows
that he did not rashly change his mind, but did godlily and holily obey the
heavenly oracle: least he should of set purpose proceed to strive against God.

16 But rise. Christ did throw down Paul that he might humble him: now he
lifts him up, and bids him be of good courage. And even we are daily
thrown down by his voice to this end, that we may be taught to be modest: but
look whom he throws down, he does raise the same again gently. And this is
no small consolation, when Christ says that he appeared to him not as a
revenger to plague him for his madness, for those stripes which he had
unjustly and cruelly given, for his blooddie sentences, or for that trouble
wherewith he had troubled the Saints, for his wicked resisting of the Gospel:
but as a merciful Lord, intending to use his industry, and to call him to an
honorable ministry. For he made him a witness of those things which he
saw and which he should afterward see. This vision was worthy to be
recorded, by which he learned that Christ reigns in heaven, that he might
no longer proudly contemn him: but acknowledge that he is the son of God,
and the promised redeemer, he had other revelations afterward, 2. Cor. 12.1.
as he says in the second Epistle to the Corinthians, and twelft chapter.

17 Delivering thee, He is armed in this place against all fear, which was
prepared for him: and also he is prepared to bear the cross: Notwithstanding
seeing he adds immediately that Paul should come to lighten the blind, to
reconcile those to God which were estranged from him, and to restore salvation
to those which were lost: it is a marvel why he does not also promise, that
they shall on the otherside receive him joyfully, who shall by means of him
receive such and so great benefits. But the unthankfulness of the world is
noted out unto us in this place: because the ministers of eternal salvation
are far otherwise rewarded: as frantike men do rail upon their physicians.
And Paul is admonished that whither soever he shall come, a great part of those
to whom he shall study to do good, shall hate him, and seek his overthrow. And
he says plainly that he is appointed to be a witness both to Jews and
Gentiles, least that turn to his reproach, because he made the Gospel common
to both alike. For the Jews had conceived such deadly hatred against him for
this cause, because it grieved them that the Gentiles should be made their
fellows. And though they made a show that this did proceed of zeal, because
they would not have the covenant which God made with the posterity of Abraham
profaned, by being translated unto strangers: yet mere ambition did prick
them forward, because they alone would be excellent, all other being
underlings. But in the person of one man, all godly teachers are encouraged to
do their duty, that they be not hindered or kept back with the malice of men
from offering the grace of God unto miserable men though they be unworthy.

18 That thou may open their eyes. Paul in taking to himself that which is
proper to God, does seem to exalt himself too high. For we know that it is
the holy Ghost alone which does lighten the eyes. We know that Christ is the
only redeemer which does deliver us from the tyranny of Satan. We know that it
is God alone who having put away our sins, does adopt us unto the inheritance
of the Saints. But this is a common thing, that God does translate unto his
ministers that honor which is due to himself alone, not that he may take any
thing from himself, but that he may commend that mighty working of his
spirit which he does show forth in them. For he does not send them to work,
that they may be dead instruments, or as it were stage players: but that he
may work mightily by their hand. But it depends upon the secret power of
his Spirit that their preaching is effectual, who works all things in all
men, and which only gives the increase.

Therefore teachers are sent, not to utter their words in vain in the air,
or to beat the ears only with a vain sound, but to bring lively light to
the blind, to fashion again men's hearts unto the righteousness of God, and to
ratify the grace of salvation which is gotten by the death of Christ. But
they do none of all these, save only in as much as God works by them, that
their labor may not be in vain, that all the praise may be his, as the
effect comes from him.

And therefore we must note, that so often as the scripture does extol the
external ministry so honorably, we must not separate it from the Spirit,
which quickneth the same even as the soul does the body. For it teaches in
other places how little man's industry can do of it self. For they must plant
and water: but it is God alone which gives the increase. But because many are
hindered by their own ignorance and malice, that they cannot reap such fruit
of the Gospel as they ought, we must note this description, which sets
before our eyes briefly and plentifully, that incomparable treasure. Therefore
this is the drift of the Gospel that being delivered from blindness of mind,
we may be made partakers of the heavenly light: that being delivered from
the thraldom of Satan, we may be turned to God: that having free forgiveness
of sins, we may be made partakers of the inheritance among the Saints.
Those which will rightly profit in the Gospel must direct al their senses to
this end: for what good shall the continual preaching thereof do us, if we
know not the true use thereof? Also the way and means to attain to salvation
is described to us, All men boast that they be desirous of salvation: but few
consider how God will save them.

Therefore this place wherein the means is pretily comprehended, is as it were a
key to open the gate of heaven. Furthermore we must know, that all mankind
is naturally deprived of those good things, which Christ says we have by
believing his Gospel. So that it follows that al are blind, because they be
lightened by faith, that al are the bo^dslaues of Satan, because they are set
free by faith from his tyra^nie: that all me^ are the enemies of God and
subject to eternal death, because they receive remission of sins by faith.
So that nothing is more miserable then we if we be without Christ and without
his faith. Whereby it appears how little, yea that nothing is left for the
free will of men's merits. As touching every part, this lightening is referred
unto the knowledge of God, because all our quickness of sight is mere vanity
and thick darkness, until he appear unto us by his truth. That reaches
farther which follows afterward: To be turned from darkness to light. For
that is when we are renewed in the spirit of our mind.

Therefore in my judgment this member and that which follows express both
one thing: to be turned from the power of Satan unto God. For that renewing
which Paul declares more largely in the second chapter to the Ephesians, is
expressed in diverse forms of speech. Remission of sins follows next, Ephe.
2.10. and 4.23.
whereby God does freely reconcile us to himself, so that we need not doubt but
that god will be favorable and merciful to us. At length the furnishing and
filling of all things is put in the last place: to wit, the inheritance of
eternal life. Some do read it falsely in one text, Among those who are
sanctified by faith: because this word is extended unto the whole period.
Therefore the meaning thereof is, that by faith we come unto the possession of
all those good things which are offered by the gospel. And faith is properlye
directed unto Christ: because all the parts of our salvation are included in
him. Neither does the Gospel command us to seek the same any where else save
only in him.

19 Whereupon, O king Agrippa, I was not disobedient to the heavenly vision.

20 But I preached first to those which are at Damascus, and at Jerusalem, and
through every region of Judea: and then to the Gentiles, that they should
repent, and be turned unto God, doing works which become those which repent,

21 For this cause the Jews having caught me in the temple, went about to kill
me.

22 Therefore seeing I have obtained help of God, I stand until this present
day, testifying both to small and great, saying none other things the^ those
which the prophets and Moses said should come to pass.

23 Whether Christ should suffer, whether he should be the first that should
rise from the dead, to show light to the people and to the Gentiles.

19 He declares now briefly to what end he rehearsed the history of his
conversion: to wit, that Agrippa and the rest might understand, that he had
God for his author of all those things which the Jews condemned of Sacrilege
and apostacy. He speaks to Agrippa by name, because he knew that Festus and
the Romans knew not what an heavenly vision meant. Now it appears that there
is nothing in the very sum of his doctrine which dissenteth from the law and
the prophets. Whereby the oracle does win greater credit, whereby Paul was
commanded to teach nothing but that which was agreeable to the scripture.
Conversion or turning unto God is joined with repentance not as some peculiar
thing: but that we may know what it is to repent. Like as also on the contrary
the corruption of men and their frowardenesse is nothing else but an estranging
from God. And because repentance is an inward thing and placed in the affection
of the heart, Paul requires in the second place, such works as may make the
same known: according to that exhortation of John the baptist: Mat. 3.8.
Bring forth fruits meet for repentance. Now forasmuch as the gospel
calls all those which are Christ's unto repentance, it follows that all men
are naturally corrupt, and that they have need to be changed. In like sort
this place teaches that these men do unskillfully pervert the gospel, which
separate the grace of Christ from repentance.

21 They went about to kill me. He complains in this place of the iniquity
of his adversaries, that it may thereby appear that their cause and conscience
were both evil. For if Paul had offended they might have gone to law with
him: and even there should they have stand in better state, seeing they did
far pass him both in favor and authority. Therefore their madness does
testify that they are destitute of reason. Whereas Paul says that he was
saved by the help of God, it makes for the confirmation of his doctrine. For
how is it that he reaches out his hand to help him, save only because he
acknowledges his minister, and because he will defend the cause which he
allows? Moreover, this ought to have encouraged him to go forward so much
the more boldly in his office, in that he was thus helped by God. For it had
been a point of an unthankful man to withdraw himself from him which had
helped him. By which example we be taught that so often as we be delivered from
danger, the Lord does not therefore prolong our days, that we may afterward
live idly: but that we may do our duty cheerfully, and be ready to die
every hour to his glory, who has reserved us to himself. And yet Paul did
not forget how much he was indebted to the chief captain, but in this
place he commends the help of God, that he may show that it became him to
spend all the rest of his course in his service, by whom he was delivered:
though that came to pass, and were done through the industrye and by the
hand of man.

Testifying both to small and great. We have said else where that it is more
to testify than to teach: as if there were some solemn contestation made
between God and men, that the Gospel may have his majesty. And he says that
he is a witness both to great and small, that king Agrippa may perceive that
this does appertain even to him: and that when the Gospel is offered even to
every simple man, that does no whit hinder but that it may ascend even unto
the throne of Princes. For Christ does gather al me^ into his bosom with one
and the same embracing, that those who lay before in the doung hill, and are
now extolled unto so great honor, may rejoice in his free goodness, and that
those who are placed in high degree of honor, may willingly humble themselves,
and not grudge to have some of the base and contemptible multitude for their
brethren, that they may be made the children of God. So in the first chapter
to the Romans, He says that he is indebted both to the fools and to the
wise, least the Romans should be kept back with the confidence which they
might repose in their wisdom, from submitting themselves to his doctrine. By
this let us learn that it is not in the teachers will to make choice of his
hearers, and that they do no less do injury to God then defraude men of
their right, whosoever they be which restrain their labor unto great men,
whom God does join with those which are small. It were too cold to restrain
this unto ages. Wherefore I do not doubt but that Paul takes away the
exception which uses to be between the noble and unnoble, because he was
neither afraid of the dignity of the one, neither did he loath the baseness
of the other, but did show himself a faithful teacher to both alike.

Saying no other thing. First, this is worth the noting, that Paul to the end
he may bring in fit and substantial witnesses of his doctrine, does not take
the same from among men, but he cites Moses and the Prophets, to whom the
Lord had gtaunted undoubted authority. And surely this is one principle to
be observed, when we will teach soundly, to utter nothing but that which did
proceed out of the mouth of God. Secondly this is worth the noting, that these
were the principal points of the disputation, which Luke does now touch:
that This was the proper office of Christ, by his death to make satisfaction
for the sins of the world, by his resurrection to purchase righteousness
and life for men: and that the fruit of his death and resurrection is common
both to Jews and Gentiles. But forasmuch as there is no manifest, and (as they
say) literal testimony extant in the Law concerning the death and
resurrection of Christ: undoubtedly they had some doctrine delivered by hand
from the Fathers, out of which they did learn to refer all figures unto
Christ. And as the Prophets, which did prophecy more plainly of Christ, had
their doctrine from that fountain, so they made the men of their time believe,
that they delivered unto them no new thing, or which did dissent from Moses.
And now Paul did either not finish his apology, or else he gathered more
evident testimonies of all those things, wherein he professed Moses and the
Prophets to be his authors.

The first of those which. There were some other whose resurrection went before
Christ's in time: namely if we admit that the saints of whom the Evangelists
speak, did come out of their graves before Christ: Mat. 27.57 Genesis 5.24. 2.
King. 2.11 1. Cor. 15.23.
which may likewise be said of the taking up of Enoch and Elias. But he calls
him in this place the First, as in another place the first fruits of those
which rise again. Therefore this word does rather note out the cause, than the
order of time: because when Christ did rise again, he became the conqueror of
death and Lord of life, that he might reign for ever, and make those who are
his, partakers of blessed immortality. Under this word light, he comprehends
whatsoever does pertain unto perfect felicity, as by darkness is meant
death and all manner of misery. And I do not doubt but that Paul alluded unto
the sayings of the Prophets, Esai. 9.2. Ibid. 60.2.
The people which walked in darkness saw great light. And again, Behold
darkness shall cover the earth, and a mist the people: but the Lord shall be
seen upon thee. Again, Behold those which are in darkness shall see light.
Again, I have made thee a light of the Gentiles. Ibid. 42.16 and 6. and 49.6.
And it appears by many oracles that the light of life should come out of
Judea and should be spread abroad among the Gentiles.

24 And as Paul answered for himself, Festus says with a loud voice, Paul
thou art beside thy self, much learning does make thee mad.

25 And Paul said I am not mad, most noble Festus, but speak forth the words
of truth and sobriety.

26 For the king knows of these things, before whom I also speak freely. For
I think that none of these things are hidden from him: for this was not done
in a corner.

27 King Agrippa beleeuest thou the Prophets? I know that thou beleeuest.

28 And Agrippa said unto Paul, Thou briefly perswadest me to become a
Christian.

29 And Paul says, would to God that not only thou, but also all which hear
me this day were both almost, and altogether such as I am, except these bonds.

30 And when he had thus spoken the king arose, and the Governor, and Bernice,
and those which sat with them.

31 And when they were gone apart, they talked together between themselves,
saying, This man does nothing worthy of death or bonds.

32 Then Agrippa said to Festus, This man might have bin loosed, if he had not
appealed unto Caesar.

24 Festus said with a loud voice. This outcrie which Festus does make, does
show how much the truth of God prevails with the reprobate: to wit, though
it be never so plain and evident, yet is it trodden under foot by their
pride. For though those things which Paul had alleged out of the Law and
Prophets, had nothing in them which was any thing like to madness, but were
grounded in good reason, yet he does attribute the same to madness: not
because he sees any absurdity, but because he refuses those things which
he does not understand. Nothing was more foolish or more unsavory than the
superstitions of the Gentiles, so that their high Priests were for good causes
ashamed to utter their mysteries, whose folly was more than ridiculous.

Festus does grant that there was learning packed in Paul's speech,
nevertheless because the Gospel is hidden from the unbelievers, 2. Cor. 4.3.
whose minds Satan has blinded, he thinks that he is a brainsicke
fellow which handles matters intricarlie. So that though he cannot mock and
openly contemn him, yet he is so far from being moved or inwardly touched,
that he counts him a man which is frenzy, and of mad curiosity. And this
is the cause that he cannot away to mark what he says, least he make him
mad also. As many at this day fly from the word of God, least they drown
themselves in a Labarinth: and they think that we be mad, because we move
questions concerning hidden matters, and so become troublesome both to our
selves and also to others. Wherefore being admonished by this example, let us
beg of God, that he will show us the light of his doctrine, and that he
will therewithal give us a taste thereof, least through obscurity and
hardness it become unsavory, and at length proud loathsomeness break out
into blasphemy.

25 I am not mad. Paul is not angry neither does he sharply reprehende
Festus for his blasphemous speech: yea he speaks unto him with great
submission. For it was no place for reprehension, and it became him to pardon
the ignorance of the man, seeing he did not set himself face to face against
God. Also he had respect unto his person. For though he were unworthy of
honor, yet was he in authority. And yet for all that he does not therefore
give place to his blasphemy, but he defends the glory of the word of God.
Whereby we do also see, that not caring for himself, he did only take
thought for his doctrine. For he does not vaunt of his wit, he does not
labor in defense of his wisdom: but he is content with this defense alone,
that he teaches nothing but that which is true and sober.

Furthermore the truth is set against all manner fallacies and fraud: sobriety
against all manner frivolous speculations, and thornie subtilties, which are
only seeds of contention. Paul does in deed refute Festus his error: yet
we may gather by this which is the best manner of teaching, to wit, that which
is not only clean from all fallicies and deceit, but also does not make the
minds of men drunken with vain questions, and does not nourish foolish
curiosity, nor an intemperate desire to know more than is meet: but is
moderate and good for sound edification.

26 For the King knows of these th^nges. He turns himself unto Agrippa in
whom there was more hope. And first he says that he knew the history of
the things: but he calls him streightway back to the Law and the
Prophets. For it was to small end for him to know the thing which was done,
unless he did know that those things which had been spoken before of
Christ, were fulfilled in the person of Jesus which was crucified. And whereas
Paul does not doubt of Agrippa his faith, he does it not so much to praise
him, as that he may put the Scripture out of all question, least he be
enforced to stand upon the very principles. Therefore his meaning is that
the Scripture is of sufficient credit of it self, so that it is not lawful
for a man that is a Jew to diminish any jot of the authority thereof. And yet
Paul does not flatter him: for though he did not reverence the Scripture as
became a godly man: yet he had this rudiment from his childhoode, that he was
persuaded that nothing is contained therein besides the Oracles of God. As the
common sort of men, though they do not greatly care for the word of God: yet
they acknowledge and confess generally and confusedly that it is the word of
God, so that they are let with some reverence either to reject or to despise
the same.

28 And Agrippa said unto Paul. The Apostle prevailed thus far at least,
that he wrong out of king Agrippa a confession though it were not voluntary:
as those use to yield, who can no longer resist the truth, or at least to
show some token of assent. Agrippa his meaning is that he will not willingly
become a Christian, yea that he will not be one at all: and yet that he is
not able to gainesay, but that he is drawn after a sort against his will.
Whereby it appears how great the pride of man's nature is, until it be
brought under to obey by the Spirit of God. Interpreters expound this en olige
diversely. Valla thought that it ought to be translated thus, Thou do almost
make me a Christian. Erasmus does translate it, a little. The old interpreter
deals more plainly, in a little. Because translating it word for word, he
left it to the readers to judge at their pleasure. And surely it may fitly be
referred unto the time, as if Agrippa had said, Thou will make me a Christian
straight way, or in one moment. If any man object that Paul's answer does not
agree thereto, we may quickly answer: For seeing the speech was doubtful:
Paul does fitly apply that unto the thing, which was spoken of the time.
Therefore seeing Agrippa did mean that he was almost made a Christian in a
small time: Paul adds that he does desire that as well he, as his companions
might rise from small beginnings, and profit more and more: and yet I do not
mislike that, that en oligo does signify as much as almost. This answer does
testify with what zeal to spread abroad the glory of Christ, this holy man's
breast was enflamed, when as he does patiently suffer those bounds wherewith
the Governor had bound him, and does desire that he might escape the deadly
snares of Satan, and to have both him and also his partners to be partakers
with him of the same grace, being in the mean season content with his
troublesome and reproachful condition. We must note that he does not wish it
simply: but from God, as it is he which draws us unto his son: because
unless he teach us inwardly by his Spirit, the outward doctrine shall always
wax cold.

Gal. 6.17.
Except these bonds. It is certain that Paul his bonds were not so hard, no
yet did they cause him such sorrow, wherein he did oftentimes rejoice, and
which he does mention for honors sake, as being the badge of his embassage:
but he has respect to those to whom he wishes faith without trouble or
cross. For those who did not as yet believe in Christ, were far from that
affection, to be ready to strive for the Gospel. And surely it behooves all
the godly to have this gentleness and meekness, that they patiently bear
their own cross: and that they wish well to others, and study so much as in
them lies to ease them of all trouble, and that they do in no case envy
their quietness and mirth. This courtesy is far contrary to the
bitterness of those, who take comfort in wishing that other men were in their
misery.

31 They spoke together. In that Paul is acquitted by the judgment of them
all, it turned to the great renown of the Gospel. And when Festus agrees to
the rest he condemns himself: seeing he had brought Paul into such straites
through his unjust dealing, by bringing him in danger of his life under color
of changing the place. And though it seems that the appeal did hinder the
holy man: yet because this was the only way to escape death, he is content,
and does not seek to get out of that snare: not only because the matter was
not even now safe and sound, Sup. 23.11.
but because he was admonished in the vision that he was also called by God
to Rome.

CHAP. XXVII.
1 ANd after that it was decreed that we should sail into Italy, they
delivered both Paul and also certain other prisoners to a Centurion named
Julius, of the band of Augustus.

2 And we entered into a ship of Adramythium, purposing to sail by the coasts
of Asia, and we launched forth, having Aristarchus of Macedonia, a Thessalonian
with us.

3 And the next day we arrived at Sidon, and Julius did courteously entreat
Paul, and suffered him to go to his friends, that they might refresh him.

4 And when we were gone thence, we sailed hard by Cyprus, because the winds
were contrary.

5 And when we had sailed on the sea which is over against Cilicia and
Pamphilia, we came to Myra a City of Lycia:

6 And when the Centurion had found there a ship of Alexandria sailing into
Italy, he put us in it.

7 And when we had sailed slowly many days, and were scarce come over against
Cnidus, because the wind did let us, we sailed hard by Creta beside Salmone:

8 And with much ado we sailed beyond it, and came to a certain place, which
is called the fair Havens, near unto which was the City of Lasea.

1 Luke sets down Paul's voyage by sea most of all to this end, that we
may know that he was brought to Rome wonderfully by the hand of God: and that
the glory of God did many ways appe^re excellent in his doings and sayings
even in the very journey: which did more establish his Apostleship. He is
delivered to be carried with other prisoners: but the Lord does afterward put
great difference between him and the evil doers, who were in bonds as well as
he. Yea moreover we shall see how the captain does lose him and let him be at
liberty when the rest lie bound. I know not what band that was which Luke
calls the band of Augustus, unless peradventure it be that which was
commonly called the Pretors band, before the monarchy of the Cesars. And Luke
sets down in plain words that they were put in a ship of Adramittium:
because they should sail by the coast of Asia. For Adramittium is a City of
Eolia. I cannot tell out of what haven they launched: because they could not
sail with a straight course to Sidon, unless the Mappes do greatly deceive
me. We may well guess that they were brought thither, either because they
could find a ship no where else, or else because they were to take the
other prisoners of whom mention is made, out of that region.

And there continued with us. Luke seems so to commend one man's constancy,
that he nippeth the rest. For there were more which did accompany him to
Jerusalem: whereof we see two only which remained with him. But because it may
be that the rest were let with some just causes, or that Paul refused to
have them to minister unto him, I will say nothing either way. Neither is it an
unmeet thing to say that Luke had some especial reason for which he does
commend this man above the rest, albeit he was but one of many. Surely it is
likely that he was a rich man, seeing he was able to bear the charges whereat
he was by the space of three years, having left his house. Sup. 17.1^ Sup.
20.4.
For we heard before that many of the chief families in Thessalonica did
receive Christ, and Luke says for honors sake that Aristarchus and Secundus
came with Paul into Asia. Therefore let it suffice us to hold that which is
certain and good to be known, that there is set before us an example of holy
patience, because Aristarchus is not wearied with any trouble, but does
willingly take part with Paul in his trouble, and after that he had been in
prison with him two years, he does now cross the seas, that he may likewise
minister to him at Rome, not without the reprochings of many, besides the loss
of his goods at home, and so great charges.

3 He suffered him to go to. Paul might have hid himself in a large City,
which joined to the sea: but he was bound with the Oracle, that he could not
withdraw himself from the calling of God. Again because the Centurion had so
courteously entertained him, that he suffered him to go to his friends that
they might dress and refresh him, who^ he might have left in the stinking
ship, he ought not ne could he provide for his own life with the other man's
danger without filthy treachery. Neither must we in any case suffer those who
have courteously entreated us to be deceived by their courtesy through our
fault. Let the readers fet the voyage whereof Luke speaks out of those which
describe places and countries* only I say thus much, that all that which is
said tends to this end, that we may know that their sailing was dangerous and
tempestuous, after that they were once gone out of the haven of Sidon, until
they came near to Melita: and that afterward the mariners did strive long time
with contrary winds, until a cruel storm arose, whose end was shipwreck
as we shall see.

9 And when much time was spent, and when sailing was now iepardous, because
also the time of fasting was now passed: Paul admonished them,

10 Saying to them, Syrs, I see that this voyage will be with hurt and great
loss not only of the burden and of the ship, but also of our souls.

11 But the Centurion believed rather the Governor and the master of the ship,
then those things which were spoken of Paul.

12 And because the haven was unfit to winter in, many took counsel to depart
thence, if by any means they might come to Phenice, and there winter. That is
a haven of Candie, and lies toward the Southwest and by west, and Northwest
and by west.

13 And when the South wind blewe softly, supposing to obtain their purpose,
when they had loosed nearer, they sailed beyond Candie.

14 But not long after there arose over against it a stormy wind, which is
called Euroclydon.

15 And when the ship was caught, and could not resist the wind, we let her go
and were carried away.

16 And when we were carried into a certain I Will called Candie, we could scarce
get the boat:

17 Which they took up, and used helps, vndergyrding the ship, and fearing
least they should fall into Syries, they struck sail and so were carried.

18 And when we were tossed with an exceeding tempest, on the morrow they
lightened the ship:

19 And the third day we cast out with our own hands the tackling of the
ship.

20 Furthermore when neither sun nor stars appeared now many days, and no
small tempest lay upon us, all hope that we should be saved, was then taken
away.

9 When sailing was now ieoperdous. He does not only mean that the winds
were contrary then, but also that the time of the year was not then
commodious, which he expresses more plainly afterward, when he says that
the fast was passed: for I think that this word was added by way of
exposition, to note the end of harvest. Neither do I pass for that, that that
solemn time of fasting whereof Luke speaks, was strange to the Centurion
and the rest of the mariners: for he notes out the times of the year
according to the custom of the Jews. Furthermore we need not doubt but that
it was the harvest fast. Though I am not of their mind, who think that it was
one of the four fastes which the Jews did appoint after the carrying away
into Babylon. For Luke would not have put down simply without adding any
distinction, the third fast which was in the seventh month, seeing it was not
more famous than the rest, being commanded to be kept because of the death of
Godolia, and because of the destruction of the rest of the people. Again, I
cannot tell whether that custom were retained by the people after their
return it is more likely that he means the feast of the atonement, wherein
the Lord commanded them to humble their souls seven days. And they began
the tenth day of the seventh month: Leu. 16.25.
whereto partly September and partly October does now agree. Therefore seeing
they were now entered into October, it is said not without cause, that
sailing was ieoperdous at that time. But and if you refer it unto hunger (as
some do) I do not see what sense can be gathered thence: for they had as yet
store of wheat in the ship, so that they needed not to be hunger sterued.
And why should he say that the time of the voluntary fast was passed?
Moreover it shall hereafter appear by the text, that they were therefore
exhorted by Paul to stay, because winter was at hand, whose sharpenes uses to
shut up the seas. For though he were assured that God would govern the ship,
yet he would not tempt him rashly by making too great haste.

11 But the Centurion. The Centurion is not reproved because he harkned rather
to the master and governor of the ship than to Paul. For what should he have
done? For though he did well like Paul his counsel in other matters, yet he
knew that he was unskillful in sailing. Therefore he suffered himself to be
governed by those which were expert, which was a point of a wise and modest
man. Yea very necessity did almost compel him to do this: for the haven was
not commodious to Winter in. Neither did the Governor give counsel to commit
the ship to the maine sea; but to thrust in into the next haven, which was
almost in view. So that with taking a little pains they might commodiously
pass the winter. Luke recites this not in vain: but that we may know that
Paul was from the beginning furnished with the sense of the Spirit, so that he
did better see what things were profitable than did the masters. We know not
whether he were taught by Oracles, or whether he gave this counsel through
secreat inspiration. This is certain, that it served afterward to his
commendation. Furthermore in that he says that they sailed beyond the coast of
Candie, until they were caught and carried away, our friend Beza does justly
reprove the error of interpreters in this word asson, who make of an aduerbe
the name of a City.

15 When the ship was caught. Luke says that that fell out here, which
uses to fall out in extreme danger: namely, they suffered themselves to be
carried of the winds. Seeing they were first gone some space, and the mariners
thought that all things fell out as they would have it, undoubtedly they did
deride Paul his admonition: as rash men use commonly to wax proud, if fortune
favor them. Being now caught, they are grievously punished for their
boldness: yea when they drew near to an haven, they were no less afraid
least they should break the ship, then they were before of ouerturning the
same. Luke does diligently note all these things, out of which we may gather,
that the storm was so vehement and fierce, and that it continued still at one
stay, that they were still in danger of death. Also he declares that they did
courageously use all remedies, which might save them from suffering shipwreck,
and that they spared not the merchandise and tackling: whence we gather that
they were enforced with a lively feeling of danger, to do what they were able.
And Luke adds that when they had assaied all things, they despaired of their
safety. And surely the very darkness of heaven was as it were a grave.
Neither need we doubt but that the Lord meant by this means to commend and
make more notable the grace of their deliverance which insued shortly after.
Nevertheless he suffered his servant to labor with the rest, until he
thought he should die. For he did not appear unto him by his Angel, before
it might seem that he was past hope of recovery. Wherefore his body was not
only tossed amidst many storms: but his soul was also shaken with violent
tentations. Notwithstanding the end does show that he stood upright by faith,
so that he did not faint. Luk speaks nothing of his prayers: but because he
himself says afterward that the Angel of God, whom he served, appeared to
him, it is likely that when others did curse both heaven and earth, he made
his prayers to God, and so was quiet, and did patiently tarry the Lords
leisure. And whereas he says that al hope of safety was taken away: it must
not be referred unto his sense, but only unto the means which men could
use: as if he should say, that things were so far out of order, that there
was no safety to be looked for at men's hands.

21 But after long abstinence Paul stood in the midst and said, Syrs ye
should have harkened to me, and not have loosed from Candie, neither have
brought upon us this injury and loss.

22 And now I exhort you that ye be of good courage. For there shall be no
loss of any man's life: but only of the ship.

23 For there stood by me this night the Angel of God, whose I am, and whom I
worship.

24 And he said to me, Fear not Paul, Thou must be brought before Caesar. And
behold God has given thee all those which sail with thee.

25 Wherefore be of good courage Syrs. For I believe God that it shall be so, as
it has bin told me.

26 But we must fall into a certain Island.

27 And when the fourteenth night was come, as we sailed in the Adriaticall
sea, about midnight the mariners supposed that some country appeared to them.

28 And when they had sounded, they found it twenty fadomes, and when they
were gone a little farther they sounded again, and they found it fifteen
fadomes.

29 And fearing least they should have fallen into some rough places, having
cast four ancres out of the stern, they wished for day.

30 And when the mariners sought to fly out of the ship, when they had let
down the boat into the sea, under a color as if they would have cast ancres
out of the fore ship,

31 Paul said to the Centurion and the soldiars, unless these abide in the
ship, you cannot be saved.

32 Then the soldiars cut off the ropes of the boat, and they suffered it to
fall away.

21 After long abstinence. Though Luke does not plainly express how the
mariners and soldiars behaved themselves, yet he does plainly distinguish Paul
from them, declaring that he stood in the midst of them, that he might
comfort their faint hearts: for no man is fit to exhort but he who is himself
an example of constancy and fortitude. Furthermore Paul deferred this
exhortation, until they were all even at the last cast. We may easily gather
out of the common custom of the infidels, that they raged and made much ado
at the first. A moderate and soft voice could never have been heard amongst
those cries and tumults. Now after they be weary with working and howling,
they sit still al in a dampe, and Paul begins to speak to them. Therefore it
was meet that they should languish like men half dead, until they were
somewhat quiet, and could hear a man which would give them good counsel.
Notwithstanding Paul seems to deal vnseasonablie when as he obiecteth to
them foolishness, because they would not do after his counsel, when all was
well, seeing that they knew that he was inexpert in sailing, as he himself
also knew how unskillful and ignorant he was.

But if we consider what an hard matter it is to bring men unto soundness of
mind, this reprehension was very profitable. Paul's authority should have
been nothing worth, neither should it have moved them any whit, unless they
should know this, that it had not gone well with them because they had
despised him before. Chiding is in deed cruel and brings no comfort: but if
it be tempered with some remedy, it is now a part of the medicine. So, after
that Paul had made the mariners attentive, and had taught by the very event
th^^ they ought to believe him, he exhorts them to be of good courage, and
promises them safety. And this is a token of no small boldness, when he
says that they ought to have obeyed him. Therefore he testifies by these
words, that he spoke nothing unadvisedly: but did command them to do that
which God had prescribed. For though we do not reed that he had some
especial revelation then given him: yet he himself knew that the spirit
did secreatly govern him: so that he might without fear take upon him to
give counsel, seeing he had the Spirit of God to be his guide. Whereby that
does better appear which I touched of late, that Paul in speaking thus does
awake the mariners, that they may more attentively hear what he will say.
Otherwise it had been a ridiculous thing for a man which was in danger of
drowning, to promise safety to those who were partakers with him in like
calamity.

23 For there stood by me. Least he might be accused of rashness, for
promising so fully that they should be all safe, he brings in God for his
author and witness. Neither is it to be doubted but that he was fully
persuaded that it was a true vision, so that he did not fear Satan's
iuglings. For because that father of lies does oftentimes deceive men under a
color of revelations, God did never appear to his servants, either by
himself or by his Angels, but he put them out of doubt by showing them some
plain and evident tokens: and secondly did furnish them with the Spirit of
descretion that they might not be deceived. But Paul does extol the name of
his God in plain words among profane men: not only that they may learn
that the true God is worshipped in Judea, but also that Paul himself does
worship him. They all knew why he was put in prison. Now seeing Angels come
down unto him from heaven, they may easily gather, that his cause is approved
of God. Therefore there is in these words a secreat commendation of the
Gospel. Nevertheless we see how Paul triumphs in his bonds, when he is
the minister of safety to so many men, and the interpreter of God.

24 Fear not Paul. He is very desirous to bring to pass that they may give
God alone the praise for their deliverance: least these superstitious men do
falsely translate it unto their idols: and by this means he inuiteth them
unto the true faith. But by this it appears how great the men's wickedness
is, in that they shut their ears against sound and wholesome counsel, and do
forthwith forgette the grace of God though it were familiarly known to them.
Yea (that which worse is) they do not see nor perceive it when it is present
before their eyes. But howsoever the more part was unthankful: yet this
Oracle was not revealed without fruit: yea this was good, that those might be
made without excuse, who did flatter themselves too much in their deceipte. And
seeing it was said that he must be presented before Caesar, it tended to this
end, that his confession might the more strengthen the godly, when as they
should know that he came forth from God as a witness to confirm and
auouche the doctrine of the Gospel, and that he was appointed and saved to
that end.

Has given thee all the souls. Luke seems to give us to understand by
these words, that Paul prayed not only for himself, but also for the rest,
that God would save them all from drowning. And surely it is likely that
seeing he saw the danger common to them all, he was not so careful for his
own life, that he cared not for the rest, whom he saw in like danger.
Notwithstanding it may be that the Lord did of his own accord prevent his
prayers. Neither is it any new thing, that his blessing should reach even
unto the unworthy, who are joined to the faithful with any society. So he
would have saved Sodom if there had been ten good men found there. Here
arises a question, how far the integrity of the saints does profit the
wicked.

First we must remove the superstition of the Papists, who when they hear
that God is good to the badde for the goods sake, dream that they be
mediators, who obtain salvation for the world through their merits. And
they be twice fools in that, that they apply these titles of the living unto
the dead: and think that God will be favorable to them for no other cause,
save only because he beholds them, and therefore they make them their
patrons. I omit that, that by extolling men's merits they darken the free
goodness of God. Now that we may answer the question propounded, we must
briefly note this: that for as much as the good are mixed with the badde, as
well prosperity as adversity does happen as well to the one as to the other:
and yet it falls out sometimes that when the Lord does spare his, he
bears also with the wicked for a time together with them. Again that there
be many causes, for which God does good to the wicked and reprobate for the
faithfuls sake. He blessed the house of Putiphar for Joseph's sake, that he
might move him to handle this holy man gently. Genesis 39.5.
He declared his good will toward Paul in saving many men, that he might
bear witness of his godliness, that the majesty of the Gospel might
thereby appear more plainly. But we must note this, that whatsoever benefits
God bestows upon the wicked, they turn at length to their destruction: as
on the other side punishments are profitable for the godly, which they suffer
together with the reprobate.

In the mean season this is a singular pledge of Gods love toward us, in that
he makes certain drops of his goodness distill from us unto others.

25 For I believe God. Paul tells them again, whence he had such boldness,
that he affirms that though they be amidst infinite gulfes of the sea, yet
shall they all come safe to the haven: namely, because God had promised it
should be so: in which words the nature of faith is expressed, when there is a
mutual relation made between it and the word of God, that it may strengthen
men's minds against the assalts of temptations. And he does not only exhort the
mariners by his own example to believe: but does as it were take upon him the
office of a promiser, that he may win credit to the Oracle. That which
follows immediately touching the I Will, is a latter sign: whereby it may more
plainly appear after the end of the matter, that this their sailing was not
uncertain: otherwise it had bin to no end for the mariners to know how they
should escape. Therefore we see how God does give that safety which he
promised, a mark, that it may not seem to come by chance. Notwithstanding we
must note that God kept them still in some doubt: partly that he may exercise
the faith of his servant, partly that they may all know that Paul learned that
of the holy Ghost, which he could not as yet comprehend by man's reason.
Notwithstanding Luke teaches in the text it self, that he was not believed
for all this. For seeing the mariners thought that there began some country to
appear unto them, it did not agree with the promise made touching their
arriving in an I Will. Therefore we see how that they were scarce enforced even
by experience, to think that he spoke the truth.

30 And as the mariners sought. The grace of the holy spirit appears in Paul
even in this point also, in that he did wisely admonish that the mariners
should not be suffered to fly. For why does not rather the Centurion or
some other of the company smell out their fraud, save only that Paul may be
the minister of their deliverance even unto the end? But it is a marvel that he
says that the rest could not be saved unless the mariners should remain in
the ship. As if it were in their power to make the promise of God of none
effect. I answer that Paul does not dispute in this place precisely of the
power of God, that he may separate the same from his will and from means: and
surely God does not therefore commend his power to the faithful, that they may
give themselves to sluggishnesse and carelessness, contemning means, or rashly
cast away themselves when there is some certain way to escape. God did promise
Ezechias that the city should be delivered. If he had set open the gates to
the enemy: would not Iesaias straightway have cried, Isai. 37.6. and 35.
thou destroyest both thy self and the City? And yet for all this it does
not follow, that the hand of God is tied to means or helps: but when God
appoints this or that means to bring any thing to pass, he holds all
man's senses, that they may not pass the bounds which he has appointed.

33 And when the day began to appear, Paul exhorted them all to take meat,
saying, this is the fourteenth day, that ye have tarried and continued
fasting, receiving nothing at all.

34 Wherefore I exhort you to take meat: for this no doubt is for your health:
because there shall not one hair fall from the head of any of you.

35 And when he had thus spoken, he took bread and gave thanks to God in
the sight of them all: and when he had broken it, he began to eat.

36 Then were they all refreshed in their minds, and they also took meat.

37 And all the souls which were in the ship were two hundred threescore and
sixteen.

38 And when they had eaten enough, they did lighten the ship, casting out the
wheat into the sea.

39 And when it was day, they knew not the land: but they spied a certain
haven having a bank, into the which they minded to thrust the ship.

40 And when they had taken up the ankars, they committed themselves to the
sea: also having loosed the rudder bands, and hoysed up the maine sail to the
wind, they drew toward the shore.

41 But when they were fallen into a place where two seas met, they thrust in
the ship, and the fore part did stick fast, and moved not: but the hinder part
brake through the violence of the waves.

42 Furthermore the soldiars counsel was to kill the prisoners, least any
after he had swomme out, should escape.

43 But the Ce^turion being desirous to save Paul, kept them from their
purpose, and commanded that those which could swim, should cast themselves
first into the sea and should escape to land.

44 And the other some on bords, and some on broken pieces of the ship, and so
it came to pass that they all escaped safe to land.

33 And when the day began. Whatsoever the mariners think, Paul his faith
does not quail: but he leans steadfastly to the promise which was made to
him. For he does not only exhort them to take meat, as did he who in extreme
despair uttered these words, Dine soldiars we shall suppe in Hell: but
continuing steadfast in his prophecy, he wills them to be of good courage.
The force of faith does therein show it self, when as it armeth us unto
patience, and does valiantly bear off and beat back those assaults
wherewith Satan goes about to shake it. But whereas he says that they
continued fasting for the space of fourteen days, it may seem absurd and
false. There may some one man be found, which can abide to fast long: but it
is scarce credible of so great a multitude. We may easily answer, that Their
unwonted abstinence from meat is improperly called fasting: because they had
never filled their belly during all that time: because those who are in
sorrow and heaviness do almost loath meat. And because despair was the
cause of this their loathing of meat, he affirms again that they shall live,
so they be of good courage. For a faithful minister of the word must not
only bring abroad the promises: but also counsel men to follow God whither
soever he calls them: and that they be not slothful and sluggish.
Furthermore the meaning of the words is this, God has determined to save you,
this confidence ought to animate you, and to make you merry, that you be not
negligent in your own business.

35 He took bread. That he may the better encourage them by his own example,
he takes bread and eats. Luke says that he gave thanks, not only
according to his daily custom, but because that served greatly to testify his
boldness and good confidence. It is not to be doubted but that Paul himself
did that when he took meat, which he commands other men: but now he
does not only testify his thankfulness, neither does he only desire of God
that he will sanctify the meat which he is about to eat: but he calls upon
God without fear who is the author of his life, that those poor wretches
which were drenched in sorrow might conceive some good hope. And he prevailed
thus far at least, that they gathered so much courage to them as to take
meat: who had through fear forgotten to care for their life.

37 All the souls. The number of the men is recited first; that it may more
plainly appear that none of the multitude did perish. For Luke does not show
how many men did swim to the shore, but how many were then in the ship.
Secondly that the miracle may be made more evident and also famous: for in
man's judgment it is a thing impossible that two hundred threescore and
sixteen men should escape to land having suffered shipwreck, without loss of
any man's life. For it is likely that few had any skill in swimming, except
the mariners. And though they were somewhat refreshed with the meat which they
had eaten: yet they were brought so lowe^ with sorrow and wearisomnesse, that
it is a marvel that they were so nimble as that they could move their arms.
And now we must consider what a stir they kept: whereas it is seldom seen
that twenty or thirty men do so swim in danger, but one of them does hinder
or drown another. Therefore God did plainly stretch forth his hand out of
heaven, seeing all those came to shore safe and sound, which had cast
themselves into the sea.

38 And when they had eaten enough. This circumstance does show that they were
at length moved with Paul's words. It was not yet light, that they could know
whether there were any haven near. And yet they cast out into the sea the
wheat which remained, that they might lighten the ship. They would not have
done this unless Paul his authority had prevailed more with them now than
before. But as all unbelievers are unstable, that persuasion did quickly vanish
out of their minds.

41 They thrust in the ship. And then it might seem that both God had mocked
Paul, and that he with trifling had brought his partners in a vain hope, but
God did forthwith put away that error by giving them prosperous success? It
was meet that when the ship was broken, they should be so discouraged, and that
their souls should so melt, that despair might increase the glory of the
miracle. For God uses to moderate and govern his works so, that he makes
some show of difficulty, by reason of many lets which fall out. By this means
he sharpneth our senses unto greater attentiveness, that we may at length
learn that though all the world strive against him, yet will he have the
victory. This is the reason why he had leiffer draw Paul and his companions to
the shore after that the ship was lost, than bring the ship whole to land.

42 The counsel of the soldiars. This was too horrible unthankfulness. Though
the soldiars might thank Paul twice or thrice for their lives, yet are they
minded to kill him, for whose sake they ought to have spared the rest. He had
saved them even as an Angel of God: he had given them wholesome counsel: he
had refreshed them in the same day when they were past hope: and now they
stick not to seek to destroy him, by whom they were so often and so many
ways delivered. Wherefore if it so fall out that we be ill rewarded for our
good deeds, there is no cause why the unthankfulness of men should trouble
us, which is a disease too common. But they are not only unthankful to Paul
who was the minister of their life, but also their filthy misbeliefe and
forgetfulness of the goodness of God does bewray it self. They had of late
received that oracle, that their souls were given to Paul: and now seeing they
will be saved after he is dead, what other thing go they about but to resist
God, that they may save themselves from death contrary to his will? Therefore
they have now forgotten that grace whereof they tasted against their will in
extreme despair: neither does it taste any longer, after that they see the
haven nigh at hand. But it behooves us to consider the wonderful counsel of
God as well in saving Paul as in fulfilling his promise: when as he brings
those men to land, who did what they could to make his promise of none effect.
Thus does his goodness oftentimes strive with the wickedness of men. Yet he
does so pity the wicked, that deferring their punishment until so fit
opportunity, he does not quite discharge them: yea the longer he tarrieth the
more grievously he punishes, and so by that means he makes amends for his
long tarrying.

CHAP. XXVIII.
1 AND when they were escaped they knew that the I Will was called Melite:

2 And the Barbarians showed us no little kindness: for they kindled a fire
and received us all, because of the present shower, and because of the cold.

3 And when Paul had gathered a bundle of sticks, and had laid them on the
fire, a vyper came out of the heat, and lept on his hand.

4 Now when the Barbarians saw the beast hang upon his hand, they said among
themselves, This man surely is a murderer: whom, though he has escaped the
sea, vengeance does not suffer to live.

5 But he shook off the vyper into the fire, and suffered no harm.

6 But they thought that it would come to pass that he would swell and fall
down dead suddenly. And as they waited long, and saw no harm come to him,
changing their mind, they said he was a God.

1 That doleful spectacle is described in the beginning of the Chapter, when
so many men being wet, and also all berayed with the some and filth of the sea,
and stiff with cold, did with much ado crawle to the shore, for that was all
one as if they had been cast up by the sea, to die some other death. After
that, Luke declares that they were courteously entertained of the Barbarians,
that they kindled a fire that they might dry their clothes, and refresh their
joints which were stiff with cold, and at length that they were saved from
the shower. Therefore in that Paul commends these duties, he shows his
thankfulness: and so great liberality toward strangers is for good causes
advanced, whereof there be rare examples in the world. And though common
nature does wring out of the barbarous Gentiles some affection of mercy in so
great necessity: yet undoubtedly it was God which caused the me^ of Melita to
handle these men so courteously, that his promise might be sure and certain,
which might seem imperfect, if the shipwreck had caused the loss of any man's
life.

A Viper coming out of the heat. The very event did prove that Paul was a
true and undoubted prophet of God. Now that God may make him famous as well by
land as by sea, he seals the former miracles with a new miracle: and so he
ratifieth his Apostleshippe among the men of Melita. And though there were not
many which did profit thereby: yet the majesty of the Gospel did shine even
among the unbelievers: also this did greatly confirm the Oracles to the
mariners, which they had not sufficiently reverenced. Neither did the viper
come out of the sticks by chance: but the Lord did direct her by his secreat
counsel to bite Paul, because he saw it would turn to the glory of his
Gospel.

4 So soon as the Barbarians saw. This judgment was common in all ages, that
Those who were grievously punished, had grievously offended. Neither was this
persuasion conceived of nothing: but it came rather from a true feeling of
godliness. For God, to the end he might make the world without excuse, would
have this deeply rooted in the minds of all men, that calamity and
adversity, and chiefly notable destruction were testimonies and signs of his
wrath, and just vengeance against sins. Therefore so often as we call to
mind any notable calamity, we do also remember that God is soar offended,
seeing he punishes so sharply. Neither did ungodliness ever get the upper
hand so far, but that all men did still retain this principle: that God, to
the end he may show himself to be the judge of the world, does notably
punish the wicked. But here crept in an error almost always, because they
condemned all those of wickedness, whom they saw roughly handeled. Though God
does always punish men's sins with adversity: yet does he not punish every
man according to his deserts in this life, and sometimes the punishments of
the godly are not so much punishments as trials of their faith, and exercises
of godliness. Therefore those men are deceived, who make this a general rule
to judge every man according to his prosperity or adversity. This was the
state of the controversy between Job and his friends: Iab. 4.7.
they did affirm that that man was a reprobate and hated of God, whom God did
punish, and he did allege on the other side, that the godly are sometimes
humbled with the cross. Wherefore, least we be deceived in this point, we must
beware of two things. The former is, that we give not rash and blind judgment
of things unknown, according to the euenr alone: for because God does punish
the good as well as the bad: yea it falls out oftentimes that he spares the
reprobate, and does sharply punish those who are his: if we will judge aright,
we must begin at another thing then at punishments: to wit, that we enquire
after the life and deeds, if any adulterer, if any blasphemous person, if any
perjured man, or murderer, if any filthy person, if any cosiner, if any
blooddie beast be punished. God does point out his judgment as it were with
his finger. If we see no wickedness, nothing is better then to suspend our
judgment concerning punishment The other caution is, that we wait for the end.
For so soon as God begins to strike, we do not by and by see his drifte
and purpose: but the unlike end does at length declare, that those differ far
before God, who seem in men's eyes both alike in the likelihood of punishment.
If any man object that it is not in vain so often repeated in the law, that
all private and public miseries are the scourges of God: I grant in deed
that that is true: but yet I deny that it does keep God from sparing whom he
will for a time, though they be of all men the worst, and from punishing those
more sharplye, whose fault is mean. Nevertheless it is not our duty, to
make that perpetual which falls out oftentimes. We see now wherein the men
of Melite were deceived: to wit, because having not scanned Paul's life, they
judge him to be a wicked man, only because the viper does bite him. Secondly
because they stay not the end, but give judgment rashly. Nevertheless we
must note that these are detestable monsters, who go about to pluck out of
their hearts all feeling of Gods judgment, which is ingraffed in us all
naturally, and which is also found in the Barbarians, and savage men. Whereas
they think that Paul is rather guilty of murder then of any other offense,
they follow this reason, because murder has always been most detestable.

Vengeance does not suffer. They gather that he is a wicked man, because
vengeance does persecute him though he have escaped the Sea And they feined
that the revenging Goddess did sit by the seat of Jupiter which they commonly
called Dice: grossly, I grant, as men ignorant of pure religion: and yet not
without some tolerable signification, as if they had painted out God to be
judge of the world. But by these words the wrath of God is distinguished from
fortune: and so the judgment of God is avouched against all blind chances. For
the men of Melita take it to be a sign of the heavenly vengeance, in that
though Paul be saved yet can he non be safe.

5 Shaking off the viper. The shaking off of the viper is a token of a quiet
mind. For we see how greatly fear does trouble and weaken me^: and yet you
must not think that Paul was altogether void of fear. For faith does not make
us blockish as brainsick men do imagine, when they be out of danger. But though
faith does not quite take away the feeling of evils, yet it does temperate the
same, least the godly be more afraid then is meet: that they may always be
bold and have a good hope. So though Paul understand that the viper was a
noisome beast, yet did he trust to the promise which was made to him, and did
not so fear her plaguie biting that it did trouble him: Because he was even
ready to die if need had been.

7 Changing their minds they said. This so wonderful and sudden a change,
ought to have inwardly touched the men of Melita, and to have moved them to
give the glory to the mercy of god, as they did before to vengeance. But as
man's reason is always carried amiss unto extremities, they make Paul at a
sudden a God, whom they took before to be a wicked murderer. But if he could
not chose but be the one, it had been better for him to be counted a murderer
then a God. And surely Paul would rather have wished to be condemned not only
of one crime, but also to have sustained all shame, and to have been thrust
down into the deep pit of hell, then to take to him self the glory of God:
which thing those knew full well who had heard him preach amidst the storms.
Notwithstanding it may be that being taught afterward, they did confess that
God was the author of the miracle. Furthermore, let us learn by this history
with patient and quiet minds to wait for the prosperous event of things, which
seem at the first to tend toward the robbing of God of his honor. Which of us
would not have been terrified with this spectacle, which did arm the wicked to
slander with all manner of slanderous speeches the glory of the Gospel? Yet
we see how God did in good time prevent this inconvenience: therefore let us not
doubt but that after he has suffered his to be darkened with clouds of
slanders, he will send: remedy in his good time, and will turn their
darkness into light. In the mean season let us remember that we must beware
of the judgment of the flesh. And because men do always forget themselves,
let us beg of God the spirit of moderation, that he may keep us always in the
right mean. Furthermore let us learn by this how ready the world is to fall
to superstition. Yea this wickedness is in a manner born with us, to be desirous
to adorn creatures with that which we take from God,

Wherefore no marvel if new errors have come abroad in all ages, seeing
every one of us is even from his mothers womb, expert in inuenting Idols. But
least men excuse themselves therewithal, this history does witness, that
this is the fountain of superstitions, because men are unthankful to God,
and do give his glory to some other.

7 And in those places were the possessions of the chief man of the isle, whose
name was Publius, who received us and lodged us courteously.

8 And so it was that the father of Publius lay sick of the fever and blooddie
flux, to whom Paul entered in: and when he had prayed, and had laid his hands
upon him, he healed him.

9 Therefore when he had done thus, the rest also which had infirmities in the
isle, came and were healed.

10 Who did also give us great honor, and when we departed they laded us with
things necessary.

11 And after three months we sailed in a ship of Alexandria which had
wintered in the isle, whose badge was Castor and Pollux.

12 And when we came to Syracuse, we stayed there three days.

13 And from thence we fet a compass and came to Rhegium. And after one day
when the South wind blewe, we came the next day to Puteoli.

14 Where we found brethren, and were desired to stay with them seven days:
and so we came to Rome.

7 And in those places. Because this name Publius is a Roman name I suspect
that this man of whom mention is made was rather a citizen of Rome, then borne
in the isle. For the Grecians and other strangers were not wont to borrow their
names of the latins, unless they were men of small reputation. And it may be
that some of the noble men of Rome came then to see his possessions, and is
called the chief man of the isle: not because he dwelt there, but because no
man could compare with him in wealth and possessions. And it is scarce probable
that all the whole multitude of Grecians was lodged there three days. I do
rather think that when he entertained the Centurion, he did also honor Paul
and his companions, because being admonished by the miracle, he did believe
that he was a man beloved of God. Notwithstanding howsoever it be, his
hospitality was not unrewarded. For shortly after the Lord restored his father
to health by the hand of Paul, who was indeed sick of a dangerous disease. And
by this means he meant to testify, how greatly that courtesy which is showed
to men in misery and to strangers, does please him. Although those who are
helped be unmindful and unthankful for that benefit which they have
received, or they be not able to recompense those who have done good to them:
yet god himself will abu^dantly restore to men whatsoever they have bestowed at
his commandment: and he has sometimes appointed to those which be merciful
and given to hospitality, some of his servants which bring with them a
blessing. This was now great honor in that Publius did lodge Christ in the
person of Paul. Notwithstanding this was added as an overplus, in that Paul
came furnished with the gift of healing, that he might not only recompense his
courtesy, but also give more then he had received.

Also we know not whether he learned the first principles of faith, as
miracles do for the most part win the rude and unbelievers unto faith, Luke
mentions the kind of disease, that he may the better set forth the grace
of God. For seeing it is an hard matter to cure a bloody flux, especially
when the ague is joined therewith: the old man was cured thus suddenly only by
the laying on of hands and prayer, not without the manifest power of God.

8 And had laid his hands upon him. Paul declares by prayer, that he himself
is not the author of the miracle, but only the minister, least God be
defrauded of his glory. He confirms this self same thing by the external
sign. For as we saw before in other places, the laying on of hands was nothing
else but a solemn rite of offering and presenting. Wherefore in that Paul does
offer the man to God with his own hands, he professed that he did humbly
crave his life of him. By which example not only those who have excellent
gifts of the Spirit given them, are admonished to beware least by extolling
them selves, they darken the glory of God: but also we are all taught in
general, that we must so thank the ministers of the grace of God, that the
glory remain to him alone. It is said in deed that Paul healed the man which
had the bloody flixe: but it is plainly expressed by the circumstances which
are added, that it was God which bestowed this benefit, making him the
minister thereof. Whereas Luke says afterward that others which were sick in
the isle were cured, he does not extend it unto all: but his meaning is that the
power of God which appeared evidently enough, was proved by many testimonies,
that the Apostleship of Paul might be thereby ratified. Neither need we doubt
but that Paul sought as well to cure their souls as their bodies. Yet Luke
does not declare what good he did: save only that the Barbarians gave him and
his fellows victual and necessary things when they loosed from the haven.
In the mean season we must note, that though Paul might have withdrawn
himself and have escaped many ways, yet was the will of God to him in steed
of voluntary fetters: because he was often cited by the heavenly oracle to
appear before the judgment seat of Nero, to bear witness of Christ.
Again, he knew that if he should run away, he could no longer have preached
the gospel, but should have lurked in some corner during his whole life.

11 In a ship of Alexandria. By these words Luke gives us to understand that
the former ship was either drowned, or else so rent and beaten that it served
for no use afterward: whereby the greatness of the shipwreck does the
better appear. And he sets down expressly that the badge of the ship of
Alexandria wherein they were carried to Rome, was Castor and Pollux, that we may
know that Paul had not liberty granted to sail with such as were like to
himself: but was enforced to enter into a ship which was dedicated to two
Idols. The old Poets did feign that Castor and Pollux came of Jupiter and
Leda: for which cause they are called in Greek dio scouroi: which word Luke
uses in this place: as if you should say, Jupiters sons. Again, they said
that they are the sign in the Zodiac called Gemini. There was also another
superstition among the mariners, that those fiery exhalations which appear in
tempests, are the very same. Therefore in times past they were thought to be
gods of the seas, and were therefore called upon: as at this day Nicholas and
Clement, and such like. Yea as in popery they retain the old errors changing
the names only: so at this day they worship these exhalations under the name of
Saint Hermes, or Saint Ermus. And because if one exhalation appear alone, it
is a doleful token: but if two together (as Pliny writes) then they
foreshewe a prosperous course. To the end the mariners of Alexandria might have
both Castor and Pollux to favor them: they had both for the badge of their
ship. Therefore as touching them, the ship was polluted with wicked
sacrilege: but because Paul did not make choice thereof of his own accord, he
is not polluted thereby. And surely seeing an Idol is nothing, it cannot in fect
the creatures of God, but that the faithful may use them purely and lawfully.
And we must needs think thus, that al those blottes wherewith Satan does go
about to stain the creatures of god through his iuggling, are washed away by
no other means but by a good and pure conscience, whereas the wicked and
ungodly do defile those things which are of themselves pure, though they do
but touch them. Finally, Paul was no more defiled by entering into this ship,
then when he did behold the altars at Athens: because being void of al
superstition, he knew that all the rites of the Gentiles were mere illusions.
Again, the men could not think that he did agree to that profane error. For
if he had bin to do any worship to Castor and Pollux though it had bin only
for fashions shake, he would rather have died a thousand deaths, then once
have yielded.

Therefore because he needed not to fear any offense, he enters the ship
without any more ado: and undoubtedly he did this heavily and with inward
sorrow: because he saw the honor which is due to god alone, given to vain
inventions. Therefore this ought to be numbered among his exercises, in that he
had those to be his guides, who thought that they were governed of Idols, and
had committed their ship to their tuition.

12 When we were come to Syracusa. Luke prosecuteth the residue of the course
of their sailing, that they arrived first in Sicilia. And after that they fet a
compass by reason of the tempest and raging of the sea, and sailed over into
Italy. And as that haven whereof Luke speaks in this place, is the most
famous haven of all Sicilia: so is it farther from the coast of Italy then is
that of Messana, over against which is Rhegium, whereof he makes mention. And
it is in the country of the Brutians, as is Puteoli a city of Campania. But
forasmuch as the brethren kept Paul at Puteoli seven days, by this we gather
how favorably and ge^tly the Centurion handled Paul. Neither do I doubt but
that the holy man would have made him a faithful promise that he would
always return in due time. But he was persuaded of his uprightness, so that
he was not afraid that he would deceive him. And now we gather out of this
place, that the seed of the gospel was then sown abroad, seeing there was
some body of the church even at Puteoli.

15 And when the brethren had heard of us from thence, they came out to meece
us at Appii Forum, and at the three Tauerns, whom when Paul saw, he gave
thanks to God and waxed bold.

16 And when we were come to Rome, the Centurion delivered the prisoners to the
chief captain of the host. But Paul was suffered to dwell alone with a
soldiar which kept him.

17 And after three days Paul called together the chief of the Jews: and
when they were come, he said to them, Men and brethren, though I have done
nothing against the people or ordinances of the Elders, yet was I delivered a
prisoner from Jerusalem into the hands of the Romans.

18 Which when they had examined me, they would have let me go, because there
was no cause of death in me.

19 But when the Jews spoke contrary, I was enforced to appeal to Caesar: not
as if I have any thing to accuse my nation of.

20 For this cause therefore have I sent for you, that I might see you, and
speak to you. For the hope of Israel am I bound with this chain.

15 When the brethren heard. God did comfort Paul by the coming of the
brethren who came forth to meet him, that he might the more joyfully make have
to defend the Gospel. And the zeal and godly care of the brethren appears
therein, in that they inquire for Paul's coming, and go out to meet him. For
it was at that time not only an odious thing to profess the christian faith,
but it might also bring them in hassarde of their life. Neither did a few men
only put themselves in private danger: because the envy redounded to the
whole Church. But nothing is more dear to them then their duty wherein they
could not be negligent unless they would be counted sluggishe and
unthankful. It had been a cruel fact to neglect so great an Apostle of
Jesus Christ, especially seeing he labored for the common salvation.

And now forasmuch as he had written to them before, and had of his own accord
offered his service to them, it had been an unseemly thing not to repay to him
brotherly good will and courtesy. Therefore the brethren did by this their
dutifulnes testify their godliness toward Christ: and Paul's desire was more
inflamed, because he saw fruit prepared for his constancy. For though he were
endued with invincible strength, so that he did not depend upon man's help: yet
God who uses to strengthen his by means of men, did minister to him new
strength by this means. Though he were afterward forsaken when he was in
prison, as he complains in a certain place, yet did he not despair: but did
fight no less valiantly and manfully under Christ's banner, than if he had
been guarded with a great army. But the remembrance of this meeting did ferue
even then to encourage him, 2. Tim. 4.16.
seeing he did consider with himself that there were many bo^ly brethren at
Rome, but they were weak, and that he was sent to strengthen them. And there
is no cause why we should marvel that Paul was emboldened at this present
when he saw the brethren, because he did hope that the confession of his faith
would yield no small fruit. For so often as God shows to his servants any
fruit of their labor, he does as it were prick them forward with a goad, that
they may proceed more courageously in their work.

16 The Centurion delivered the prisoners. Luke does signify that Paul had
more liberty granted him then the rest: for this condition and estate was
peculiar. For he was suffered to dwell in an house by him self, having one
keeper with him, where as the rest were shut up in the common prison. For the
general captain knew by Festus his report, that Paul was giltlesse: and the
Centurion, as it is likely, did faithfully rehearse such things as might serve
to bring him into favor. Notwithstanding let us know that God did govern from
heaven the bonds of his servant: not only that he might ease him of his
trouble, but that the faithful might have freer access unto him. For he would
not have the treasure of his faith shut up in prison, but he would have it
laid open, that it might enrich many far and wide. And yet Paul was not so
at liberty, but that he did always carry a chain. Luke calls the general
captain Stratopedarches, who was appointed over the army which kept the
city, as histories make mention.

17 And after three days. Paul his humanity was wonderful, in that, though
he had suffered such cruel injuries of his nation, he studieth notwithstanding
to appease the Jews which are at Rome, and he excuses himself to them,
least they hate his cause, because they hear that the priests do hate him.
He might well have excused him self before men, if he had passed over these
Jews and turned him self to the Gentiles. For though he had continually in
diverse places assayed to bring them to Christ, yet they were more and more
netled and moved? and yet he had omitted nothing neither in Asia, nor in
Grecia, neither at Jerusalem, which might mittigate their fury. Therefore all
men would have justly pardoned him, if he had let those alone, who^ he had so
often tried to be of desperate pride. But because he knew that his master was
given of his father to be the minister of the Jews, to fulfill the promises,
whereby God had adopted to himself the seed of Abraham to be his people: he
looks unto the calling of God and is never weary. He saw that he must
remain at Rome seeing he had liberty granted to teach, he would not that
they should be deprived of the fruit of his labor. Secondly he would not have
them moved through hatred of his cause, to trouble the church: because a small
occasion might have caused great destruction. Therefore Paul meant to beware,
least according to their wonted madness they should set all on fire.

I have done nothing against the people. These two things might have made the
Jews hate him: either because he should have done hurt to the common wealth
of his nation, as some runnagates did increase their bondage which was too
cruel, through their treachery: or because he should have done somewhat
against the worship of God: for though the Jews were grown out of kind, and
religion was depraved and corrupted among them with many errors, yet the very
name of the law, and the worship of the temple were greatly reverenced.
Furthermore, Paul denies not but that he did freely omit those ceremonies
whereto the Jews were superstitiously tied: yet he cleereth himself of the
crime of reuolting whereof he might be suspected. Therefore understand those
ordinances of the fathers, whereby the children of Abraham and the disciples of
Moses ought according to their faith to have been distinguished from the rest
of the Gentiles. And surely in that he did cleeue so holily to Christ, who is
the soul and perfection of the law, he is so far from impairing the
ordinances of the fathers, that none did better observe the same.

19 I was enforced to appeal. This appeal was full of hatred and envy for
this cause, because the authority and liberty of the Jewish nation did seem
to be sore oppressed, who could have been content to have lived with their own
laws. Secondly, because his defense was joined with infamy and loss of all
the people. Therefore he answers this objection also: because he was enforced
with the stubbornnes of his enemies to fly to this fortress. For he is
excused by necessity, because he had no other way to escape death. And after
that he had excused that which was done already, he promises that he will so
handle his matter hereafter, that he will not labor against the Jews.

20 For the hope of Israel. We must understand much more under these words,
then Luke expresses: as we gather out of the answer, where the Jews speak of
the sect: to wit, repeating his speech, which Luke omitteth. Therefore Paul
entreated of Christ, that it migh plainly appear that neither, the law nor
the temple did profit the Jews any thing without him: because the covenant
of adoption is grounded in him, and the promise of salvation is in him
confirmed. Neither did they doubt but that the restoring of the kingdom did
depend upon the coming of the Messiah: and even at that time their misery and
decay did increase the hope and desire of him. Wherefore Paul says for good
causes that he is bound for the hope of Israel. Whereby we be also taught that
no man does hope aright, but he which looks unto Christ and his spiritual
kingdom: for when he places the hope of the godly in Christ, he excludes all
other hopes.

21 But they said unto him, we neither received letters from Judea touching
thee, neither did any of the brethren come and show us or speak any evil of
thee.

22 But we will hear of thee what thou think: for as concerning that sect,
we know that it is spoken against every where.

23 And when they had appointed him a day, many came to him to his lodging: to
whom he expounded and testified the kingdom of God, and persuaded them of
Jesus out of the law of Moses and out of the prophets, from morning till
night.

24 And certain believed those things which were spoken, but certain believed
not.

21 Neither by letters. The Priests and Scribes did not hold their peace,
because they were become more gentle toward Paul, or to the end they might
spare him: that proceeded rather of contempt or else of despair: because they
neither knew how to oppress him when he was so far from them, and his
carrying into Italy was to them in steed of a grave. For they did lord it no
less carelessly then proudly, so that no body did trouble them at home.
Furthermore though the Jews come not altogether rightly prepared to hear, yet
they show some desire to learn, when as they do not refuse to hear the
defense of his doctrine, which is spoken against every where. For many do stop
the way before themselves with this prejudice, because they cannot abide to
hear that which is refused by common judgment: but subscribe to the opinion of
other men to the condemning of doctrine which they know not. Nevertheless this
is not without fault (as I said) that they obect gainsaying to cause hatred,
or to procure evil suspicion: as if it had not been said before by Isaias,
that god should be a stone of offense to all the people. It is uncertain
whether upon the day appointed Paul disputed all the day, or they reasoned one
with another: save only because we may guess by the circumstance of time, that
Paul did not continue speaking still, For he could scarce have framed a speech
which could have continued from morning to night. Wherefore I do not doubt but
that after the Apostle had briefly expounded the sum of the gospel, he
granted liberty to the hearers to propound questions, and did make answer to
the questions which were objected to him. But we must note the state of the
disputation which Luke says is double. For Paul taught first: after what sort
the kingdom of God was amongst them, and principally what manner chief
felicity and glory that was which was promised to the^, which the prophets do
so highly extol. For seeing that many of them did dream of a frail estate of
the kingdom of God in the world, and did place the same falsely in idleness,
pleasure, and in plenty of present good things, it was necessary that it
should be rightly defined, that they might know that the kingdom of God is
spiritual: whose beginning is newness of life, and the end thereof blessed
immortality and the heavenly glory.

Secondy Paul exhorted them to receive Christ the author of the promised
felicity, And again this second point had two members, for it could not be
handled profitably and soundly, unless he did expound the office of the
promised redeemer: secondly unless he did show that he is already given, and
that the son of Mary is he in whom the Fathers hoped. It was in deed a common
maxim among the Jews that the Messiah should come and restore all things into
perfect order. But Paul labored another point, which was not so well known:
that the Messiah was promised, who should with the sacrifice of his death, make
satisfaction for the sins of the world, who should reconcile GOD to men, who
should purchase eternal righteousness, who should fashion me^ after the image of
God, being regenerate with his spirit, who should finally make his faithful
servants heirs with him of eternally life.

And that all those things were fulfilled in the person of Jesus Christ
crucified. He could not entreat of those things, but he must needs call back
the Jews from their gross and earthly inventions into heaven, and also take
away the stumbling block of the cross, seeing he taught that there was no
other way or means whereby we are reconciled with God. And let us note, that
(as Luke does testify) Paul took all that which he spoke of Christ out of
the law and prophets. For true religion differs from all feigned relig^ons,
because the word of God alone is the rule thereof. Also the church of god
differs from all profane sects in this, because it hears him speak alone,
and is governed by his commandment.

And now by this we see the agreement that is between the old and the new
testaments to establish the faith of Christ: secondly, that double profit of
the scripture which the same Paul commends in another place: to wit, that it
is sufficient as well to instruct those which are willing to learn, as to
refute the stubbornness of those which set themselves against the truth. 2.
Tim. 3.16. and Tit. 1.9.
Therefore let those, who desire to be wise with with sobriety and to teach
others well, appoint themselves these bounds, that they utter nothing but out of
the pure fountain of the word. The philosophers deal otherwise, who contend
only with reasons, because they have no sound authority, whom the papists
imitate too much who set apart the oracles of God, and lean only to the
inventions of man's brain, that is too mere folly.

24 Some believed. Luke declares that this was at length the success of the
disputation, that they did not al profit in the same doctrine. We know that the
apostle was endued with such grace of the spirit, that he ought to have moved
stories: and yet he could not after long disputing and testifiyng, win: all
men unto Christ. Wherefore let us not marvel, if the unbelief of many do at
this day resist the plain doctrine of the Gospel, and if many remain
obstinate, to whom the truth of Christ is no less made manifest, then the
sun at moon day. Moreover those return from Paul blind and blockish, who
came unto him willingly, as if they had bin desirous to learn. If there were
such stubbornness in voluntary hearers, what marvel is it if those refuse
Christ with a malicious mind, who swell with pride and malice, and do openly
fly and hate the light.

25 And when they could not agree, they departed after that Paul had spoken one
word, well spoke the holy ghost by Iesaias to our fathers:

26 Saying, Go to this people, and say, ye shall hear with your ears and not
understand: and seeing ye shall see, and not perceive.

27 For the heart of this people is waxed gross, and their ears are dull
with hearing, and with their eyes they have winked: least at any time they see
with their eyes and hear with their ears, and understand with their heart,
and they be converted and I heal them.

28 Be it known therefore unto you, that this salvation of God is sent to the
Gentiles, and they shall hear it.

29 And when he had said these things, the Jews went out from him and had
great reasoning among themselves.

30 And Paul remained two years full in a thing he had hired for himself, and
he received all those which came in unto him.

31 Preaching the kingdom of God, and teaching those things which concern the
Lord Jesus, with all boldness, and no man did let him.

25 And when they could not. The malice and frowardness of the unfaithful is
the cause of this, that Christ who is our peace and the only bond of holy
unity, is an occasion of dissension, and does cause those to go together by
the ears, who were friends before. For behold when the Jews come together to
hear Paul, they think all one thing and speak all one thing: they do all
profess that they embrace the law of Moses. So soon as they hear the
doctrine of reconciliation, there arises dissentio^ among the^, so that they
are divided. And yet for all this we must not think that the preaching of the
Gospel is the cause of discord: but that privy displesure which lurked before
in their malicious minds, does then break out: and as the brightness of the
sun does not color things otherwise then they were: but does plainly show
the difference, which was none so long as it was dark. Therefore seeing God does
illuminate his elect peculiarly, and faith is not common to all men, let us
remember that it cannot be but that so soon as Christ comes abroad, there
will be a division among men. But the^ let us call to mind that which Simon
foretold of him, that he shall be a sign which shall be spoken against, that
the thoughts of many hearts may be disclosed: Luc. 2.34.35.
and that unbelief which strives against God, is the mother of dissension.

After that Paul. At the first he went about to allure them meekelie and
gently, now so soon as he espieth their obstinacy, he inueigheth sharply, and
does severely denounce the judgment of God: for the rebellious must be
handeled thus, whose pride cannot be tamed with plain doctrine. The same
order must we keep, we must gently govern those who are apt to be taught and
gentle: but we must cite the stubborn unto Gods judgment seat. Whereas he
brings in rather the holy Ghost speaking, the^ the prophet, it makes to the
credit of the oracle. For seeing God requires that he alone be heard,
doctrine cannot otherwise be of authority, then if we know that it did proceed
from him, and that it did not issue out of man's brain. Again, he declares
therewithal that the stubbornness of one age only, is not there noted, but
that the oracle of the spirit is extended unto the time to come.

26 Go to this people. This is a notable place, Mat. 13.14. Ioh. 12.40. Romans
11.8. Mark. 4.12. Luke 8.10.
because it is cited six times in the new Testament: but because it is brought
in else where to an other end, we must mark for what purpose Paul applies it
unto the present cause. Namely, he meant with this as with a mallet to beat in
pieces the hardness and frowardness of the wicked: and to encourage the
faithful who were as yet weak and tender, least the unbelief of others*
should trouble them.

Therefore the sum is, that that was fulfilled which was foretold by the
prophet: and that therefore there is no cause why the reprobate should flatter
themselves, or that the faithful should be terrified as it were with some new
and unwonted thing. And though it be certain that this blindness whereof the
prophet spoke, began in his time: yet John shows that it did properly
appertain unto the kingdom of Christ. Therefore Paul does fitly apply it
unto that contempt of the Gospel which he saw: as if he should have said: this
is the very same thing which the holy ghost foretold in times past by the mouth
of Isaias. And though this place be diversely applied not only by the
Evangelists, but also by Paul himself, the show of contrariety is easily
put away and aunsweared. Matthew, Mark, and Luke say that this prophecy was
fulfilled, when Christ spoke by parables unto the people, and did not reveal
to them the mysteries of the kingdom of heaven. For then the unfaithful hard
the voice of God with their outward ears, but they did not profit thereby. John
says in a sense not much unlike to this, that the Jews were not brought to
believe, no not with many miracles, so that this same prophecy of the prophet
was fulfilled. Ioh. 12.37.
Therefore these four agree in this, that it came to pass by the just
judgment of God that the reprobate in hearing should not hear, and in seeing
should not see. Now Paul calls to mind that which the prophet did testify
concerning the Jews, Romans 11.5.7.
least any man wonder at their blindness. Furthermore, in the Epistle to the
Romans, he mounteth higher, showing that this is the cause of blindness,
because God does give the light of faith only to the remnant whom he has
chosen freely. And surely it is certain that because the reprobate reject the
doctrine of salvation, this comes to pass through their own malice, and
that therefore they them selves are to be blamed. But this next cause does not
let but that the secret election of god may distinguish between me^: that
those may believe who are ordained to life, and that the other may remain
blockish. I will not stand long about the words of the prophet, because I have
expounded the same elsewhere. Neither did Paul curiously recite the words which
are in the prophet: but did rather apply his words unto his purpose.
Therefore he imputes that making blind, which the prophet attributes to the
secret judgment of God to their malice. For the prophet is commanded to stop
the eyes of his hearers: and Paul in this place accuses the unbelieving of his
time, because they shut their own eyes. Though he sets down both things
distinctly, that God is the author of their blindness, and that yet
notwithstanding they shut their own eyes and become blind of their own
accord: as these two things do very well agree together, as we said else
where. In the last memember where it is said, Least they see with their eyes,
or hear with their ears, or understand with their heart: God shows how
clear his doctrine is: to wit, that it is sufficient to lighten all the
senses, unless men do maliciously darken them selves: as Paul also teaches
in another place, that his Gospel is plain so that none can be blind in the
light thereof, ^. Cor. 4.3.
save those who are ordained to destruction, whose eyes Satan has blinded.

Least they be converted and I heal them. By this we gather that the word of
God is not set before all men that they may return to soundness of mind: but
that the external voice sounds in the ears of many without the effectual
working of the Spirit, only that they may be made inexcusable. And here the
pride of flesh does rashly murmr against God: as we see many object, that
men are called in vain, yea absurdlie, unless it be in their power to obey:
for though we see no reason why god appears to the blind, and speaks to
the deaf: yet his will alone which is the rule of all righteousness, ought to
be to us in steed of a thousand reasons. In the conclusion we must note the
wholesome effect of the word of God: namely the conversion of men: which is not
only the beginning of health: but also a certain resurrection from death to
life.

28 Therefore be it. Least the Jews may afterward accuse him of reuolting,
because he forsakes the holy stock of Abraham and goes to the profane
Gentiles: he denounces that which the Prophets did so often testify, that The
salvation whereof they were the proper, at least the principal heirs, should
be translated unto strangers. Notwithstanding whereas he says that salvation
was sent to the Gentiles: he means, in the second place: to wit, after that
the Jews had rejected it, as we have said before more at large. Therefore the
sense is, that there is no cause why the Jews should complain, Sup. 13.46.
if the Gentiles be admitted into the void possession after that they have
forsaken it. Neither does he make faith common to all the Gentiles in general,
when he says that they shall hear. For he had full well tried, that even
many of the Gentiles did wickedly resist God: but he sets so many of the
Gentiles as believed, against the unbelieving Jews, Deuteronomy. 32.21
that he may provoke them unto jealousy: as it is in the song of Moses. In the
mean season he signifies that the doctrine which they refuse shall profit
others.

29 Having much reasoning. No doubt the wicked were more netled because he
cited the Prophecy against them: for they are so far from waxing meek when
they are reproved, that they are more inflamed with fury. This is the reason
why they reasoned when they were gone out from Paul, because the more part
would not be quiet. But seeing there was such disputing: it appears that some
did so embrace those things which Paul had spoken, that they doubted not to
defend and stoutly to avouch that which they believed. But it is in vain for
any man to object thereupon, that the Gospel of Christ is the seed of
contention, which comes undoubtedly from man's pride and waywardness: and
assuredly if we will have peace with God, we must strive against those which
contemn him.

30 He received al. The Apostle showed an excellent example of constancy, in
that he offered himself so willingly to all those which were desirous to
hear him. Surely he was not ignorant what great hatred he did purchase: and
that this was his best way, if by holding his peace he might appease the
hatred of his adversaries. For a man being desirous to provide for himself
alone, would not have done thus: but because he remembered that he was no less
the servant of Christ and a preacher of the Gospel when he was in prison, then
if he had bin at liberty, he thought it was not lawful for him to withdraw
himself from any which was ready to learn, least he should foreslow the
occasion which was offered him by God, and therefore he did more regard the
holy calling of God then his own life. And that we may know that he did
incur danger willingly, Luke does shortly after expressly commend his
boldness: as if he should say that setting al fear aside he did faithfully obey
the commandment of God, neither was he terrified with any danger, but did
proceed to take pains with whomsoever he met.

Preaching the kingdom of God. He does not separate the kingdom of God and
those things which belong to Christ as diverse things, but does rather add the
second thing by way of exposition, that we may know that the kingdom of God is
grounded and contained in the knowledge of the redemption purchased by Christ.
Therefore paul taught, that men are strangers and forrayners from the kingdom of
God until having their sins done away they be reconciled to God, and renewed
into holiness of life by the spirit: and that the kingdom of God is then
erected and does then flourish among them, when Christ the mediator does join
them to the father, having both their sins freely forgiven them, and being
also regenerate unto righteousness, that beginning the heavenly life upon earth
they may always have a longing desire to come to heaven, where they shall
fully and perfectly enjoy glory. Also Luke sets forth a singular benifit
of God in that Paul had so great liberty granted him. For that came not to
pass through the winking and dissimulation of those who could hinder it,
seeing they did detest religion: but because the Lord did shut their eyes. 2.
Tim. 2.9.
Wherefore it is not without cause that paul himself does bost, that the word
of God was not bound with his bonds.

The end of the latter part of the commentaries upon the Acts of the Apostles.
All glory to God.
A TABLE OF THOSE things which are expounded in these Commentaries upon the
Acts of the Apostles. The former number shows the Chapter, the latter the
verse.
A
Abraham the father of the faithful 7. 3 Abraham prevented by the goodness and
grace of God 7. 2. Abraham's faith. 7. 4. Abraham's children are of two sorts. 3.
25. and 7. 52. and 13. 16. 33. and 26. 7. Abraham's obedience is worthy of
singular commendation. 7. 3. and 10. 14. Abraham his patience. 7. 5. Abuse of
tongues. 10. 46. Abuse of miracles. 3. 9. Abuse of the names of Saints. 15. 1.
Acception of persons is condemned. 10. 34. Al sharp and open accusation is not
to be condemned. 23. 3. The end of our adoption. 10. 43. A dramittium a city
of Aeotia. 27. 1. Natural affections are not of themselves corrupt. 8. 2. and
20. 37. Afflictions of God. 10. 38. and 11. 28. Afflictions of sin. 28. 4.
Afflictions common to the godly as well as to the wicked. 23. 8. and 27. 24. and
28. 4. Afflictions for Christ's sake are glorious. 5. 41. 42. and 16. 22.
Afflictions cannot hurt the elect. 7. 30. Afflictions are to be suffered with a
pacient mind. 14. 22. Profit of Afflictions. 11. 19. and 14. 22. and 16. 22.
29. and 18. 2. 41. After put for moreover or besides. 5. 36. In what sense
Agabus was called a prophet. 11. 27. Herod Agrippa the elder. 12. 1. Agrippa
son of Agrippa the elder. 25. 13. Alexander a revolt. 19. 33. All for many.
9. 35. Alms is precious to God. 5. 5. Look liberality.
The Allegory of the bush wherein the Lord appeared to Moses. 7. 30. Ambition a
great vice. 5. 1. Ambition very hurtful to the church. 8. 14. Ambition is
always envious and malicious. 11. 23. Ambition the mother of dissension. 23.
9. Ambition the mother of al heresies. 20. 30. Anabaptists refuted. 2. 39. 45.
The error of the Anabaptists concerning baptising of infants. 8. 12. 37. The
doting of the Anabaptists touching the having of goods common. 4. 34. and.
5. 4. The doting of Anabaptists touching the children of Abraham. 3. 25.
Anabaptists illusions. 7. 31. Ananias Paul's teacher. 9. 6. 10. Whether
Ananias who commanded Paul to be smitten were the highest priest. 23. 2. and
24. 1. What a grievous sin that of Ananias was. 5. 5. Why the vision did
appear to Ananias. 9. 10. Angels were called men. 10. 30. Whether every man
has his Angel. 12. 15. An^^ls were messengers and witnesses in the publishing
of the law. 7. 53. Angels ministers of the faithful. 5. ^9. and 12. 11. 15. The
Angel which appeared to Moses was Christ. 7. 30. Holy anger. 13. 10. and 14.
14. and 17. 16 Antichrists bondslaues. 12. 3. Antichrists miracles are false.
2. 22. an excellent ornament of Antioch. 11. 26.
The men of Antioche were first called christians. 11. 26. The faith of the me^
of Antioch. 11. 27. How far forth we must lean to Antiquity. 14. 16. and 30.
and 24, 14. What antiquity is to be allowed. 24. 4. Look antiquity. Antonia a
tower buylt by Herod. 4. 1. Apollos Paul's successor among the Corinthians. 18.
24. The Apostles spoke indeed with strange tongues. 2. 4 Apostles ministers not
authors of miracles. 3. 46. 12. and 16. 18. and 28. 8. and 19. 11. Why the
Apostles went fearfully forward in preaching the gospel. 8. 1. Apostles
witnesses of Christ. 1. 8. and 10. 39. Apostles had wives. 1. 14. The apostles
wrought miracles having the spirit for their directour. 3. 5. and 9. 34. and
14. 9. The Apostles brought in no new relygion. 3. 13. and 5. 30. Why the
Apostles did not preach the gospel immediately after Christ's resurrection or
assention. 1. 4. Why the Apostles began to preach the gospel at Jerusalem. 1.
4. Authority of the Apostles. 6. 2. Apostles constancy. 5. 12. 36. 42. and 8.
2. Apostles curiosity. 1. 7. The Apostles modesty. 5. 12 The apostles office.
11. 22. and 15. 4. The apostles foolish opinion touching the kingdom of Christ.
1. 6. The apostles power. 13. 11 The certain calling of the Apostles. 1. 2.
The sincere zeal of the apo^tles. 4. 25. 33. The difference between apostles
and pastors. 1. 23. and 14. 23 The difference between apostles and Elders, 14.
23. The apostles had no certain place of abode. 9. 32. Who were elders in the
church. 14. 2. The name of an apostle reaches far. 14. 14. The Apostles
accused of sedition. 5. 28 The apostles nothing ambitious in gathering places
of scripture together. 15. 16. The Apostles made after Christ's resurrection.
2. 4. Apostles were admitted or entered by external baptism by John. 1. 5.
Why the apostles had diversity of tongues given them. 2. 2. The faithful had
diuersitye of tongues given them. 10. 46. How miserable the bondage of the
people of god was in the apostles times. 16. 3. Aquila a Jew was Paul his
host. 18. 2. Aratus his half verse. 17. 28. Christ his ascension to heaven is
the end of the history of the gospel. 1. 2. Aristotle's authority among the
Sorbon doctou s. 17. 28. Aristotle's place. 1. 3. Aristarchus Paul his
companion. 27. 2. Aretas the kings Lieuetenant. 9. 23. Asdod which is also
called Azotus. 8. 40 Assaron the name of a city. 9. 32. Asson a city of Troas
which was also called Apollonia. 20. 13. Astrology a profitable science. 7.
22. Judiciary astronomy condemned. 19. 19. Augustine assaulted with the
Pelagyans. 15. 10. Augustine his places 1. 11. and 2. 1. and 7. 56. and 8. 1.
24. and 10. 4. and 13. 33. and 16. 4. and 23. 5. Augustine his complainte of
the too weighty burden of traditions. 16. 4.
B
The Baptism of the spirit was committed to Christ. 1. 15. The word baptism
used improperly. 1. 5. The word Baptism is sometime referred to the gifts of
the spirit. 19. 5. Titles of Baptism. 1. 5. The end of Baptism. 8. 37. The
form of Baptism. 10. 48. Whether Peter did after the form of baptism. 2. 38
Whereupon the force of baptism depends. 2. 38. and 11. 16. and 22. 16. The
baptism of John put for all his whole ministry. 10. 37. and 18. 25 John's
baptism. 11. 16. The comparison between the Baptism of John and of Christ. 1.
5. the difference between John's baptism and ours. 19. 4. The right of
baptism among the men of old. 8. 38. Baptism is an appurtenance of the
spiritual grace. 10. 47. Baptism is as it were an appurtenance of faith. 8.
37. Baptism is grounded in Christ. 8. 37. Baptism is a seal wherewith the
promise of grace is confirmed. 2. 38. Baptism is a token of newnes of life. 8.
36. Baptism is a token of repentance. 2. 38. Baptism must not be denied to
infantes. 1. 39. and 8. 37. Baptising of infantes is avouched against the
Anabaptists. 8. 37. and 11. 17. Breaking of bread for the Lords supper. 2. 42.
and 20. 7. How Barnabas was an apostle. 14. 14. Barnabas the minister of the
Gentiles. 14.. 13. Barnabas hs title. 11. 24. Barnabas his simplicity. 11. 24.
25. Barnabas his zeal. 14. 14. and 15. 28. Barsabas. 1. 26. How many soldiers
were in a bad. 10. 1 The band of Augustus. 27. 1. Bernice the natural sister
of Agrippa the younger. 25. 13. Bishops and elders. 10. 28. How ridiculous the
popish bishops are. 1. 21. and 6. 2. The frivolous boasting of popish bishops.
4. 11. 20. 28. The tyranny of popish bishops. 15. 30. Blastus was won with
gifts. 12. 20. What it is to be blessed in the seed of Abraham. 3. 25. The
blessing of the priest effectual. 3. 26. Eating of blood was in times past
forbidden. 15. 19. Brainsicke men under color of the spirit refuse external
doctrine. 16. 14. Brainsick men refuted. 8. 2. The allegory of brainsicke men
touching the children of Abraham. 13. 33 The error of brainsicke men touching
angels and devils. 23. 8. The error of brainsicke men touching the soul. 9.
41. The erroneous spirit of brainsicke men 10. 44. What vision Brutus saw. 16.
10. Budeus his place. 1. 1. What form of building the Jews did use. 10. 10.
Brethren put for the faithful converted to God. 14. 2. Breaking of bread put
for the Lords supper. 2. 42. and 20. 7. What burying does profit. 9. 37. Why
we must have respect of burial. 8. 2.
C
Caiphas had two names. 4. 5. We must apply our selves diligently in our
calling. 1. 8. and 7. 3. and 20. 23. and 27. 3. and 28. 17. 30. The Queens of
the Ethiopians were called Candace. 8. 27. We must always beware of the
judgment of the flesh. 28. 6. The Fable of the Poets touching Castour and
Pollux. 28. 11. Ceremonies abrogated by the coming of Christ. 6. 14. and 8.
27. and 13. 38. and 15. 9. 16. and 16. 3. and 21. 20. A huge heap of Ceremonies
in popery. 16. 3. Weakness of ceremonies. 13. 38. Use of Ceremonies. 13. 38. and
15. 9. and 17. 25. Use of Ceremonies was free until the truth of the Gospel
might more plainly appear. 16. 3. and 18. 18. Why Christ and Paul commanded
the Devil to hold his peace. 16. 18. Devils for lesser gods and Angels. 17. 18.
Chaldea comprehended under the name of Mesopotamia. 7. 2. Who be properly the
children of God. 17. 28. Why Christ was called Jesus of Nazareth. 10. 38. What
it is to bear the name of Christ 9. 15. The faith of the godly leans to
Christ. 3. 16. Christ the only author of life. 2. 24. and 4. 12. and 8. 33. and
9. 39. and 26. 6. Christ beneficial to the world. 10. 38. Christ the head of
the church. 2. 25. 36 Christ knows the hearts. 7. 54. and 13. 50. Christ the
perpetual keeper of the church. 9. 5. Christ the only master and teacher of
the church. 3. 21. and 7. 37. and 9. 36. and 10. 24. and 13. 47. and 15. 2. and
20. 30. Christ the Lord. 2. 36. Christ the guide of his. 5. 31. Christ the
son of David. 2. 30. and 13. 23. Christ the son of God. 2. 22 and 8. 37.
and 9. 20. and 13. 33. and 16. 31. Christ the end and performer of the law.
20. 30. and 7. 37. 52. and 13. 38. and 28. 17. Christ the only fountain and
author of blessing. 3. 26. Christ the fountain of salvation. 4. 12. Christ the
foundation of the church. 4. 11. Christ the only foundation of faith and
repentance. 2. 38. Christ true man. 7. 30. Christ the restorer of the church.
2. 17. and 15. 16. Christ the image of the invisible God. 10. 4. Christ the
judge of the world. 1. 11. and 3. 20. and 10. 42. and 17. 31. Why Christ is
called just. 7. 52. and 22. 24. Christ the mediator. 2. 21. 33. and 7. 30. and
10. 4. 36. 43. and 13. 38. and 17. and 3. 18. and 20. 21. and 26. 6. and 27.
24. and 28. 31. Christ Jesus the true Messiah. 4. 10. Why Christ was called a
Nazarite. 10. 38. Men have no participation with God but by Christ. 7. 30.
Christ is our peace. 28. 25. Christ is the pledge and substance of eternal
life. 9. 37. Christ the first fruits of those which rise again. 26. 23.
Christ the chief of all the prophets. 3. 22. Christ the eternal king. 2. 35.
and 10. 38 Christ the end of baptism. 10. 48. Christ a priest. 10. 38. Christ
the only mark whereat faith does aim. 16. 31. and 20. 21. and 26. 18. Christ
the sign which is spoken against. 28. 25. Christ the savior of his. 5. 31.
Christ the blessed seed. 3. 25. Christ the son of righteousness. 2. 7. and 9.
18. and 13. 8. and 17. 2. and 18. 2. Christ alone must be heard. 9. 6. Christ
was crucified in the 18. year of the reign of Tiberius. 4. 5. Christ was
appointed first for the Jews. 3. 26. To what end Christ was sent into the
world. 10. 36. Why Christ was without corruption. 2. 29. Christ was not
extinguished by death. 8. 33. Christ must be called upon by the godly. 9. 14.
21. To what end Christ died. 10. 37. How Christ was slain of the Jews. 2. 23.
Christ is not idle in heaven. 1. 11. Christ suffered according to the will of
God. 3. 18. Christ was promised to David peculiarly. 2. 30. Christ must be
sought by faith. 1. 11. Christ is eternal God. 2. 33. and 7. 30. 59. and 9. 3.
14. and 20. 28. Christ is our Advocate. 2. 21. Christ is the immaculate lamb.
8. 32. Christ was the Angel which appeared to Moses. 7. 30. Christ the soul of
the law. 7. 38. and 28. 17. Christ the earnest of our election. 13. 48. Christ
the author of spiritual baptism..51. Christ the author of miracles. 16. 18
Christ must be sought in heaven. 1. 11. and 3. 21. and 7. 56. Christ is above
Moses. 7. 36. Why Christ appeared so often to his apostles after his
resurrection. 1. 3. Christ was anointed. 10. 38. Why Christ went to Jerusalem
upon the feast days. 2. 1. When Christ baptized with the spyrit. 1. 5. Christ
is compared to a sheep. 8. 32. Why Christ did not openly show himself to al
men. 10. 41. Christ did indeed depart out of this world. 1. 2. How Christ was
governed by the spirit. 1. 2. To what end Christ rose again. 10. 37. How Christ
stands or sits at the right hand of God. 7. 56 Why Christ lived at home
like a private man until he was thirty years of age. 1. 1. 2. 1. How
dangerous the denial of Christ is. 3. 17. and 5. 40. and 26. 10. Christ his
coming is comfortable to the godly, but fearful to the wicked. 14. 23. The
afflictions of the church are common to Christ. 9. 5. Christ's assention is one
of the principal points of the christian faith. 1. 9. How great the
authority of Christ is. 3. 23. Christ's body is not infinite. 1. 11. How
Christ's body is in heaven. 1. 11. and 7. 56. All the sayings of Christ are not
set down in writing. 20. 35. How great the dignity of Christ is. 10. 38. and
17. 31. How necessary the knowledge of christ his doctrine is. 1. 1. The
sum of christ his doctrine. 1. 3. Christ's glory is wonderful. 8. 33. What
great account we ought to make of the glory of christ. 11. 25. and 26. 10.
Christ his grace reaches unto all degrees. 17. 11 Christ his grace must not
be separated from his presence. 26. 19 How we must handle the contemners of
the grace of christ. 13. 40. How gently christ deals with those that be his.
10. 41. Christ his innocence. 13. 28. How great the majesty of christ is. 2.
34. and 9. 3. and 13. 25. To what end christ his miracles did tend. 10. 38.
Christ his death was slanderous. 5. 30. Christ his death was foretold. 8. 32.
Christ's death is lively. 8. 32. Christ his death was voluntary. 8. 37. To
bear the name of christ. 9. 15 Christ his office. 1. 1. 5. and 2. 33. and 3.
25. and 10. 43. and 13. 38. and 17 3. and 26. 22. Christ his kingdom was in
times past shadowed by figures. 21. 7. Christ his kingdom is eternal. 2. 35.
and 8. 33. and 13. 34. Christ his kingdom is spiritual. 17. 7 Christ his
kingdom is never quiet in the world. 4. 25. The nature of christ his kingdom.
1. 6. The ornaments of christ his kingdom 21. 9. The perfection of christ his
kingdom is deferred til the last day. 3. 21. Christ his resurrection is true.
13. 30. 33. Christ his resurrection is a principal point of the gospel. 1. 21.
Christ his resurrection is as it were the accomplishing of the gospel. 4. 33.
The knowledge of christ his resurrection is very necessary. 1. 3. The use of
christ's resurrection. 13. 34. The voluntary sacrifice of Christ. 8. 32 Christ's
triumph in death. 8. 33. Christ his victory gotten of his adversaries. 8. 33.
Christ's life lasts ever. Ibid. The force of the voice of Christ. 9. 40. The
difference between Christ and his Apostles. 3. 13. The comparing of Christ
and John baptist together. 1. 5. The difference between Christ and the pastors
or ministers of the word. 1. 5. and 7. 36. and 11. 16. All things are subject
to Christ. 7. 59. and 9. 5. Christianity cannot be without doctrine. 9. 36.
The true rule of christianity. 1. 1. The sum of christianity. 1. 3. and 2.
38. and 8. 32. Christians were sometimes called disciples. 9. 36. and 14. 23.
and 18. 22. and 21 4. Who be true christians. 14. 23. and 15. 22. How far
forth Christians ought to flee persecution. 11. 20. Chrysostomes place. 8. 33.
36. and 18. 3 Ciceroes place. 9. 25. and 17. 21. In what sense Circumcision is
called the eternal covenant. 15. 9. There has always been a Church in the
world. 23. 6. How hurtful domestical adversaries are. 15. 1. and 20 30. How
the restoring of the Church ought to be accomplished. 1. 17. The majesty of
the Church. 5. 15. The warfare of the Church is not yet come. 3. 21. Four
marks of the Church. 1. 42. The peace of the Church is of no long continuance.
12. 1. The perpetuity of the church is avouched in the person of Christ. 8. 33.
The persecutors of the Church shall be sore punished. 1. 20. and 9. 5. Why the
Church did err so long. 14. 16. The Church may err in the election of Min.
6. 5. The Church has always something which may be reformed. 6. 1. The Church
is assaulted on every side for diverse causes. 12. 3. How hard and laborious the
edifying of the Church is. 18. 11. The condition of the Church is stable in the
manifestation of Christ. 2. 17. The state of the Church. 7. 30. Look the state
of the faithful. The true and right ordering of the Church. 15. 16. The
perpetual government of the church belongs to Christ. 10. 42. The church is
the body of Christ. 1. 18. The Church is the house of God. 9. 31. The Church
is compared to a buylding. 4. 11. The Church is the temple of God. 9. 31. The
domestical Church. 10. 2. The church gathered of the Jews and Gentiles. 15.
16. The church was for the most part gathered of the common sort of me^. 9. 43
How precious the Church is to God. 20. 28. The church ought not to be without
discipline. 3. 1. The church cannot be without an ordinary ministry. 14. 23.
How the church increased. 1. 15. and 2. 41. and 4. 32. and 5. 14. and 6. 1. 7.
and 9 32. and 11. 19. and 13. 49. and 16. 5. 16. and 17. 12. and 19. 1. 20. The
state of the Church among the Jews in the time of the Apostles. 2. 7. The
horrible dissipation of the church of Jerusalem in the time of Paul. 23. 2.
Principal Churches serve not a little to keep other churches in order. 15. 36
How far we must imitate the example of Churches. 15. 1. How profitable and
necessary the unity of Churches is. 8. 14. Circumcision was to the Jews a
toke^ and pledge of free adoption. 7. 8. Whence some gather that the Jews
ought at this day to observe circumcision with the appurtenances thereof. 15.
21. and 16. 3. Common for that which is profane. 10. 14 The complaint of
Gregory Nazianzene, of the success of councels. 15. 2. Brotherly concord is
commended. 1. 14 and 4. 32. Auricular confession of the papists. 19. 19. The
conscience has two parts. 24. 16. Security of Conscience is very necessary.
10. 20. An evil conscience drives men unto madness. 7. 26. Examples of an
evil conscience. 5. 2. and 6. 12. Consent of the wicked in oppressing the
gospel of Christ. 23. 6. The Consolation of the faithful. 3. 20. and 4. 18.
and 5. 17. 41. and 7. 55. 59. and 8. 2. and 9. 5. 37. and 12. 3. 23 and 14. 21.
and 22. 7. Conspiracy to put Paul to death. 23. 12. Contention is to be
avoided. 23. 9. 10 Corinthus a sumptuous and populous city. 18. 1. How long
Paul preached the gospel at Corinthus. 18, 11. Cornelius the Centurion. 10. 1.
2. Cornelius was brought unto the faith of Christ after an heavenly manner. 10.
3. Cornelius was one of the faithful before Peter was sent unto him. 10. 4.
Wherein Cornelius offended in giving honor to Peter. 10. 25. Cornelius his
willing obedience. 10. 7. Covetousness is condemned. 5. 1. and 10 2. and 19. 24.
and 20. 33. How great the authority of Councels is. 15. 2. 28. The decree of
the Counsel of Laodicia touching the Election of Pastors. 14. 23. A lively
pattern of a lawful Council. 15. 12. How unhappily doubtful Counsels fall out.
5. 4. What a virtue Courtesy is. 23. 19. Too much credulity is to be fled. 21.
17. Peter heals the Creeple. 3. 7. Crispus the ruler of the Synagogue was
converted to the faith. 18. 7. Curiosity ingrafted in men. 1. 7. Curiosity
springs from idleness and distrust. 1. 8. Curiosity of the Apostles. 1. 7.
Curiosity ought to be avoided. 1, 7. 20. and 10. 41. and 17. 21. 30. and 19.
19.
D
How the Days were divided by the men of old into certain hours. 2. 14. and
3. 1. and 10. 3. and 12. 14. The great Day of the Lord comprehe^deth the whole
kingdom of Christ. 2. 18. To whom the Day of the Lord is joyful and to be
wished for. 3. 20. David a figure of Christ. 1. 18, and 4. 11. 25. and 13. 22.
33. The temporal and frail kingdom of David. 2. 35. Why the Day of judgment
is called the time of refreshing. 3. 20. The Day of the Saboattis for the
Sabbath. 19. 12. The Deaconshippe subject to sinister murmurings. 6. 3. To what
end the Deacons were ordained. 6. 1. 3. How Deacons ought to be chose^. 6. 3.
Deacons are subject to the Elders. 11. 30. What manner Deacons were in Popery.
6. 2. Fear of Death falls even upon the Saints. 9. 13. How far forth we
must bewail the Dead. 8. 2. Why they did in times past wash the bodies of the
Dead. 9. 37. Decrees of the Apostles. 16. 4. Demas a treacherous revolt. 8. 13.
Demetrius the Author of sedition against Paul. 19. 23. Demosthenes his place.
12. 20. Denial of Christ how dangerous. 36. 10. Denial of our selves is
commanded. 7. 3. and 14. 16. and 20. 28. Denial of our selves follows true
faith. 8. 18. Whence the denial of the providence and of the free election of
God does come. 20. 26. The devotion or vow of those who had conspired to kill
Paul. 23. 12. Dexterity is the gift of God. 7. 10. The invention of the image
of Diana. 10. 35. Dionysius Areopagita. 17. 34. The disciples for the faithful.
6. 2. The office of the disciples. 21. 3. Discipline is necessary in the
church. 3. 1. Discord must be fled. 15. 2. How hurtful inward dscord is to
the church. 15. 1. Discord between Paul and Barnabas. 15. 37. Discord arises
for the most part of ambition. 23. 9. The true way of disputation. 17. 2. How
the Devil is the father of lies. 16. 16. The devils are enforced to yield to
the majesty of the gospel. 8. 7. The popish divinity is an horrible Labyrinth.
16. 31. The popysh dyuines were overthrown with the only voice of the
Martyrs. 6. 9. Doctrine is as it were the soul of the church. 2. 42. Doctrine
without zeal is unprofitable. 18. 25. How the Jews did handle doctrine in
Paul's time. 13. 15. The doctrine of the Gospel is no new doctrine. 3. 21. The
authority and immortality of found doctrine. 7. 38. The sum of the doctrine of
the apostles. 8. 25. The sorrows of death. 2. 24. Donatists were heretics. 10.
15. Dorcas which was also called Tabita. 9. 36. The difference between Dreams
and visions. 18. 9. What a filthy vice Dru^kennes is. 2. 14 Drusilla the wife
of Felix, and daughter of Agrippa the elder. 24. 25. The men of the East are
enclyned to lust. 15. 19.
E
Ecclesiastical assemblyes are profitable. 3. 1. and 5. 12. What a hard
matter the Edyfiyng of the church is. 18. 11. Wherein the edifying of the
church consists. 20. 21. We must study to edify. 10. 24. and 11. 24. 25.
and 13. 15. and 15. 28. 16. 5. and 20. 20 The Egyptians woorshipped an Ox. 7.
41. What Elders there were in the Apostles time. 11. 30. and 20. 16. A vessel
of Election put for an excellent minister. 9. 15. Election is the cause of al
good things. 13. 17. Election goes before faith. 13. 48. There was a double
Election of the children of Abraham. 13. 33. Whence the denial of free
Election comes. 20. 26. The Elect alone do truly believe. 13. 48. and 16.
14. and 28. 25. 26. The difference between the Elect and the reprobate, the
faithful and the unfaithful, the godly and the ungodly. 3. 20. and 5. 11. and
9. 5. 6. 29. and 12. 13. and 14. 22. and 17. 32. and 16. 16. 30. 33. Eloquence
is the gift of God. 24. 1. We must not despise all Eloquence. 18. 24. How
far Eloquence does profit the Gospel. Ibid. The Encratite heretics. 10. 15.
Eneas his faith. 9. 34. Ennius his place. 9. 37. Envy is condemned. 11. 23. 24.
The books which were openly burnt at Ephesus. 19. 19. Epicures make semblaunce
of faith. 8. 15. Epicures dotings. 17. 18. The difference between the Epicures
and Sadduces. 23. 8. The Error of those which hold that the baptism of John
and the baptism of Christ were diverse. 1. 5. The error of the Jews touching
the kingdom of the Messiah. 1. 8. Stubbornness accompanies Error. 11. 2.
Errors once conceived are not easily plucked out of men's mynds. 10. 45. The
old Errors are retained in Popery, the names alone being changed. 28. 11. The
sect of the Essenes. 26. 4. The Evangelists were in the midst between the
Apostles and Doctors. 21. 8. Ennica the mother of Timothy. 16. 3. How the
Eunuchs faith was perfect. 8. 37. The notable modesty of the Eunuchs. 8. 31.
Eusebius his place, 12. 17. and 15. 13. Eutiches an heretic. 30. 28. Eutichus
was raised from death when Paul prayed. 20. 10. An Example of dying godlily and
holily in the death of Stephen. 7. 59. Exhortations are very necessary. 11. 23.
and 14. 20. and 19. 8. The popish Exorcists. 19. 13.
F
True Faith. 10. 43. and 11. 21. and 16. 31. 33. Faith put for the word of
God and the profession of Christianity. 6. 7. Faith is the gift of God. 15. 9.
and 16. 14. Faith comes by hearing. 8. 6. and 10. 5. and 14. 9. 17. Faith is
the soul of the Church. 23. 6. Faith is the sole foundation of godliness. 24.
14. and 25. 19. True faith does wholly addict us to God. 10. 33. Faith is
grounded in the word of God. 13. 9. Faith alone does justify. 13. 39. Faith
leans to the resurrection of Christ. 1. 3. Faith depends upon the election
of God. 13. 48. How faith does purify the heart. 15. 9. Faith must not be
separate from the knowledge of Christ. 10. 4. The Faith of the men of Antioche.
11. 17. The entangled Faith of the Papists. 16. 31. The certainty of Faith. 1.
4. The confirmation of faith is necessary. 8. 25. and 17. 11. The external
confession of Faith is necessary. 8. 36. The fruit of faith. 8. 39. The
foundation of the true Faith. 24. 14. The increase of Faith. 8. 37. and 10. 48.
The righteousness of Faith. 13. 38 The nature of Faith. 27. 25. The obedience of
Faith. 10. 20. The office of Faith. 15. 9. The trial of Faith. 7. 5. and 10.
40. The external profession of Faith is necessary. 8. 27. and 10. 2. The
security of Faith differs from sluggishnes. 1. 14. The force and efficacy of
Faith. 3. 16. and 10. 43. and 13. 39. The distinction between Faith and
repentance. 20. 21. The difference between the Christian Faith and the
superstition of the gentiles. 17. 18. All the Faithful must always be ready
to give an account of their life and doctrine. 11. 3. How the Faithful are
made partakers of the the flesh and blood of Christ. 1. 11. How precious the
Faithful are to god. 20. 28. The Faithful have always need of confirmation.
14. 20. and 15. 36. and 16. 5. and 18. 9. and 20. 32. and 28. 15. The Faithful
are not extinguished by death. 8. 31. The faithful profit daily. 5. 11. and 10.
48. and 14. 23. and 16. 5. and 17. 11. and 20. 32. The Faithful are dailye
reconciled to God. 13 38. The faithful are not streightway regenerate in all
points. 10. 45. The afflictions of the faithful are honorable. 16. 22. The
afflictions of the faithful are diverse. 14. 21. The afflictions of the
Faithful are likewise the afflictions of Christ. 22. 7. The souls of the
faithful are streightwaye received of Christ so soon as they depart out of the
body. 7. 59. Companies of the Faithful assembled in the time of persecution.
12. 12. The state of the Faithful in this world. 4. 21. and 7. 6. 30. and 5.
17. and 24. 8. 1. and 12. 3. and 13. 27. and 14. 22. and 17. 6. and 18. 17 and
28. 4. The consciences of the Faithful must be ruled by the word of god alone.
16. 4. The Faithful were called Disciples in times paste. 6. 2. All the
Faithful are Priests. 2. 17. and 3. 2. The Faithful are made partakers of the
gifts of God by hope. 1. 4. The Faithful are content with Christ alone. 28.
20. The Faithful are content with the commandments of God alone. 8. 26. and
10. 20. The Faithful are content with the word of God alone. 23. 11. The
Faithful are laid open to slanders. 17. 6. and 25. 7. The constancy of the
Faithful. 20. 37. How the houses of the faithful must be ordered. 16. 15. The
Felicity of the Faithful. 14. 22. The strength of the Faithful is in Christ
alone. 7. 55. The joy of the Faithful. 2. 25. 29. 46. and 5. 41. and 8. 8. 39.
and 11. 23. and 13. 48. 52. and 16. 33. and 20. 24. the glory of the Faithful.
5. 41. The meeknes of the Faithful. 26. 29. The warfare of the Faithful. 4.
23. and 5. 17. and 9. 16. and 12. 1. and 14. 22. and 28. 29. The quiet death of
the Faithful. 7. 59. The death of the Faithful is precious before god. 12. 2.
3. The patience of the Faithful. 26. 29. and 27. 2. Wherein the perfection of
the Faithful consists. 20. 37. The puritye of the Faithful is placed in
Faith. 15. 9. The security of the Faithful comes from the presence of god.
18. 10. The simplicity of the Faithful. 24. 5. 22. The hope of the Faithful
is in Christ alone. 28. 20. The fear of the Faithful. 14. 5. The triumph of
the Faithful. 16 22. The victory of the Faithful. 4. 21. The common calling
of the Faithful is depainted in Christ. 13. 22. The profit of the faithful is
always annexed to the glory of god. 9. 41. The zeal of the Faithful. 14.
14. 17. 16. We must do good chiefly to the faithful. 11. 23. What Fathers are
to be imitated and how far. 3. 13. Whether the Fathers were not partakers of
the promises. 13. 32. The Fathers of the Jews were slears of their own
brethren. 7. 9. How reproachful the estate of the Fathers was in Egypt. 7. 6.
The faith of the Fathers was always founded in Christ. 15. 1^. The difference
between the Fathers and the Faithful of the new testament. 2. 17. 33. and
13. 32. and 15. 11 Fasting put for the unwonted abstynence from meat. 27. 33.
Fasting is an help for prayer. 13. 3. The use of Fasting. 14. 23. What manner
Families Christians ought to have. 10. 2. 7. and 16. 15. All manner Fear is
not to be condemned in the godly. 9. 17. Fear is most contrary to the pure and
free preaching of the gospel. 18. 19. What manner fear is in the Faithful. 5.
11. and 10. 24. The Saints are also afraid of death. 13. 13. Felix was a
covetous, cruel, and voluptuous governor. 24. 25. 26. Felix the governor was
moved when he heard Paul preach. 24. 26. Festus was an ambitious governor. 25.
9. Folly is a common and almost a perpetual vice among al people. 16. 22. How
far the foreknowledge of times is permitted. 1. 7. The foreknoweledge of
things to come must be left to god. 1. 7. Man's free will is overthrown. 22.
14. and 26. 18. To be fulfilled, for to come. 2. 1.
G
Gallio the Deputy of Achaia would not hear Paul answer for himself, 18.
17. Gamaliel a Pharisie. 5. 34. Gamaliel was a courteous and modest man. Ibid.
Gamaliel was Paul's master. 22. 3. How far forth Gamaliels counsel is to be
allowed. 5. 36. Gamaliels judgment was unseeming a prudent man. 5. 34 True joy
is of Faith and the knowledge of god. 8. 39. and 16. 33. It was a common
custom among the men of the East country to rent their garments. 14. 14. Gaza
was also called Haza. 8. 26. How the gentiles were in times past admitted unto
the worship of god. 10 12. Places touching the calling of the gentiles. 1. 8.
and 2. 23. 9. and 3. 25. and 8. 25. and 10. 12. 44. and 11. 1. and 13. 33. 46.
and 14. 27. and 15. 7. 13. and 18. 6. and 28. 28. The quality of the gentiles
and Jews. 15. 9. Glory must be given to god alone 26. 21 God alone is the
Author of salvation. 16. 9. God the Author of the calling of the gentiles. 15.
13 God is bountiful naturally. 14. 17. God is the knower and searcher of
hearts. 1. 24. 26. and 5. 9. and 15. 8. and 16. 24. God is the creator of
heaven and earth. 4. 24. and 14. 15. and 17. 24. God the guide of his. 19. 21
God the judge of all the whole world. 5. 8, and 7. 7. and 10. 15. and 28. 4.
God is inco^prehensible. 3. 13. and 7. 32. God is the deliverer of his church.
7. 7. God the Father of Christ. 22. 14. God is always like to himself. 17.
26. Why God is called the god of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob. 7. 32. God alone
must be heard in Christ. 9. ^. God alone must be called upon. 12. 5. God must
be sought in heaven. 7. 47. How God deals with the godly. 12. 6. and 19. 21.
Why God created the world in six days. 12. 10. Why god does sometimes
defer his help. 23. 11. God has a peculiar care for those that be his. 2.
25. and. 4. 21. and 5. 19. and 7. 34. and 8. 33. and 9. 5. 39. and 12. 2. 7.
and 14. 23. and 16. 26. and 20. 1. 9. and 21. 31, 34. and 23. 16. and 25. 1.
and 28. 16. God beholds the heart, 8. 23. Why God did swear. 2. 30 God uses
to give more to the godly then they desire. 12. 15. How God did reveal
himself to the Fathers. 2. 17. God preuenteth men with his grace. 3. ^. Why
God does not punish the wicked forthwith. 27. 24. How God reigned in his. 1. 3
Why God would have only a few miracles wrought and that for a short time. 14.
11. How God uses the industry of the wicked. 4. 28. and 13. 21. 27. and 17.
26. and 23. 23. 27. The free love of God toward his. 13. 17. and 27. 24. The
secrets of god must not be sought out curiously. 14. 16. and 17. 30. and 16. 5.
The end of Gods benefits. 7. 7. How great the goodness of God is toward those
that be his. 2. 25. 18. and 3. 3. and 7. 38. and 11. 3. and 12. 15. and 17. 27.
Gods goodness uses to strive with men's wickedness. 27. 42. How necessary the
knowledge of the true God is. 17. 22. The fruit of the knowledge of God. 8. 39.
We must seek the counsel of God in his word. 20. 26. The lawful worship of
God. 14. 15. The worship of God is always spiritual. 7. 44. and 15. 9. and 17.
25. The decree of God is immutable. 2. 23. The use of Gods gifts. 2. 22. Gods
election is free. 16. 5. Gods election is the cause of all good things 13. 18.
and 22. 14 Gods covenant cannot be void. 17. 4. What account we ought to
make of the glory of God. 4. 30. and 8. 20. and 9. 45. and 28. 6. Gods grace
was never tied to Ceremonies. 7. 7. Gods grace is not tied to the Sacraments.
22. 16. Gods grace is the first cause of our salvation. 2. 47. Gods grace is
free. 16. 5. Gods grace is necessary for all men. 10. 43. Gods grace preuenteth
men. 5. 31. and 7. 2. and 93. 5. and 10. 4. 5. 35. and 13. 48. and 22. 14. Gods
favor and mercy toward those that be his. 2. 30. and 5. 19. and 9. 31. 39..
and 10. 4. 30. 45. and 13. 18. 20. and 14 17. and 15. 10. and 17. 24. and 18.
9. 10. and 22. 19. The calling upon God is his principal worship. 2. 21.
Calling upon God is always necessary. 7. 59. Gods infinite mercy. 9. 3. Gods
mercy is necessary for all men. 10. 43. Gods nature. 1. 26. and 4. 29. and 8.
14. and 13. 21. Gods works are never without fruit. 2. 12. How we must weigh
the works of God. 2. 12. and 3. 9. 15. 18. Gods patience toward the people of
Israel. 7. 36. How Gods power must be considered. 20. 32. Gods power must not
be separated from his counsel. 15. 10. Gods power in Christ's resurrection. 1.
30. How great Gods power is. 4. 24. and 9. 1. 40. and 12. 7. and 26. 8. How
Gods foreknowledge ought to be considered. 2. 23. and 17. 26. Gods presence is
fearful. 9. 3. and 10. 4. Gods presence does sanctify the place. 7. 33. The
knowing of Gods presence is the best stay for the godly. 2. 25. Gods promise
was peculiarly appointed for the Jews. 2. 39. Gods promises are to be embraced
by faith. 7. 5. Gods promises in Christ. 13. 32. 34. How Gods providence must
be weighed. 4. 28. How reverently and modestly Gods providence ought to be
considered. 17. 30. Whence the denial of Gods providence does come. 20. 26. A
place of gods providence. 1. 18. 26. and 2. 23. and 4. 21. 24. and 5. 7. and
and 7. 17. and 8. 4. 32. and 10. 10. and 12. 2. 20. and 13. 21. 27. 37. and 14.
17. and 16. 5. 17. 26. 28. and 18. 24. and 19. 2. and 21. 31. 33. and 23. 16.
23. and 25. 22. and 28. 3. Wherein the kingdom of God consists. 1. 3. and
28. 31. How gods kingdom is erected in us. 8. 5. Gods kingdom is spiritual.
17. 18. and 18. 18. and 19. 8. and 28. 22. The fear of god in the faithful.
5. 11. The fear of god is necessary for all the godly. 16. 2. 35. and 13. 16.
41. Why gods word is compared to a sword. 2. 37. The word of god is said to
increase two manner of ways. 6. 7. The word of god does make the godly afraid.
10. 4. Why the word of god is set before the reprobate. 28. 27. The authority
of the word of god. 8. 25. and 13. 51. and 20. 23. and 28. 25. The contempt of
the word of god must be sore punished. 3. 22. and 13. 41. 51. and 14. 16. The
majesty of the word of god. 12. 52. The plainness of the word. 2. 27. The
force and efficacy of the word. 3. 6. and 5. 5. 33. and 8. 6. 13. and 9. 22
and 19. 6 and 24. 26. The manifold use of the word of god. 14. 20. We must
neither add too nor take away from the word of god. 26. 22. How much gods
truth does profit the reprobate. 26. 24. Gods calling is free. 16. 5. What
account we must make of the calling of God. 17. 1. We must follow the
calling of god. 20. 23. and 23. 12. Gods will is the chiefest law of equity.
14. 16. Gods will must be preferred before all things. 21. 2. 13. 14. Gods will
must be sought in the law. 2. 23. Gods will must be sufficient for the godly.
28. 27. How terrible the voice of god shall be to the wicked. 5. 3. The lawful
way to worship god. 8. 28. The difference between god and all creatures. 17.
28. The difference between god and men. 10. 33. and 11. 16. and 15. 8. The
difference between god and Idols. 7. 2. The difference between god and the
world. 5. 41. We must obey god without delay. 16. 20. 23. 29. and 15. 4. God
must have the whole praise and glory. 14. 26. and 26. 2^. and 28. 8. It is man's
duty to seek god. 17. 27. What it is to tempt god. 5. 9. and 15. 10. The false
opinion of the gentiles touching their gods. 17. 22. God must not be
woorshipped with man's traditions. 15. 29. and 16. 4. One god. 14. 15. God is no
respecter of persons. 1. 26. and 22. 1. and 10. 34. and 16. 22. God has life
and death in his power. 7. 55. God is not the Author of evil. 2. 23. God alone
is the Author of miracles. 14. 3. and 19. 11. and 28: 8. Peace of the godly.
2. 25. The security of the godly. 2. 15. 46. Why sincere and sound godliness
was never found in the more part of the world. 14. 15. There is no godliness
without right instruction. 18. 22. Faith is the foundation of godliness. 24.
14. and 25. 19. To go in and out, for to be conversant. 1. 21. and 9. 28. How
goods are common among the Faithful. 2. 45. and 4. 33. 34. Who is to be counted
a good man. 11. 24 Good men are mixed with the badde. 6. 1. 5. and 8. 13. and
13. 40. and 15. 12. 24. and 17. 32. and 20. 30. and 27. 24. The gospel arose of
small beginnings. 8. 26. How the gospel came even unto the Ethiopians. Ibidem.
Why the gospel is preached. 17. 30. Why the gospel is set before the reprobate.
24. 25. The certainty of the gospel. 3. 24. The authority of the gospel. 17.
30. and 19. 17. A commendation of the gospel. 3. 22. 23. 24. The estate of the
gospel. 6. 8. and 7. 54. and 13. 27. and 17. 6. The free profession of the
gospel is a singular gift of god. 4. 31. The confirmation of the gospel. 3.
21. The contempt of the gospel must be sharply punished. 3. 20. 22. and 4.
26. and 13. 41. 51. and 19 l 16. The dignity and excellency of the gospel. 9.
5. The doctrine of the gospel is subject to infinite slanders. 6. 14. The
doctrine of the gospel is not new. 3. 21. and 20. 43. and 13. 17. 32. The
commendations and titles of the gospel. 5. 20. The glory of the gospel is
always joined with the cross and diverse troubles. 6. 8. The end and scope of
the gospel. 1. 3. and 11. 18. and 20. 8. The majesty of the gospel. 26. 22. The
gospel is like to leaven. 13. 49. How the gospel is the cause of trouble. 14.
4. Why the gospel is called the kingdom of god. 20. 25. Why the gospel is
called the word of grace. 14. 13. The gospel is the word of salvation. 13.
20. The gospel is the word of life. 5. 20. The gospel was appointed for the
Jews. 3. 25. The gospel is not preached unto us without consideration. 2. 2.
The gospel was stablished by miracles. 14. 3. The parts of the gospel. 23. 8.
and 20. 21. The preaching of the gospel is of great importance. 10. 21. The
preaching of the gospel is most acceptable obedience to God. 6. 2. The
preaching of the Gospel is the cause of salvation. 11. 3. The preaching of the
gospel is very effectual. 10. 44. The preaching of the gospel is always
acceptable to God. 24. 25. The preaching of the gospel is established by strong
obtestations. 10. 42. The sweetness of the gospel. 13. 26. The sum of the
gospel. 1. 1. and 5. 31. and 10. 43. The sum of the gospel is known where
Christ is known. 8. 34 The force of the Gospel. 19. 9. Look the force and
efficacy of the word of God. Why all in general do not believe the gospel.
13. 48. Grace put for the faith of the gospel. 13. 43. Grace put for the power
of the spirit. 14. 26. Grace for calling into the hope of salvation. 13. 43.
The grace of the spirit is not tied to signs. 10. 47 Thanksgiving for
deliverance from death. 12. 11. Thankfulness is commended. 10. 23. and 11. 29.
Grecian put for a gentile. 16. 3. Grecians for the dispersed Jews. 9. 29. The
complaint of Gregory Nazianzene of the success of Councels. 25. 2.
H
Hand put for power. 11. 21. Hand put for principality. 7. 36. Why the Apostles
laid their hands upon the Deacons. 6. 6. The Heart for the mind. 16. 14. The
Heart for the will. 4. 32. The whole Heart for a sincere heart. 8. 37. How
acceptable singlenes of heart is to God. 5. 1. What great heed we must take
that we be not too Hasty. 16. 35. Hearing is the beginning of faith. 8. 6. The
word Heaven is diversely taken. 1. 11. How Steven saw the Heavens open. 7. 56.
What the opening of the Heavens does signify. 10. 11. Wherewith Herod was
moved to persecute the Church. 12. 3. Herod's tower was called Antonia. 4. 5
Herod's blindness. 12. 19. The word heresy was in times past not infamous. 24.
14. How heretics ought to be confuted. 9. 22. How ridiculous the popish
Hierarchy is. 20. 28. The books of the celestial Hierarchy and other foolish
and wicked books are amiss attributed to Dionysius Areopagita. 17. 34. Hieroms
place. 1. 12. and 7. 14. and 15. 10. 13. and 17. 23. and 19. 6. The holy Ghost
was promised of the Father. 1. 4. The holy ghost is appointed peculiarly for
the Church. 2. 18. Why the holy ghost was powered out upon the Apostles fifty
days after the first fruits. 2. 1 How the holy ghost is called by the name
toungues. 2. 3. The holy ghost is not given to the profane and contemners. 2.
^8. The holy ghost is the Author of miracles. 9. 34. The nature of Hope. 1. 4.
The holy ghost is God. 5. 4. and 13. 2. Horace his place. 17. 21. How far
forth we must use humanity toward our brethren. 21. 13 Humanity is necessary in
a magistrate. 23. 19. Humanity is commended. 2. 27. and 10. 23. and 28. 7.
Peter his humanity. 9. 43. Humanity ought to be embraced. 9. 5. 6. and 10. 48.
and 12. 23. Hypocrisy is in men naturally. ^8. 23. Hypocrisy is blind. 6. 1^.
How we ought to detest Hypocrisy. 5. 1. 3. 8. Hypocrites are ambitious. 7. 57
Hypocrites are bloody. 9. 29. Hypocrites are hardly discerned. 8. 13. How we
must handle Hypocrites. 7. 53. and 8. 20. 23. Blindness of Hypocrites. 9. 23 The
feyned modesty of Hypocrites. 14. 14. The manner of Hypocrites. 4. 1. and 5.
4. 21. and 7. 1. and 13. 50. and 14. 14. and 23. 4. The careless securitye of
Hypocrites. 24. 2. The furious bloody zeal of hypocrites. 4. 7. and 5. 17. and
6. 11. and 9. 29. and 17 5. and 19. 23. 27. and 23. 12. Hirelings are noted. 8.
39.
I
James the brother of John was slain by Herod. 12. 2. James the son of
Alphee. 12. 17. and 13. 15. Violence is done to Jason because he entertained
Paul and his companyons. 17. 5. The Iaylor converted unto Christ. 16. 33.
Blindness of Idolaters. 13. 6. Hypocrisy of Idolaters. 17. 17. Whence Idolatry
came. 7. 40. Idolatry is very fertile. 7. 42. Idolatry is contrary to it
self. 17. 24. How far forth ignorance is to be excused. 3. 17. and 14. 17.
and 17. 30 What the word Jehovah does signify. 17. 28. The Jews were the
first begotten in the Church. 1. 8. and 2. 39. and 3. 26. and 10. 12. and 13.
26. 16. 3. and 20. 21. 28. 28. How the Jews did crucify Christ. 2. 23. 36.
and 4. 10. Why the Jews did not keep company with the gentiles. 10. 28. and
11. 3. The arrogancy of the Jews. 13. 42. and 22. 22. The blasphemy of the
Jews. 13. 45. and 18. 6. The blindness of the Jews. 17. 3. 4. and 28. 26. The
horrible fault of the Jews. 2. 36. and 3. 13. and 4. 10. and 7. 52. The
doting of the Jews about the word Iehoua. 3. 6. The profit of the scattering
abroad of the Jews. 17. 4. The election of the Jews was double. 13. 33. The
proud boasting of the Jews of their fathers. 7. 9. The ignorance of the Jews
was mixed with hypocrisy. 3. 17. The monstrous unbelief of the Jews. 13. 27.
The unthankfulness of the Jews. 2. 36 and 7. 26. and 13. 46. The hypocrisy of
the Jews. 7. 53. 57. The tongue of the Jews was corrupt after their exile.
22. 2. The fathers of the Jews did murder their brethren. 7. 9. The
stubbornnes of the Jews. 17. 51. The Jews were corrupters of the scripture.
17. 3. The Jews which dwelt in the provinces were deadly enemies to the
gospel. 6. 9. The Jews were the people of God by the alone grace of Gods
adoption. 10. 15 The prerogative of the Jews. 13. 46. The rejecting of the
Jews. 13. 46 The religion of the Jews was corrupt in the time of the
Apostles. 13. 6. The religion of the Jews was condemned by the cruel edictes
of the Romans. 8. 27. and 10. 2. and 16. 20. The religion of the Jews was
every where odious. 16. 13 Three sects of the Jews. 23. 6. The blind zeal of
the Jews. 3. 17. and 23. 6. The equalitye of the Jews and gentiles. 15. 9.
The difference between the Jews and gentiles. 2. 39. The use of Images among
the gentiles. 17. 29. Impiety of the Israelites. 7. 36 Inco^stancy is a common,
and in a manner a continual vice in all people. 16. 22. Incredulity profaneth
all things. 10. 28. Infantes must not be kept from Baptism. 2. 39. and 10.
47. The Invention touching the two Angels of every man is profane. 12. 15 The
Invention of Mercury, the Interpreter of the gods. 14. 11 The Invention
touching the Image of Diana. 9. 35. Invocation of dead Saints is overthrown.
3. 22. The office of John baptist. 1. 5. and 10. 37. and 13. 24. and 19. 3. The
comparing of Christ and John baptist together. 1. 5. John Mark was the helper
of Paul and Barnabas. 13. 5. John Mark departs from Paul and Barnabas. 13.
13. John Marks sin was greater then it is commonly taken for. 15. 37. Why
Ionathas the high priest was slain. 24. 2. Josephus his places. 4. 15. and 5.
36. and 15. 13. and 8. 5. and 11. 28. and 12. 1 21. and 21. 37. and 23. 2. and
24. 2. 5 and 25. 13. Ironia. 4. 9. and 23. 5. Judas an Author of sedition. 5.
36. Judges put for rulers and governors. 13. 20. Judges raised up of God. 5.
30. Rash Judgment is condemned. 10. 15. and. 28. 4. How necessary the
preaching of Gods Judgment is. 3. 20. and 17. 37. Justice put for honesty and
innocence before men. 10. 35 To justify for to deliver and acquit. 13. 38.
The fable of Iustine touching Moses. 7. 2.
K
The Kingdom of God put for the doctrine of the gospel. 20. 25. How small the
beginnings of Christ's Kingdom were. 16. 11 Kneeling is not to be condemned of
it self. 10. 25. Kneeling in time of prayer is a token of humility. 9. 40.
Knowledge is the moderation of zeal. 18. 25.
L
How the Law as concerning the ceremonies, is abrogated by the coming of
Christ. 8. 27. The Law concerning the choice of beasts is abrogated. 10. 13.
Man cannot possibly fulfill the Law. 15. 10. The Law is counted a yoke two
manner of ways. 15. 10. The Law is the rule of good life. 10. 35. How the
Law is counted a liuelye speech. 7. 38. How the Law is lively. Ibid. The Law
of Porcius touching the privilege of the Citizens of Rome. 16. 37. and 22. 25.
The Law of Sempronius of the Citizens of Rome. 16. 37. and 22. 25. The word
Law improperly used. 1. 5. The authority of the Law. 7. 53. The alone end of
the Law. 15. 11. The office of the Law. 15. 1. 10. The perpetuity of the Law
is grounded in Christ. 15. 9. The difference between the Law and the Gospel.
17. 2. Whether the Faithful may go to Law under an unbelieving Judge. 25. 11.
Laying on of hands was a temporal ceremony. 8. 18. Laying on of hands was a
solemn sign of consecration. 6. 6. What laying on of hands did note in times
past. 9. 17. and 33. 3. and 19. 6 and 28. 8. Laying awaite for Paul. 9. 23. How
many soldiers were in a Legio^. 10. 1. What liberality does please God. 4.
32. Liberality must be voluntary. 11. 29. Liberality is commended. 9. 36. and
10. 2. and 28. 7. The reward of Liberality. 10. 4. Liberality is commended. 10.
25. 20. 25. The word Lotte is diversely taken.. 1. 26. How far forth it is
lawful to cast Lottes. Ibid. Love commended. 4. 32. and 5. 12. Degrees of
Love. 11. 29. The Lucianistes make semblaunce of faith. 8. 13. Luke is full of
hebrew phrases though he wrote in Greek. 2. 3 Lydda was also called Diospolis.
9. 32. Lydia was the first fruits of the church of Philippi. 16. 13. The way to
order the life aright. 10. 2. The abuse of the present life. ^7. 27. Wherein the
integrity of life consists. 10. 35. Newness of life is necessary. 3. 26. We
must study to lead a godly life. 20. 21. The bond of life and death is
appointed for men. 13. 37 In what respect we must save our life or contemn it,
20. 24. and 23. 17.
M
Macedonius an heretic. 13. 2. The office of a Magistrate. 16. 15. 22. and 18.
12. How far forth we must obey the Magistrate. 5. 29. and 23. 25, The
unfaithfulness of certain Magistrates. 11. 17. The Mahometists imagine a new
God 22. 14. The error of the Maniches touching the souls. 17. 28 Man's duty
is to seek God. Ibidem. To what end Men are borne. 17. 26. What men are able
to do of themselves. 9. 15. Al men are accursed without Christ. 3. 25. 26.
How great Men's blindness is. 17. 27 Man's conversion is in the hand of god. 14.
1. Men's hearts are in the hands of God. 9. 6. and 16. 14. and 23. 19, 23. and
25. 1. and 28 1. Four kinds of men. 13. 50. Men's unthankfulness. 17. 26. Men's
merits are ouerthowen. 7. 35. and 13. 39. 48. Man's nature is bent unto vanity.
14. 11. Man's careless security. 17. 32. How great man's rechlesnesse is. 2.
12. Man's life is in the hand of God. 5. 19. That is sometimes attributed to
men, which is proper to God alone. 7. 30. 36. and 13. 47. and 16. 9. and 26.
18. Who be true Martyrs. 21. 34. Christ's Martyrs must be comforted. 24. 23.
The constancy and courage of the Martyrs in our time. 6. 9. and 19. 34. The
difference between Martyrs and wicked doers. 7. 58. Matthias was made an
Apostle by the judgment of God. 1. 23. Means must not be rejected. 27. 30.
Those of Melita thought amiss of Paul. 28. 4. The inconstancy of the
Melitians. 28. 6. Men's merits are overthrown. 7. 35. and 10. 4. and 13. 17.
and 15. 9. and 26. 18. How ministers ought to be chosen in the Church. 6. 2.
Look Pastors.
The Ministry of the word is necessary in the Church. 14. 23. The Ministry of
the word is most laborious. 6. 2. The Ministry of the word is commended. 1. 2.
and 2. 2. 4. 7. and 8. 31. and 9. 6. and 10. 5. 36. 44. and 11. 3. and 15. 28.
and 16. 9. 14 and 17. 30. and 22. 10. and 26. 18. Why Miracles are called
signs and wonders. 2. 22. and 19. 11. Why there were only a few miracles
wrought and for a short time. 14. 11. Miracles ought never to be separated from
the word of God. 5. 12. and 14. 3. What Miracles do of them selves in men. 3.
9. Whom miracles profit. 2. 5. Whether Miracles be sufficient for
approbations. 2. 22. What popish miracles do. 3. 9. The abuse of Miracles.
Ibidem. The use and end of Miracles. 3. 6. 13. and 4. 10. and 5. 15. and 8. 6.
and 9. 32. 35. 42. and 10. 38. and 14. 3. and 15. 11. 13. and 28. 7. Mockers of
the word of God. 2. 12. The treachery of certain moderate men. 17. 6. and 20.
20. Modesty is commended. 9. 5. 6. and 12. ^8 The feigned Modesty of
hypocrites. 14. 14. The Moon turned into blood. 2. 18. Montanus an heretic.
10. 15. Moses the Minister of deliverance. 7. ^. 24. In what sense Moses is
called a redeemer. 7. 36 Moses is subject to Christ. Ibid. Moses his Modesty.
7. 22. What it does signify in the scriptures to open the mouth. 8. 34. and
10 34. We must always ask the mouth of the Lord. 22. 10. We must not
forthwith cleave to the multitude 14. 16. and 19. 27. Monks followers of
Iudaisme. 9. 37. The arrogancy and pride of Monks. 15. 5. Impudency of
Monks. 2. 45. Murder was always most detestable. 28. 4.
N
Name put for authority. 4. 7. Name put for the cause or means. 4. 12. Name
put for rule and power. 3. 6. The name of the Lord put for the profession of
the gospel. 9. 24 The Night was divided into 4. parts. 12. 4. What it is to
bear the name of Christ. 9. 15. The Name of Jesus of Nazareth for the whole
profession of the Gospel. 26. 9. Two Natures in Christ. 20. 28. The sect of
the Nazarites. 24. 5. Why Christ was called Jesus of Nazareth. 10. 38. Nero
his cruelty against the godly. 12. 8, Nestorius an heretic. 20 28. With what
color the Nicodemites excuse their dissimulation. 21. 26 Nicholas the deacon
was the author of a filthy and wicked sect. 6. 5. Noble me^ were also called
Eunuchs. 8. 27. An universal Note is not always taken universally. 8. 1. and
9. 35. and 10, 2. Nuns were chosen in steed of the vestall virgins. 14. 15.
O
The fruit of Obedience. 8. 27. Trial of Obedience. 8. 26. We must cut off
all occasion from the wicked. 6. 14. Offenses must be avoided. 15. 1. and 20.
33. We must take Opportunity. 3. 1. and 10. 48. and 13. 40. and 20. 16. and
21. 4. and 22. 25. and 28. 30. We must avoid Offenses. 10 28. and 13. 27. and
18. 18. and 20. 3. 34. and 22. 27. and 28. 17. 19. One for the first. 20. 7.
P
Paphus a city cituate on the Sea shore toward the South. 13. 6. The vain
brag of the Papists touching vain titles. 7. 1. The vain and proud
boasting of the Papists touching counsels. Ibid. The vain boasting of the
Papists touching the faith. 3. 13. and 7. 52. The gross ignorance of the
Papists. 1. 7. and 13. 39. and 17. 34. The liberty of the Papists against the
worshippers of God. 23. 4. The false miracles of the papists. 5. 15. What the
miracles of the Papists can do. 3. 9. The prejudice of the Papists. 16. 21.
The preparations of the papists are overthrown. 22. 14. The relics of the
Papists. 19. 11. The vain satisfactions of the Papists. 10. 43. and 13. 38.
The folly of Papists. 16. 14 The blockishnes of Papists. 23. 12. How the
superstitions of the Papists crope in. 14. 11. The vain titles of the
papists. 7. 2. and 23. 6. The stinking anointing of the papists. 19. 6. The
preposterous, furious and bloody zeal of the papists. 5. 17. and 11. 16. and
9. 23. and 16. 19. and 18. 25. 19. 23. 27. How vain the Images and Pictures of
the Papists were. 74. 3. The stageplay Mass of the Papists. 7. 22. Under what
color the Papists defended the sacrifice of the Mass. 13. 2. The horrible
sacrilege of the Mass. 16. 3. The Papists are addicted to external visures.
6. 14. Whence the papists fet an example of making vows. 18. 18 The Papists
inue^t to themselves a new God. 22. 14. The Papists feign that al manner
antiquity is allowed. 24. 14. Under what color the Papists cloak their
idolatry. 14. 15. The Papists include Christ in bread and wine. 7. 49. Under
what color the Papists take upon them to bind men's consciences. 15. 28. The
Papists place the power of God in the Saints. 3. 12 The Papists lean only
to untimely Counsels. 15. 2 With what trifles the Papists do think the dignity
of Baptism is adorned. 10. 47. The Papists cannot deliver the doctrine of
repentance. 3. 19. The Papists do almost translate the name of repentance
unto external rites. 2. 38. The Papists do attribute more to the reasons of
the Philosophers then to the oracles of God. 28. 23. The Papists attribute
magical force to the Sacraments. 8. 13. Under what color Papists make boast
of their relics. 5. 15. Ambition of Papists. 16. 19. Arrogance of Papists. 7.
1. Covetousness of Papists. 1. 6. Boldness of Papists. 17. 34. The blasphemy of
the Papists against Baptism. 8. 16. The blindness of Papists. 23. 12. The
Papists blaspheme the scriptures. 17. 2. ^1. 28. and 18. 18. How the Papists
must be convict of error. 14. 15 The Papists are corrupters of true doctrine.
2. 42. and 6. 11. and 13. 15 The Papists are vnreformable. 41 The Papists are
without excuse. 17. 29. The Papists are profaners of the sacraments. 10. 37.
How ridiculous the papists be. 9. 17. The Papists abuse miracles. 14. 3. The
Papists tie the cause of grace to to their charms. 22. 16. The papists tie
the grace of the Spirit to signs. 10. 4. 7 How the Papists color their
dealings in changing or abrogating the institutions of Christ. 2. 38. Whence
the Papists go about to prove that the Church has some authority of her
own. 15. 28. Whence the Papists fet Peter's supremacy. 1. 13. 16. How the
Papists extenuate the grace of God. 9. 5. The papists do in vain invent to
them selves infinite ways to attain to salvation. 4 12. A Pastor is also a
Bishop. 20. 28. In what respect a Pastor may fly in time of persecution. 8.
1. Pastors be master builders. 4. 11. Pastors are ministers of life. 11. 3. In
what sense Pastors are priests. 13. 2. What manner persons must be chosen. 1.
24. Pastors must be honored. 16. 9 Pastors are subject to infinite slanders. 6.
14. and 7. 26. and 16. 20. and 17. 6. and 18. 12. and 19. 23. and 21. 17. and
25. 17. Pastors must not make choice of their Auditors. 26. 22. The Pastors
must especially pray. 6. 4. Ambition of Pastors is hurtful to the Church. 20.
30 Ambition of Pastors does corrupt the purity of the Gospel. Ibid.
Covetousness of Pastors is condemned. 20. 33. Authority of Pastors. 6. 3. How
the sermons of Pastors must be tempered. 3. 17. The state of Pastors. 14. 15.
and 15. 2. Constancy of Pastors. 4. 20. and 7. 54. and 9. 16. and 18. 9. and
19. 29. The lawful way to make Pastors. 14. 23. The people must be permitted
to make choice of the Pastors. 24. 23. Joy of Pastors. 11. 23. How hurtful the
sloth of Pastors is to Churches. 15. 36 The innocence of Pastors. 25. 10. The
labor of Pastors is not in vain. 11. 21. The invincible fortitude of
Pastors. 15. 2. The warfare of Pastors. 19. 23. The office of Pastors is an
hard office. 14. 23. The function and duty of Pastors. 11. 1. and 2. 40. and
8. 17. 25. and 4. 11. 20. and 5. 8. 32. and 6. 2. and 8. 2 13 39. and 9. 22.
26. and 10 43. and 11. 17. and 13. 15. and 14. 14. 20. and 15. 28. and 16. 9.
and 17. 5. 10. 18. 31. 32. and 18. 6. 9. 19. and 20. 18. 20. 24. 26. and 21.
13. 37. and 22. 18. and 23. 17. and 26. 17. 22. The patience of Pastors. 9. 16.
The true trial of Pastors. 20. 19. The wisdom of Pastors. 18. 4. and 20. 26.
The diligence of Pastors. 6. 4. How hurtful the pride of Pastors is to the
Church. 15. 22. How hurtful the fearfulness of Pastors is to the Church. 18.
9. The vehemency of Pastors is not to be condemned. 9 31. and 13. 10. The
vigilantnesse of Pastors. 20. 29. The life of Pastors ought to be dear to the
godly. 12. 5 The certainty of the calling of Pastors. 16. 5. What manner zeal
ought to be in pastors. 13. 10. 51. and 14. ^4. The difference between Pastors
and Apostles. 1. 23. and 14. 23. How far forth we must obey pastors. 4. 19. and
5. 29. How necessary patience is in the godly. 18. and 7. 5. 6. and 8. 32. 33.
and 9. 16. and 14. 5. 22. The vigilantnesse of Pastors. 20. 28. The invincible
constancy of Paul. 13. 46. and 14. 13. 14. 19. 20. and 17. 1. 10. and 18. 18.
and 19. 30. and 21. 1. 10. 12. and 24. 25. and 27. 21. and 28. 30. How fruitful
Paul's conversion was. 9. 20. Paul's conversion was famous. 8. 3. The sum of
Paul's doctrine. 20. 21. Paul's courtesy. 20. 13. and 21. 26. Paul's humility. 20.
19 Paul's innocence. 24. 23. and 25. 10. and 26. 4. Paul's integrity. 28. 14.
Paul's just anger. 13. 10. and 17. 16. Paul's warfare. 17. 5. and 18. 11. Paul's
modesty. 19. 30. and 21. 18. Paul's patience. 9. 26. and 16. ^3. and 17. 1 How
effectual Paul's preaching was. 17. 11. 32. 34. and 18. 9. 10. Why the Jews
did detest Paul's appealing to Caesar. 28. 19. Paul's wisdom. 16. 37. and 18.
4. and 20. and 20. 24. 25. Paul's cruelty before his conversion. 9. 2. How
precious Paul's life was to the faithful. 20. 3. and 24. 23 Paul's calling was
certain. 14. 27. The stout zeal of Paul. 9. 22. and 13. 40. and 14. 14 and 15.
28. and 17. 16. and 26. 28. Paul the Apostle and teacher of the gentiles. 13.
46. How Paul was appointed to be the teacher of the Gentiles. 13. 1. Paul had
two names. 13. 10 Paul was no common minister of Christ. 9. 15. Paul a Prophet
of God. 28. 3. Paul was appointed to be a witness as well to the Jews as to
the Gentiles. 26. 17. Paul was stoned. 14. 19. How desirous Paul was of peace.
16. 4. Why Paul did circumcise Timothy. 16. 3. Paul his girdle which Agabus
took. 21. 11. Paul disputes at Athens with the Jews. 17. 18 The pride of the
Athenians. 17. 16. The sum of Paul's preaching, 9. 20. Paul heals a creeple.
14. 10. The reconciling of certain places to look to, contrary. 7. 2. and 8.
32. and 4 15. 7. and 10. 14. and 13. 2. 29. 33. and 14 17. and 15. 19. and 16.
1. 4. 18. and 17. 24. and 18. 25. and 20. 22. and 21 4. and 22. 9. Peace put
for the reconciliation of God and men. 10. 86. What Peace we must keep. 15.
1. and 23. 6. The peace of the Church does not continue long. 9. 31. The peace
of the godly. 2. 25. Pelagius an heretic. 10. 34. The inconstancy of the
common peole. 16. 22. and 21. 30. The people must not be excluded from the
affairs of the Church. 15. 30. The people is not to be restrained in the
affairs of the Church. 22. 22. Persecution raised by Herod. 12. 1. How far
forth it is lawful for Christians to fly persecution. 11. 20. Persecution does
help the course of the gospel. 8. 1. The profit of persecution. 11. 19. We
must not yield to persecution. 8. 4 The persecuters of the church must be sore
punished* 9. 5. It is lawful to fly in time of persecution. 8. 1.
Perseverance is the gift of God. 5. 31. It is necessary to persevere in prayer.
1. 4. and 10. 2. We must persevere in Christ's doctrine. 4. 30. and 7. 3. and
11. 23. and 14. 22. and 15. 36. and 20. 19. and 27. 7. The place of Persius.
17. 25. Person put for the external state or appearance. 10. 34. The person of
the holy Ghost. 13. 2. Accepting of persons is condemned. 1. 34. The Fable of
Peter his disputation with Simon Magus. 8, 24. Why Peter was called Symeon. 15.
13 How Peter did excel among the Apostles. 8. 19. Peter's constancy. 4. 8. 11.
Peter's courtesy. 4. 43. Peter's modesty. 11. 3. Peter's obedience. 12. 9. Whence
the Papists derive Peter his supremacy. 1. 13. 16. and 9. 32. Peter his
wisdom. 4. 8. We must beware of Preiudices. 7. 1. and 10. 34. and 21. 28. and
12. 23. and 28. 22. Whence the Pharisees had their name. 23. 6. The great pride
of the Pharisees. 15. 5. The Church of the Philippians came from a slender
slip. 16. 14. Philip the deacon. 6. 5. and 8. 5. Philip the Evangelist. 21.
8. Philips constancy. 8. 21. Philips stoutnesse. 8. 40. The doctrine of the
Philosophers. 17. 18. Why the Philosophers called man the lesser world. 17.
27. The Place is sanctified by the presence of God. 7. 33 A Place to be mended
in the text. 7. 16. Plato his place. 13. 37. and 17. 18. Pliny his place. 7. 2.
and 8. 27. and 17. 1. and 20. 13. and 28. 11. The Plural number put for the
singular. 13. 14. Pomponius Mela was deceived. 8. 26. The Pope is the minister
of Satan. 5. 28. The Pope has bound many wicked sects in one bundle. 10. 15
The Popes arrogance. 13. 3. and 15. 16 and 22. 1. The ridiculous hierarchy of
popery. 20. 28. The Popes vain boasting. 4. 11. 19. and 5. 28. 29. The Popes
impudency. 15. 13 The Faithful must shake off the Popes yoke. 23. 25. The
wicked law of the Pope touching choice of meats. 10. 15. The ribaldry plays
of the Pope. 3. 6. The fair titles of the Pope. 16. 16. The great tyranny of
the Pope. 9. 32. and 10. 15. and 11. 3. and 14. 19. and 15. 16, 28. 30. and 19.
19. and 22. 1. To whom the care for the poor must be committed. 6. 2. We must
have regard of the Poor. 9. 34. How deadly that Power is which is void of
the fear of God. 4. 17 Power granted to the Apostles. 13. 11. The true rule
of Prayer. 4. 24. and 16. 13. We must Pray without ceasing. 12. 5. 6. We must
pray for the increase of doctrine. 20. 36. We must especially pray for those
which are afflicted by the wicked for the testimony of the gospel. 12. 5.
Prayer must flow from faith. 8. 22. Prayers for the dead are in vain. 15. 10.
The Preparations of the Sophisters are overthrown. 22. 14. The Preparations of
the Papists are overthrown. 22. 4. The Priest of the law was a figure of
Christ. 3. 26. The Popish Priests were Simonists. 8. 21. The covetousness of
Priests. 14. 13. The evil conscience of the Priests. 4. 13. The impudency of
the priests. 4. 13. The obstinate malice of the Priests. 4. 13. The tyranny
of the Priests. 4. 9. 13. The preposterous zeal of the priests. 4. 1. The
ridiculous shauing of Priests. 18. 18. The Christian Priesthood. 13. 2. The
office of Princes. 16, 15 How far forth we must obey Princes. 17. 7. and 23.
25. Priscillian an Heretic. 10. False prophets are apes of the Prophets. 21.
11 The custom of false Prophets. 21. 11. The veheme^cy of the Prophets. 13.
10. Prophecy put for the rare and singular gift of understanding. 2. 17. How
great the force of prophecy is. 24. 26. Why Prophesying did cease after the
return of the people. 3. 22 All Prophecies were gathered into one body or
volume. 7. 42. and 13. 40. and 15. 15. The word Prophet is diversely taken. 12.
27. What this does signify a Prophet to be raised of God. 3. 26. Why the
Prophets were called Seers. 2. 50. Prophets put for excellent interpreters of
the scriptures, 13. 1. Prophets put for those which were endued with excellent
knowledge of the mysteries of God. 15. 32 Prophets raised up of God. 5. 30. All
the Prophets did testify of Christ. 3. 21. The Prophets did write their
doctrine* out of the law. 26. 22. The custom of the Prophets. 21. 11. The
consent of the Prophets. 15. 15 The use of the doctrine of the Prophets 15. 6.
The office of the Prophets. 1. 7. and 7. 52. Why Prophecies were removed from
the Church. 21. 9. The Prophecies of the prophets were for the most part
confirmed by miracles. 21. 11. The modesty of Proselytes. 13. 42. We must
have respect unto prosperity. 13. 37 Certain proverbs. 2. 45. and 53. 6. 1. 2.
4. and 7. 1. 54 and 9. 5. and 13. 41. and 14. 22. and 15. 21. and 16. 3. 16.
and 18. 1. 9. and 2. 25. Providence is necessary for pastors. 8. 13. Pride is
in all men naturally. 9. 5. How greatly God does hate pride. 12. 26. The proud
men war against God. 12. 23. Publius his hospitality. 28. 7. The fable of the
poets of Python the serpent. 16. 16
Q
Diverse Questions with their answers. 1. 5. 21. 23. and 2. 17. 18. 22. and 3.
1. 5. 17. 20. 22. 25. and 4. 27. and 5. 32. and 6. 5. and 7. 2. 30. 32. 33. 38.
49. 56. 58. 60. and 8. 1. 13. 16. 24. and 9. 25. 39. and 10. 4. 12. 24. 25. 30.
35. 41. and 11. 1. 29. and 12. 5. and 13. 22. 34. 37. and 14. 9. and 15. 2. 9.
10 16. 19. and 16. 3. 6. 13. 16. 22. 27. and 17. 23. 27. and 18. 10. and 10. 2.
5. and 20. 20. and 21. 4. and 22. 16. 19. and 23. 25. 28. and 24. 6. and 27. 4.
20. Frivolous Questions must be let alone. 20. 21.
R
The Rational of divine offices. 7. 22. Redemption is yet in the course. 3.
21. The end of Redemption. 7. 7. Regeneration an effect of faith. 10. 43.
Regeneration the beginning of the kingdom of God. 1. 3. Religion is a rare
virtue and found but in few. 2. 12. What true Religion is. 7. 59. and 14. 15.
and 17. 4. What Religion comes from man's brain. 17. 16 The Iewishe Religion
was corrupt in the Apostles time. 13. 6. The Religion of the Jews was
condemned by the cruel decrees of the Romans. 8. 17. and 10. ^. To what end
popish Religion tends. 20. 30. The difference between true Religion and
false. 28. 23. Remission of sins must be preached to all. 8. 22. and 13. 38.
What true Repentance is. 2. 37. 38. and 5. 31. and 16. 19. Repentance is the
gift of God. 5. 31. Repentance must not be separate from faith. 11. 18. The
preaching of Repentance must always be found in the Church. 2. 38. and 3. 26.
How cold the doctrine of Repentance is in popery. 3. 19. The beginning of
Repentance. 2. 37. and 5. 31. Signs of Repentance. 8. 34. The distinction of
Repentance and faith. 20. 21. How we must handle Reprobates. 5. 33. and 7. 54.
Look how Reprobates ought to be handled. How the Reprobates are touched with
the word of God. 7. 54. The Reprobate are never bettered. 5. 33. The
Resurrection of the body is a work of the power of God. 26. 8. The general
Resurrection is proved. 24. 15. We must not look for Revelations from heaven.
10. 5. Rich men ought to minister to the poor. 11. 29. The right hand for
the hand of power. 2. 33. and 5. 31. Righteousness of faith. 13. 38. What
manner persons the Romain Rulers were. 7. 58. The proud boasting of the
Romans. 11. 26. The privilege of the Citizens of Rome. 22. 25.
S
Why the Sabbath was appointed. 13. 14. A Sabbath days journey. 1. 12. It was
in times paste death for the Grecians and Romans to keep the Sabbath. 16. 13.
Sabellius an heretic. 13. 2 The Sacraments do not forthwith show forth their
force. 8. 13. The Sacraments must not be separated from the word of God. 7. 8.
and 10. 37. and 13. 24. The wicked peofaning of the Sacraments in Popery. 10.
37. The force of the Sacraments. 8. 13. The true use of the Sacraments. 18. 25.
and 22. 16. The abuse of Sacrifice. 14. 11. The Saduces were of great
authority among the Jews. 4. 1. 33. and 5. 17 The error of the Saduces. 23.
8. The diffecence between the Sadduces and Epicures. 2. 88. Dead Saints must
not be called upon. 3. 12. and 13. 37. and 27. 24. How far we must imitate
the examples of the Saints. 3. 13. How far the integrity of the Saints does
profit the wicked. 27. 24. There is sure Salvation in calling upon the name of
God. 2. 21. The matter of our salvation. 10 37 A brief definition of
Salvation. 16. 31. Samaria was also called Sebaste. 8. 5. The obstinate
wickedness of Sapphira. 5. 8. Satan is Gods hangman. 1. 38. and 12 23. Satan an
utter enemy to the truth. 4. 1. and 6. 8. and 19. 23. Satan is Gods ape. 7. 5.
and 2^. 11. Satan's craft. 2. 22. and 3. 9. and 5. 1. 21. and 6. 1. 14. and 7.
30. 31. and 8. 11. and 9. 10. and 11. 12. and 13. 6. 8. and 14. 11. and 5. 1.
37. and 16. 10. 16. and 19. 16. and 21. 17. and 23. 6. and 27. 23. Satan's
wickedness. 17. 13. Satan's iuglings differ from the miracles of God. ^. 2^. How
great the power of Satan is in pricking forward the adversaries of the word.
8. 1. 6. 11. and 7. 54. and 8. 11. and 9. 23. and 12. 19. and 13. 45. and 16.
22. and 17. 7. 13. and 18. 9. and 19. 16. 23. 29. and 21. 31. and 23. 2. 12.
and 25. 5. Satan is slain with the sword of the word. 9. 22. Satan cannot do
hurt when he will. 4. 4 Satan is subject to Gods providence* 13. 27. How vain
Popish Satisfactions be. 10. 43. Saul, look Paul. Ibid. How great authority
the Scripture has. 1. 16. and 24. 14. How profitable the reading of the
scripture is. 8. 28. 34. and 13. 27. and 17. 11. The division of the Scripture.
24. 14. The commodity of the Scripture is manifold. 22. and 14. 20. and 17. 2.
and 18. 28. and 20. 20. and 27. 23. There was not always an order kept in the
Scriptures. 7. 2. The scripture speaks of God after the manner of men. 10. 10.
4. The Scripture uses to speak of the Sacraments two manner of ways. 11. 16
How the Scripture ought to be read. 8. 28. Three sects among the Jews
principally. 23. 6. The beginning of Sects in popery came from the profaning of
the word of God. 23. 6. Sedition ought to be fled. 5. 21. We must beware of
Seducers. 15. 24. It is man's duty to Seek God. 17. 27. A man cannot long make
Semblaunce of virtue 20. 19. Sergius his wisdom. 13. 6. Seruetus his error
touching the Godhead of Christ. 20. 28. Seruetus his error about the estate of
the fathers of the old testament. 15. 11. Severity must be avoided in external
rites. 8. 38. What the shaking off of the dust from the feet does signify. 13.
51 Signs must not be separate from the word of God. 7. 8. External Signs in
prayer. 20. 36. The profit and efficacy of signs or miracles. 8. 17. Silas
and Judas were the Ambassadors of the Apostles unto the Gentiles. 15. 22. Simo^
the Tanner was Peter's host. 9. 43. Whether Simon Magus did truly repent after
that he was chidden of Peter. 8. 24. Simon was a sacrilegious person. 8. 21.
Simon Magus his ambition. 8. 18 The faith of Simon Magus. 8. 13. The hypocrisy
of Simon Magus. 8. 18. What the Papists call Simonie. 8. 21. The impiety of
Simon Magus. 8. 20. Simplicity of heart what. 2. 46. How we must awake
Sinners. 3. 20. and 17. 31. Sin cannot be the work of God. 2. 23. Voluntary
sin does not always bring despair. 3. 17. The confession of sin is
necessary. 19. 19. Remission of sins is a part of the gospel. 5. 31.
Remission of Sins must always be preached. 23. 8. Remission of sins is
grounded in Christ. 2. 38. and 10. 43. There is no forgiveness of sins without
the Church. 2. 47. Remission of sins follows repentance. 3. 19. What this
does signify to sit at the right hand of God. 2. 34. How great men's
slacknes is. 10. 17. We must shake off slothe. 1. 14. and 2. 18. and 3. 20. and
8. 26. 36. and 9. 15. 31. and 10. 2. 7. 17. and 12. 5. and 13. 38. and 14. 22.
and 16. 5. and 17. 11. 16. 30. 31. and 20. 28. 29. 36. and 27. 30. We must use
sobriety. 10. 30. Sobriety of mind is commended. 1. 7. and 17. 30. Solitarines
is a great help to prayer. 10. 10. Soldiers may also serve God. 10. 7.
Solomon's porch. 3. 11. Sosthenes Paul his companion. 18. 17. Soul taken for
the life. 2. 27. Soul for the will. 4. 32. Soul of man is an essential
spirit. 7. 59. Souls live after death, 7. 32. 50, 60. and 23. 8. The souls
of the faithful when they depart the body are forthwith received of Christ.
7. 59. Speech for thing. 10. 36. The spirit put for the gifts of the spirit. 5.
32. and 6. 5. and 8. 16. and 19. 2. The spirit is the guide and governor of the
faithful. 20. 22. The spirit of discretion is necessary for the godly. 17. 11.
The spirit of wisdom and strength is necessary for the godly. 4. 8. The
erring spirit of brainsick men. 10. 44. The gifts of the spirit are given even
to those which are unworthy. 8. 21. The grace of the spirit is not tied to
the signs. 10. 47 There can no more excellent thing be given to men then the
grace of the spirit. 2. 17. Who those be which resist the spirit. 7. 51. The
gifts of the spirit are given even to those who are unworthy. 8. 21. The use
of the gifts of God comes of God himself. 10. 4. Stephen was accused of
blasphemy against God and Moses. 6. 14. How Stephen was full of the spirit and
faith. 6. 5. 8. Stephen was stoned to death violently and tumultuously. 7. 58.
Stephen his courage. 6. 15. and 7. 56. Stephens love. 7. 59. 60. The wonderful
co^stancy of Stephen. 7. 60. Stephen his faith. 7. 59. Stephen his modesty. 7.
2. The dotings of the Stoikes. 17. 18. Stubbornes is a companion of error. 11.
2 Suetonius his place. 11. 28. How the Sun was turned into darkness. 2. 18.
Superstition is contrary to her self. 17. 24 Superstition is bloody. 9. 29.
Superstition is always blind. 17. 22. Whence Superstition came. 39. and 7. 3.
4. and 14. 11. and 28. 6. Superstitious men are very liberal. 14. 13. How far
we must obey our Superiors. 4. 19. and 5. 29. Whence the Synagogue of the
Libertines had his name. 6. 9. The Synagogue of the Ephesians does intertaine
Paul courteously. 19. 9. Synagogues in diverse places of Jerusalem. 24. 12. Why
holy Synodes were gathered together from the beginning. 15. 2. The form and
order of gathering a Synod. 15. 6.
T
The Tabernacle of David restored by Christ. 1. 6. and 15. Why Tabitha was
raised from the dead. 9. 39. The commendation of Tabitha. 9. 36. Tatianes
heretics. 10. 15. The true way of Teaching. 2. 38. and 3. 29. and 10. 43. and
20. 26. and 26. 22. 25. Aptness to be taught is the gift of God. 9. 5. and
10. 10. and 16. ^. 14. Aptness to be Taught is very necessary. 2. 37. and 8.
6. 31, and 17. 17. What manne^ Teachers the Papists have. 20. 20. A great
Tempest arose as Paul did sail. 27. 18. The captain of the Temple. 5. 21 Who
it was that was captain of the Temple. 4. 1. and 5. 34. Terron sent of God. 4.
5. and 5. 24. Tertullians opinion touching flying in persecution. 8. 1^
Tertullus a lying Rhetorician. 24. 2. The difference between the new and old
Testament. 2. 17. and 28. 23. Where the city Thiatira was situate. 16. 14.
Theudas. 5. 36. Why Paul did circumcise Timotheus. 16. 3. Why Titus was not
circumcised. 16. 3 What great account we must make of the Truth. 15. 37. The
firmness and certainety of the Truth. 13. 27. What the hatred of the Truth
does procure. 9. 23 How great the force of the Truth is. 9. 22. and 15. 12.
and 19. 9. The Tumults raised by Satan are maliciously imputed to the Gospel.
17. 6. The Turks because of their manifold victories deride the gospel of
Christ 25. 19. The school of Tirannus at Ephesus. 19. 9. Tirants are afraid of
innouations. 12. 1. How arrogant spiritual Tyrants are. 5. 28. Sidon and Tyrus
were proud c^. 12. 20.
V
We must leave Vengeance t^ God. 7. 7. and 16. 37. 23. 3. Virtues signs and
woon^ers put for miracles. 2 22. and 4. 30. Why Paul speaks of hi^ virtues.
20. 18. Virgils place. 6. 35. and 17. 28. Paul saw a Vision. 1^. 9. and 16. 9.
and 22. 18. and 27. 2^. Peter saw a Vision. 10. 3. 12. The use of Vision. 9.
10. Difference between Visions and dreams. 18. 9. The punishment of unbelief.
8. 11. All Unbelievers are polluted. 10. 28. The understanding of spiritual
things is a peculiar gift of God. 16. 14. Unthankfulness must be avoided. 10.
41. Unthankfulness of the Israelites. 7. 36. 40 The pride of the Italians. 10.
1. Use is the father of wisdom. 6. 2.
VV
Why they did Wash the bodies of the dead in times past. 9. 37. Why it is
forbidden to scale the walls. 9. 25 The ancient rite of Washing corpses. 9.
37. Way put for sect. 19. 25. The ways of the Lord. 13. 10. The ways of men.
14. 16. The malice of the Wicked is likned to fransines. 13. 27. The fear of
the wicked. 16. 38. The manner of the wicked. 9. 23. The hatred of the wicked
against the truth. Ibidem. The obstinacy of the wicked. 5. 21. How God uses
the industrye of the wicked. 4. 28 The rage of the wicked is set on fire so
soon as the light of the Gospel ^^mmeth near it. 13. 45. The diligence of
the Wicked in oppr^ssing the truth. 4. 1. The godly must despise and tread
underfoot the pride of the wicked. 13. 48. 52. The fear^^lnes of the wicked.
23. 12. The zeal ^f the wicked. 17. 5 How we ought to handle the wicked. 4.
11. and ^. 33. and 7. 54. and 8. 20. 23. and 13. 1^. 40. and 18. 6. and 19. 9.
and 23. 3. and 2^. 26. and 28. 25. The wicked join hand to hand to oppress
the Gospel. 23. 6. The wicked though against their wills confirm the G^spel. 4.
21. The wicked do always invent some causes to sin. 16. 19. The wicked do
not what hurt they would. 2. 43. and 3. ^8. and 4. 1. 4. 21. 28. and 22. 2.
and 18. 1^. and 25. 1. How the wicked do obey God. 2. 23. The Wicked return
always unto their nature. 24. 27. The wicked are easily seduced by Satan. 2.
22. The wicked do even establish the providence of God. 17. 26. All the wicked
are subject to the providence of God. 13. 27. The wicked do sometimes fear
men. 5. 21. The afflictions of the wicked are the very entry of hell. 14. 22.
The blindness of the wicked. 5. ^7. and 9. 23. The evil conscience of the
wicked. 5. 13. 17. The vain counsels of the wicked. 4. 5. 25. 27. and 9. 23.
and 23. 16. The end of the wicked. 1. 20. and 8. 20. The frail and vain
felicity of the wicked. 12. 20. The destruction of the wicked. 9. 5. and 12.
20. The judgment of the Wicked ought worthily to be despised. 16. 1. The lust
of the wicked must be bridled. 16. 37. The wicked are the children of the
devil. 13. 10. The wicked are the bondeslaues of Satan. 13. 51. The wicked are
the ministers of Satan. 21. 11. How abominable the wicked are in the sight of
God. 13. 9. The wicked must sometimes be set by the ears together. 23. 6. The
wicked do always wax worse and worse. 8. 1 and 9. 6. and 12. 19. and 13. 45.
and 19. 9. and 26. 24 and 28. 29. The wicked must not be preferred to govern
the Church. 4. 17. The wicked are without excuse. 2. 23. and 18. 6. and 24. 25.
and 28. 27. The liberty of whoring did reign every where. 15. 19. Whoredom is
accursed before God. Ibid. Women must not be kept from the word. 18. 26 Word
put for thing. 5. 32. and 10. 36. Whence the majesty of the word does come.
10. 33. Look the word of God. Whether good works be the cause of salvation.
10. 35. Whether good works do purchase Gods favor. 10. 35. Good works are
commended. 23. 8. and 9. 36. The reward of works. 10. 4. All the world must
be subject to the preaching of the Gospel. 1. 2. Contempt of the world. 13. 1.
How we ought to consider the creation of the world. 4. 24. The nature of the
world is addicted to external visures. 6. 14. The unthankfulness of the world.
26. 17. The wickedness of the world how great. 14. 19. The difference
between God and the world. 5. 41. How the creation of the world is to be
considered. 4. 24. The world was created by God. 14. 15. 17. Why God created
the world in six days. 12. 10. How greatly the world is set upon
superstition. 28. 6. The world is governed by the counsel of God. 17. 26. 28
How far forth it was lawful for the faithful to worship in the temple 24.
11. Civil woorship must be distinguished from that which is done for religions
sake. 10. 25. 54. Why bastardly and corrupt worshippings are distinguished
from the good and sincere. 7. 44. 4. What worship is acceptable to God. 7. 42.
Widows chosen to the Deaconship. 6. 1. We must have regard of widows. 9.
39. True wisdom. 10. 21.
Z
The Zeal of the Sadduces. 5. 17. The bloody Zeal of Hypocrites. 17. 5.
What account we ought to make of rash Zeal 5. 17. The mad Zeal of the
Jews. 3. 17. and 23. 6. The blind and furious Zeal of the Papists. 5. 17.
and 6. 11. 9. 23.
IMPRINTED AT LONdon by Thomas Dawson for George Bishop. 1585.


