The Mind of the Godly and excellent learned man M. Ihon Caluyne, what a
Faithful man, which is instruct in the Word of God, ought to do, dwellinge
amongst the Papists.

2. Cor. 6. What fellowship has righteousness with unrighteousness? What company
has light with darkness? How agrees Christ with Belial? Or what part has
the beleuer with the infydele? etc.

Anno Domini M.D.XLVIII.

The Preface to the Reader.
Sense yt Satan was losed out of the botomles pyt, Apoc. 20.
and (for man's unthankfulness toward God for his manifold benefytes) permytted
to range through out the whole world, to deceive mankind, man off him self
naturally prone unto evil, and therefore ready to enclyne to his diabolycall
suggestions and temptations / well nygh all ye whole world (a few of the little
flock of Christ only except, Gene. viij
who^ it has pleased God of his mercy so to preserve, as he always does his
church that they have not bowed their knees to Baal) has neglected and set
naught by Gods everlasting testament and gospel which is the power of god
in to salvation 3. Reg. 19.
Romans 1.
to all them yt believe. And wheare as they knew there was a god, and have not
worshipped him as god, nor thanked him, but became vain in their ymaginations,
and their foolyshe heart was blinded, when they counted them selves wise, they
became fools: and turned the glory of the incorruptible God into the
symylitude of a corruptible man etc. Wherefore God, likewise, gave them up unto
their hertes lusts into uncleanness, to defyle their own bodies in them
selves, which turned the truth of god in to a lie, so that they worshipped and
served the creature more then ye creator, which is blessed for ever and ever.

Romans 1
And what more ensued Saint Paul declares, They Justly received the reward
of their error, and as they had no regard to know God, even so god gave
them up unto a lewd mind, to do those things which were not comely being
full of all unrighteous whoredom, wickedness, covetousness, malyciousnes,
full of envy, murder, strife, deceit, evil co^dicioned, whisperers, back
biters, dispisers of god, doers of wrong proud, boasters, bringers up of
evil things, disobedyent to their elders, with out understanding, covenant
breakers, unloving, stubburne, unmerciful, and endued with all kind of
wyckednes.

Thus do you see (good Christian reader) how dangerous a thing it is, to
neglect or dispyse the myghtie word of god, against which (notwithstanding)
the gates of hell can not prevail: so yt in dispisynge or resystinge it
although of a malycious or perverse mind, thou go about to suppress and
keep it back thou do nothing else but procure thine own dampnation, the
word of god florisshinge nevertheless: for as the gospel is salvation, to them
that believe it, so is it dampnatio^ to them that believe it not. This does
Christ verify and affirm him self, saying, Ihon. 12.
he that refuses me and receives not my words, has one all ready that
judges him.

The word which I have spoken, yt shall judge him at the latter day: for he
shall have nothing to cloak his sin wythall. Ihon. 15.


Paraduenture we will think that Saynct Paul does speak those things only
of those yt were before his days and so persuade our selves that it was
nothing meant of us, but in less then we ca^ prove our selves not guilty in
those and like offenses that they in the old law were plaged and punisshed
for, let us not persuade our selves to be clear of like threatenynges. No, let
us look for none other thing, but to be cast up of god into a reprobate and
leude mind and so headlonge into all fylthynes and iniquity the just reward
of our error whose end is death everlasting.

Deuteronomy. viij.
God fed ye Israelytes with fine Ma^na sent them from above, they abhorred it
and wisshed to be at their full gross fleash pottes again in Egipte. Exo. 16.
They were plaged for their unthankfulness. God has sent us the true Manna,
Ioh. vi
his everlasting word ye bread of life we abhor it, we can not abide it, we
would be at ye full pottes of ye gross flesh of men's traditions to poison
our selves. Well, shall we think to escape gods wrath? Is god become a
chaungelyng? will he not punysshe us, for our unthankfulness as he did them?
yea truly. For we be more worthy of punishment then they, seeing we have their
punishment, Number. xi.
for an ensample before our eyes to beware by.

God also brought the children of Israel out of Egypt by wonderful miracle,
Exodus 14.
for when it was impossible by all reason, but ye other they should have been
destroyed by Pharao and his army being behind them: or else to have been all
drowned in the read sea before them: the mighty power of god caused the deep
sea to stand on either side of them like a wall so that they passed through it
safe lie, but their enemies pursuinge them were drowned horse and man. Wheare
as they ought with whole heart and mind continually duringe their lives to have
given thanks unto that myghtie god alone for their deliverance: they shortly
after made them a golden calfe, Exo. 32
fell down and worshipped it, offering sacrifyce unto it, saying. These be thy
gods (O Israel) which have brought the out of the land of Egypt. This
their unthankful Idolatry Moses called ye greatest sin and was grievously
punysshed: for there ensued murder of ye Israelites to ye nombre of xxiij.m.
Now if it can be proved, yt we have showed no such unthankfulness toward god,
have not resisted his word nor committed no such like offense: then may we
sleep the more careless and fear no such plages to fall upon us, for of this
we may be sure, God will not punysshe us without a cause. But amongst many
other things, what say you to this, I pray you? We were long in Egypt that
is in the bondage and captivity of Pharao the devil, and when we could be
delivered by no power no merit or intercession of any creature beside christ
visyble or invisible / mortal or immortal / and where as it was impossible to
al reason, but other we should be euerlastinglye drowned in ye red fiery sea
of hell and death being allwaies before our eyes: or else to be devoured of the
furiouse Pharao the devil pursuinge us: God of his mere mercy (above all our
desert) sent his only begotten son Christ Jesus, to become very man and
dye for us, for in as much as we had committed such offense Genesis 2.
as was forbidden in pain of death we must needs be redeamed again by death,
and that by such a one yt should not remain dead still, for then should not
he overcome death but death overcome him: therefore must he rise again and so
by death overcome death.

This part has christ played alone. He died for our redemption, 1. Cor. 15.
1. Cor. 1 Ephe. 1
he rose again for our justification and so overcame death sin and hell: and
thus most wonderfully delivered us out of everlasting thraldom and captivity.
But have we always ascribed the renown and glory of our redemption and
forgiveness of sins to god alone? No no but rather to masses satysfactorie
with sundry other vain traditions of man. To who^ do we attribute, or whom do
we praise for our daily preservation from perilles and Ieoperdyes? God alone?
No, our manyfeste acts do openly reprove us. How many men and women have been,
when they have been in danger / some of drowninge, some of burninge, some of
^reakynge their necks, and some lyeng so sick that to all reason they seemed
vn^^rable, that, if god of his goodness preserved them and raised them up again,
would shortly after get them to one ydol or other (to whom they had vowed their
pilgrimage and offeringe) as some to ye lady of Walsyngham some to the lady
of Grace, or unto some other foul ydoll. And where as they should have given
glory and praise to the one everlasting god, which alone delivered the^ they
have kneeled down in the sight of the whole multitude and thanked a dome
image, worshippyng and offering their ydolatrous sacrifice unto it. Was not
this ydolatry worse the^ the worshipping of the golden calfe? yes truly. For
then sacrifice was commanded to be offered to god with calves, but not calves
to be worshipped: as for ydolatrous images were forbidden then as they be now.
And for that the people might be yt more allured to like abhomynation ye
priests taught them for their own advantage to come only in their shirtes
and smockes what was this else but to say with ye Israelytes? These be thy
gods (o Israel) which have brought the out of ye land of Egipte and
bondage: yea and no doubt the world both has and shall be plaged with as
grievous plages as they were, if it do not earnestly repent and forsake not
only such abomination: but also all kind of ydolatrie that is, all inward
or outward worshipping of the image of any thing visyble or invisyble: or sea
king forgeuenes of sins or salvation at any creature mortal or immortal, but
only at gods mercy, and yt for christ's sake.

More over for these and such like our unthankfulness and offenses, God had
justly given us up into such a lewd and reprobate mind, that all we (a few
except) were not only given headlong into all kind of vice and ydolatrie:
but were so far gone yt we were just partakers of the curse pronounced out
off gods mouth by the prophet Esaie. Esai. 5
woe be to you yt call evil good, and good evil, making derkenes light and
light derkenes, taking bitterness for swetnes and swetnes for bytternes. In
this case were we. That which was vice and abomination, we took for godlynes
and virtue: And that which was godlynes and virtue in deed, we took for
heresy and sin: for who was he yt thought it not godly to profess him self
into an abbey friar house or nonry? Who was he that spoke against them, and
that with gods word but he should be hated and persecuted? Who was he that
thought but that it was hyghlie meritorious to go on pylgrimage to this or that
image? Who was he that could speak against them but he should be in danger
of his life? Who durst speak against ye Popes hot purgatory, but that he
should be burned to ashes? And as for the abusing of the lords supper which
they called the sacrament of the Aultare, he yt spoke but a word against it,
or against their wicked masses satisfactorie (though it were the very
scripture) hanging was to good for him, he must dye most cruel death. But
thanks be to ye eternal god for he (to the declaration of his glory and for
his electes sake) has styrred up men as his instruments to speak, write and
printe myghtelie against such abomination, and he has turned the hearts and
powers of some christen Princes against them to suppress them and root out
all such plants as our heavenly father has not planted.

Finally, seeing that papisticall abhomynations and ydolatries be now well nyghe
all known though they be yet scarcely half left in many places, it is
requisite and highly necessary to know how a faithful christian man, endued
with the spirit of god and truly taught in his word, shall behave himself
among ye papists, were in and how far he may be conuersaunt with them:
namely, whether he may be present at their mass and supersticious Ceremonies
without offense in yt he, although by owtwarde gestures as by cappynge and
kneelynge seem to worship with them, does notwithsta^dynge in his heart
worship the only living god: whether he may lawfully use such
dissimulation or not? For thy full erudition and learning in this behalf
although very few writers have touched this poincte (namely in the English
tongue) here haste thou (good Christian) this notable work of M. Ihon Caluyn a
man of good learning and godly conversation, now first translated into
English: which, if thou, dilygentlie read peruse and mark with sobernes, it
wylfullie satisfy thy mind in this behalf where as certain places in scripture
(afte^ some men's minds) seem to bear with such dissymulation in worshipping
thou shalt have them most manyfestly opened unto the: so that thou shall
perfectly know, that all that be of Christ ought not only to confess God
with ye heart inwardly, but also (after the council of Saint Paul) to
confess the lyuinge god with the mouth and gloryfie him in their bodies
professynge him in all their outward gesture and behavior. Romans 10. 1. Cor. 6.


AMEN.
How a faithful man shall behave him self, dwellinge amongst the Papists.
MAny do ask me Counsel oftentimes, how they should behave them selves among
ye papists where it is not lawful for them to worship God puerly: but every
man is constrained to use many ceremonies which have been invented against ye
word of god, and be full of superstition. Now it were not very hard to answer
them in this matter and to defyne unto them symply ye truth thereof, if they
were fully determined in their hertes to follow wholly and without contradictio^
all that God has commanded them by his word. But I wot not how the most
part of men, after yt they have known a thing displeasith god do
nevertheless give them selves leave, and also do defend the^ selves against
it. For there have been diverse have asked me counsel in this matter eue^
altogether after such a fashion as Baalam did of god, when he would go unto
king Balach, Nume. 22.
for he knew well enough that it was against the will of God that he should
take that viage upon him, but yet nevertheless he ceased not to ask him leave
for ye same. Even likewise these men here being in manner co^uict in their
conscience / that it is evil done, to bow them selves before Idolles / do
enquire and demand what they may do not for to captyuat and make subject
their assent unto god, and rest upon his word / but to ye intent men should
give them the bridle: and yt they having answer after their desire may quiet
them selves in their vice through vain flaterie. To be short even as the
prophet Ezechiell says. Ezechi. 13*
They go sekyng about yt men should make them cusshens to lay their conscience
a sleep upon and yt men should make them believe yt they live when they be in
death.

Nevertheless because it is our office puerly to bear witness to ye verite, I
can not disse^ble nor refrain, but yt I must needs speak those things which
I think necessary to be known: specially when I am required there unto, but for
as much as all the difficultye comes of this, that we do ever give more head
to keep us in the favor of the world, then to please god I exhort every
faithful person in the name of Jesus Christ / for to resist his own affections,
yt he may be obediente unto the will of his master Christ. It is a paynefull
thing for a man to put him self in danger of losing both body and gooddes /
to stere up all the world against him, to live in opprobrye and utter reprofe,
and to leave the contrary, where one may live well at ease, for to go into a
strange country as one goes astray. I do grant it to be so, but what is ye
first lesson yt we should learn in ye scole of Jesus Christ, but to forsake
our selves, but if there be any so weak or frail that they can not at the
first determine very well what they ought to do, at the least I desire them
that they will not flatter them selves seeking stertyng holes and vain excuses
for to hyde them with / but these stertynge holes can not deliver them from the
judgment of god, yea and we se that this is ye beginning and as it were the
first degree of the ruin of such as do fall from the grace of god. And when
they see yt it is not sure for the^ to make them selves known before men, that
they be ye true servants of god duly to honor him they excuse them selves and
will be counted for righteous and fauteles when they do with other men defyle
them selves with diverse kinds of Idolatrye. Then afterward they perceyuinge yt
they can not this way escape al manner of suspicio^ they think they be
discharged if they do hyde their cristianite al together without speaking so
much as one word of God except it be to their chief friends and familyars and
yt shut up in a chamber suerly. Now ye whiles they suffere the truth of God to
be blasphemed, and what dishonor soever me^ do use to do to Jesus Christ: they
do not only make no resystence to the contrary, but also make as though they
consented to it, having none other things in their mind but to take heed yt
no man should perceive that they be cristians at the last what happens to
such manner of people which will with so carnal pretense (that is to say, by
perverse subtilitie) begyle both god and the world god suffers them to fall
as it were into a depthe of darkness depriving them of ye knowledge that he had
given them, and so finally ye deuylles possessed the^ and styrred them up
against the gospel and makes them persecute with a hoote and cruel fury,
the doctrine which before they knew to be of god, and that by good right, for
it is reason, that that man which turns the verytie of god into a lie for to
iustifye him self in his iniquity, should therefore feel such vengeance. For
as much then as as infirmyte does let us for to accomplysshe our deutie, let
us rather give all glory unto god in confessing our myserye, then by inuentynge
cauillations and startynge holes to bring upon our selves shame and double
damnation, for we should take the ensamples of ye punyshementes of god for
admonitions or warnynges, to the intent that we should learn to walk in his
fear.

What shall men do then? first of all let us not measure our duty due unto
God after our own commodite, for after that manner we shall never attain to
the truth. Then afterward let us not in this matter have respect unto our own
persons for to seek out that which is most convenient for us after ye flesh.
Thirdely let us not take counsel at our own brain, which way is best to
wynd us out of parell and trouble: but let us rather trust in the providence of
god nothing doubting but that he is able enough for to keep us even in the
mids of a thousand deaths, if necessite required, that it should come there
unto: thus doing we should not have any need long to stand in aduisement or
dispute of the one part or of the other part whyther we should with trouble
with the loss of our goods, with the danger of our life, obaye unto god or no,
and for to please him get the evil will of me^: but having ones his
commau^demente, we should redelye and without doubt follow it as a suer way
committing unto him what soever might come thereof and give our selves over
unto his holy sauegarde: here have we ye only mean whereby to govern us
truly. In this case I will recite a godly example that Saint augustyne does
rehearse which shall be good for to bolde^ and incorage us thus for to do. It
is that Saint Cyprian after that he was conde^pned to the death because he
would not do sacrifice unto ydolles was moved and enticed to condiscende unto
the same for saving of his life. And specialy the Judge coveting to deliver him
required him instauntly, for to do so and prayed him well to bethynke and advise
him self. Unto whom he gave a short answer, that in a thing so holy
deliberacion might have no place. Let us now consider in what estate Saint
Cypriane was then, he saw the death before his eyes: but for asmoche as he was
at a point with him self, for to follow the commandment of God, the same
delivered him from all perplexite, that he was not astonyed: so yt he did not
bow or change his mind, but abode invincible.

This is then a notable sentence which ought to be well printed in our memory,
to thinte^t that we do not attempt through any deuelysh presumption, for to
advise our selves whether we may do that which God has spoken or no: as
though we might controlle him, but if we will take counsel at our own head
and turn away from his word, let us surely wait for the curse which he has
pronounced by the Prophet Esaias, upon all them which give not auctorite unto his
spirit for to rule in their counselles and axe not at his mouth to take there
at their determinacions.

We se now touching this present matter, that if our lord has on this wise
declared his will, we contentinge our selves with his word, may have sure
knowledge of that yt we ought to do. This now concluded, if any man will
still to it replye, let him go and plead against God, to se whether he can
wyn his process against one so strong a party specially having so evil a
matter.

First, let us remember that Jesus Christ does learn us all this lesson at the
first entrance into his scole, that if we be ashamed of him or of his word
before men, Mat. 10
of us will he be asshamed when he shall come in Majesty with his angels.

Behold then how that our Lord is not content when we do knowledge him
secretly only and in our hertes, but he requires straightly, that we do
declare before me^ by outward profession that we be of his: and he does not
accept us to be of his kingdom but under that condition. And it is no marvel
for that that saint Paul says can not be false, Romans 10.
that as with ye heart a man believes unto right wysnes: so must he confess
with his mouth that he may be safe Whereby he signifies that can not be the
fruit of faith before God, which brings forth no confession before men. Who
soever now draws back, he must go seek him a new master.

Now one will demand whether every one must declare him self openly or no,
if he will do his duty though no man enquire of him his faith? I answer,
that it is not my meaning for in asmoche as it is a particular office to
preach openly / it is not convenient that every man meddle therewith / no
neither were it expedient nor convenient? I mean not the^ that every man
should go into the pulpet to declare their christianyte / or else that we
should publysh it in ye streets as ye blowing of a trompet: but yt every one
after their vocation in ye which he is called to take heed that he give god his
glory.

Now for as much as our lord has not determined neither the time nor the
place, neither yet the bounds, how far we shall go, we can not make any
certain laws therefore.

But it is mete that every one (to his power) do apply him self faithfully,
to do the same by all the means that he can, consydering always the state in
which he is and the grace yt god has given him, and because that we be al
slothful and negligent, except that we have always some spoure for to stere
and prick us forth, let us have these godly sentences printed in our hearts
wherein it is commanded us to be ready to render a reason of the hope that is
in us unto eueri one that axeth us. 1. Pet. 3.
Esai. 2
In like wise wheare it is said that thoffice of every faith full person is, to
take his neighbor by ye arm and say let us ascend into the hill of Syon in
to ye house of ye god of Jacob and he will teach us to walk in his ways, we
se now yt there should be such zeal in us both for to exalte the kingdom of
God and also for to edify our neighbor: and that we should give all our
strength and apply all our study to do the same.

But for as much as we have no certain rule to certifye us, how far and how
wide we should walk, there is no more to do then, but every man to desire our
lord to direct him in true wisdom: yt he may judge what is most expedient
to be done. And then afterward after his power (according to the measure of
the understanding which he has) he do seek all the means and occasyons that
is possible for to fulfill his duty: to the intent that we have all ways the
folowinge of Jesus Christ for our mark, Psalm. 68
of whom it is spoken that the zeal of ye house of god consumed him, yt is to
say, he was inflamed with such love and affection to build and interteyne ye
church of god that ye same was even as a burning fire in his heart which did
never let him rest. On the other side, let us note well, what is spoken of them
which durst not confess Jesus Christ after that they believed in him. Ihon. 12.
It is that they loved more the glory of men then the glory of god. Is it not
a cursed and an ouertwarte choice to prefer men before god? Let us take head
that we come not into such co^dempnation.

But the thing which I have taken chiefly to handell at this time, is to know
whether a Christian man being rightly instruct in the truth of the gospel,
when he is among the Papists do offend god or not if he do as other do in
going to ye mass, worshipping of images, relics, and vsyng such like
ceremonies. And to prevent the cauillatio^ of some, we entreat not now of this
difficulty, whether it be evil done to dissemble: but whether a man may feine
and counterfaicte or fasshion him self against the verite and truth. A man
does dissemble when he hydeth that that is with in his heart: but he feyneth or
se^bleth when he feineth him self to be that he is not, in conclusion look
what it is to lie with the mouth yt same is to feine in the deed.

Now to defyne this question, we must note, that as there be two manner of
honors that we owe unto God, that is to say, (...) spiritual service of the
heart and the external or outward worshyppinge: even so on the other side, be
there two kinds of Idolatry, the first is when a man through a false fantasy
which he has conceived in his heart or spirit does corrupt and pervert ye
spiritual salues of one only god The other is when a man (for what cause so
ever it be) does give or transfer ye honor which belongs unto god only,
unto any creature. As for an ensample unto an image, let us then begin to
speak of the duty which we owe toward god, to serve him duelye. Is it
sufficient for every man to hold god within him self within his heart for his
savior and worship him in secret? No, he requyrethe more of us saying, that
we must glorify him as well in our body as in our spirit and he adioyneth the
cause. Because that both of them belong unto him. Now although we had not this
commandment, yet it is euydent yt it should be so, for in as much as our
bodies be redeemed by ye precious blood of Jesus Christ. What reason is it, yt
we should prostytute it before an Idol? Seeing that it is the temple of the
holy ghost. What an horrible sin were it then for to defyle it with such
sacryledge? Considering that it is predestinate to receive ye crown of
immortalite and to be partaker of the glory of god, is it then convenient for
to corrupt and to foil it with such fylth? let us learn then that even as our
souls be consecrated unto God, even so ought our bodies to be reserved unto
his honor. S. Paul cryinge against whoredom uses this argument. 1. Cor. 6.
Seeing yt our bodies are the members of Christ, is it lawful to make the^ the
members of an harlot? By the same reason may we say, saying that our bodies
be ye me^bres of Christ, shall we deuyde them from his communion by pollutinge
them and bowing of them before Idols? Therefore our Lord speaks of his true
servants, and gives them this mark that they had not bowed their knees
before Baal nor yet had kissed his hand, 3. Kyn. 19.
who might have said that they were not corrupt with false superstition holding
Baal for their God in their hearts. But he willinge to sygnifye that ye matter
lies not all together therein, said. That they had not done him any reverence
by any owtwarde gesture. In this description does he show us yt we ought
narowly to abstein from such defylinge of our selves, if that we will be of
the nombre of his people. This is also that he says, by Esaias. Esai. 45.
I am the living god every knee shall bow before me / and every tongue shall
swear by my name, he declares by these words yt he rekeneth not him self to
be worshypped truly, but wha^ a man does render unto him only yea even with
outewarde gesture: and that he be worshypped of the body as well as of the
soul. Now when the contrary is done, that is to say, when one knelethe down
before an image, it is derogation to his majesty. And what will we more? Have
we not an express commandment which forbyddeth us to give any honor unto
images? For the words which ye lord uses do not only importe, that men
should not attribute unto the^ his glory through any superstitions or
perverse opinion: but they do also comprehend all ye honor yt men may do on
what wise or for what end so ever it be.

Then it is now a vain excuse, and that does not else but aggrauate and
enlarge the syn to allege that god is content with thy heart: for we se ye
contrary. Even so is it to allege that ydolatry proceeds of superstition and
therefore that it is not committed but when the heart is there with it, for
although a man do mock an Idol in his heart when he makes as though he
worshypped him: yet is he nevertheless gyltye of this sin in that he gives
the honor of god to a creature / but let us set a part all superstition: what
is it that a man can pretend in his behalf? He will deny that he sins, for
asmoch as his mind or intent is not evil. What thing soever (will he say)
that other men do, I worship the living god in my heart, I know that it is
sacrilege and abhomynation for a man to goo to an Image, of it to seek or wayt
for any help or else to do it any reverence. It is to god yt I direct my
self, although I seem to worship the Image. This is ye same cloak and color
which ye Corinthyans pretended when Saint Paul reproved them of this vice,
1. Cor. 8.
for they went unto the brotherhodes which men made unto ye honor of ydolles
and did eat of their sacrifices with other: was this now through superstition? No
for S. Paul brings forth this excuse in their name or person: we know that
the Idol is nothing, but vanite: what folysshe fancy so ever the world have
of it, and yt there is but one only god and one only lord Jesus Christ. But
is he content with this? No. Even clean contrary he answers yt all this is
nothing saying yt through their examples they did entise other to worship
Idolles. A weak person (says he) yt sees you, thinks he not that you have
the Idol in some estimation? Now upon this is he confyrmed to do in like case:
yea but you have a right understanding in your heart. Must he therefore for
who^ Christ died perysshe in bearing him self bond of your knowledge? Does he
not through this answer shake of all their clokes? With which many now a
days would help the^ selves. And yet does he speak more sharply a little
after. 1. Cor. 10.
That even as he which is partaker of ye sacrifice of god is partaker of the
true sacrifice so he which does communicate with such faulty and defiled manner
of doings is polluted and defiled, it is a vayn thing (says he) to replye,
that the image is nothing and that it can do nothing. Let us be content that
in as much as ye unbeliever does sacrifyce unto Deuylles / who so have any
thing to do with them in this act gives him self to the devil in like
wise. Now can no man be partaker of the lords table and of ye deuylles
together: neither yet drink of the lords cup and also intermedle with the
deuilles cup: who so ever does take ye one does clearly renounce the other.

Daniel. iij.
And in deed if Danielles companyons might have escaped by this subtlety, it was
very folly and rashenes for them willingly to offer them selves unto death.
Might not they have agreed within them selves to say. Other men do worship
the Image, but our spirits shall be erected up to heaven to worship the lyuinge
God.

Thus the cause standing for to avoid danger, let us be in the company of
other, fayninge as though we followed them, Could such cauillation quyte them
before God? Every man will say nay, Well what shall we say then, shall we
accuse the^ of an indiscreet zeal / because that they had rather suffer the^
selves to be cast into a burning furnace then to counterfaite or feyne, and
have their hearts nevertheless always unto God? But this were asmoche as to
reprove the holy ghost which prayseth them for this their co^stancy, Some man
will say, yt every man can not be so constant and steadfast. Well follows it
therefore upon that yt we should not follow thexemple which is set before us for
a doctrine.

Even according as we do seek sterting holes for to excuse our syn: so seems
it unto some men, that they have a good solucion for this text: when they
say, that it ought to be understand of the Idolatry of the heathen, and
therefore it ought not to be applied unto our time.

For the Paynims (say they) were not only deceived in vsinge of perverse
ceremonies: but also in as much as they had Gods devised and forged out of
their fantasye. It is no meruell then (say they) if our lord do so greatly
reprove their manner of doings: but this is not all one with that that is done
among the Papists: For although the service of God be among them corrupt
and fautie, yet always their intention is none other but to worship God. To
be short, they arm them selves with this diversity that they think there is
not so great parell to be partaker in any Idolatry the which is covered with
the name of God, as in an other that were altogether without any cover. But
unto this I answer that for asmoche as the world goes about to serve God
after a perverse and an unlawful manner, that then it does worship an Idol:
what cloak so ever they make. Then, they that inuente superstitions which God
condemns and refuses, might very well say, we will serve god but in asmoche
as God accepts not such service they do it rather to the devil. Romans 1
Wherefore saint Paul says, yt they which did transform the glory of god
into any corruptible figure, did serve the creature and not the creator. But to
the intent a man may understand more plainly, how feeble this defense is, let us
take thexamples of the scripture convenient unto this purpose. Nume. 21.
Mark the brazen Serpent which was not invented rashely by the folyshnes of
men but by the will of God. It was not only a memorial of the benefyte which
God had done to the people of Israel, but also an holy Sacrament of Jesus crist
Afterward did they make of it an abominable Idol, and yet nevertheless, this
was not done without a Godly show or pretense of the name of God. I demand
now if that any of the^ in the same time had made as though he had worshypped
it for to fashion him self unto the superstition of the people, whether that
we would excuse him? I think there is no man that would not condemn him.
Exodus 32


Look also upon the golden Calfe which Aaron did cast, was not the same to
represente the lyuinge God? for when he made proclamation that the people
should assemble together for to keep the feast of the Lord which had brought
them out of the land of Egypt, yt same was received of every man without
contradiction: it was then a Ceremonye set up to honor God with. But because
it was false and perverse, it was reputed for Idolatrye. He that had feyned him
self there to consent excusinge him self by the title of God / had he
therefore been gyltlesse? We would all of us condemn him. How comes it then
in a like matter, we will not seem to err. As much may we say of the Calves
which Jeroboam prepared 3. Regu^. 12
for he professed not to bring in any new God: but rather protested that he
would always hold him unto the living god. And in deed he had none other
respect then to keep ye people from goinge to Jerusalem, for fear least they
should join them selves again unto the house of David. This was
notwithstanding ydolatry, because he inverted a strange manner of worshippynge
against ye word of god. if that any man now which consented not unto this
abhomynation had sacrificed there, had he done well? And without making any
more a do. Read we that any seruante of god did at any time worship there?
No but contrarywyse we read yt the Lord by his Prophets forbad it as a crime
very abhomynable.

Now to make an end of this article the temple of ye Samaritaynes, was it
builded unto ye name of Jupiter or Mars? We know that it was done to the name
of the lord god of Israel, was it therefore lawful for any faithful man to
worship there. It is very plain yt it had been an extreme abhominatio^. I
conclude then upon these reasons inuincyble, that it is no more lefull to
communicate in an ydolatry which is decked with the name of God then if it were
all together the sacrifice of ye heathen.

Now, before we pass any further, in as much as we have now seen that
ydolatry, yea, all although it be committed but fainedly, does always displese
God: it is convenient for us to apply this doctrine unto our time. If a man
were among ye Turks, there were no doubt but he should do wickedly and
against god, to enter with the^ into their sinagoge / there for to keep their
superstition? And if there might be found paraduenture any man so far past
shame as for to aproue this, he should declare himself to have no fear of god
nor any conscience of sin. A good cause why? For look even as ye worshippyng
of god done in the church or in the company of the faithful after his word is
a solemn acknowleginge that we do hold and except him for our god: and that
we do honor him openly. So a man to join him self with ye Turks or Paynims
for to follow their manner of worshipping that they use (which is naught) It is a
kind of forsakynge of god, by which he is defiled and accursed. To say so
much of ye Papists, plainly it seems a very strange thing. For we have many
things with them to common together: and what soever deuisio^ or variance
there be between them and us, yet must we (without all comparison) have more
fellowship with them, the^ with the heathen, yea, and if it were but for the
honor of the name of Jesus Christ which they bear: in which thing also we
agree with them.

We must see then where in and how far, it is lawful for a christian man
that is well instruct in the truth of the gospel, for to communicate with
them / for I speak not, but because of the^ (to whom god has opened his
truth) with how great filthiness the whole papisticall church is replenished. To
judge now well of this matter, it is necessary to be noted that of that which
men call ye service of god there is one part which was Institute all together
directly against god: another part has been depraved and abused by ye fault
of them which misused it. Albeit that at the beginning the first origenall was
not evil. Further that there be many ceremonies which a man by no means can
excuse, but yt they conteyne plain ydolatry. Now there be other which be vain
and folysshe, nevertheless of the^ selves they cannot defile a man except that
a man in the obseruinge of them have any superstitious opinion. Thirdely we
must mark that there be some things that were commanded wickedly which
notwithstan- a christian man may keep with out offense. Other there be which
may not, neither ought not in any wise to be observed. It is not necessary for
to handle or entreat of all these kinds one after another severally. It is
sufficient to touch them to the intent that a man may know yt I am not so
sharp and extreme as altogether and without exception to forbid a christian
man that he may not confirm him self to the Papists in any cerymonye of
observation: for I intend not to condemn any other thing then that which
is plain evil and manifestely naught. And because this can not be well
understand but by examples, without goinge any further about the busshe, let
us set forth the thing even as it is, amongst the papists there is mass
song daily, they that will seem more devout then other, go to the church to
hear it: whether may this thing now be excused? Who soever has but meanly
profited in ye Gospel is not ignorante but yt thing is none other than plain
sacrilege and abhominatio^ which the priests do there. I pray you, may a man
go to bow him self before an Idol, that eueri man should know that he has a
devotion to a wicked thing and it not syn in so doing? But if it be so, what
should become of that that the holy ghost speaks by ye mouth of saint Paul
that we have not to do with ye unfruitful works of darkness but rather should
reprove the^? Ephe. 5.
Behold a work that I know to be wicked and does displease god / I have to do
with it. I make as though I accept it and afterward think that I have clean
hands. What is yt any other thing then (as ye prophet Dauyd speaks) for
to say with ye wicked let us do hardely that that likes us / for god sees us
not? Psalm. 14.
But these men do allege. It is not we that do it, but syn. What can we do
seeing yt it lies not in our power to amend it? I answer that the evil which
I reprove is in them yt abstain not from yt thing which they know to be
evil: but defile the^ selves by wrappyng them selves in it. And in deed
touching this poincte it is not hard to stop their mouths. Now of hye mass
it seems to many yt it has a better cloak and a more apparent shine, for all
though (say they) that there be much corruption in it (which we can approve)
nevertheless, for as much as to us it is as it were a memorial of ye supper of
ye lord (eue^ so do we take it) then when we come there it is to reduce into
our memory the death and passion of our lord Jesus, well is the matter at that
point that we may transform things after our appetit and say that darkness is
light. I pray you what similitude is between ye holy Sacrament institute of the
lord Jesus and this confection co^pounded of evil. First to speak of that
that the mass is holden for a sacrifice, by which god is pacified not only with
the living, but also with the dead, think they yt this is nothing? Is this
nothing another, yt ye Cano^ which is as it were ye principal substance of ye
Mass, is full of such abominable blasphemies? In likewise ye prayers for the
souls in purgatory which we know to be altogyther supersticious?

But if there were no more but this deuelish Imagination for to sacrifice Jesus
Christ unto god to ye intent yt such a work should be a satisfaction and an
atto^me^t for ye quick and ye dead, is not this a manifest denieng of his
death and passion: the which is made of no value if that me^ do not acknowledge
it for ye only and perpetual sacrifice? Is it not a plain corruption of the
holy supper? It is sure that these two so abominable pollutions ca^ no more be
separated from ye mass, then heat from fire. Whosoever comes thereunto to be
partaker of it / can he be puer and clean commyttyng such an act? Is this
the honor which we bear unto God our father and to Jesus Christ our master
and redeamer, that when we see such a spytefull deed done of one and other, in
the stead of speaking against it, do come and join our selves unto him that
does it? And that worse is, do allure other by our examples to do as much. Is
it not to shameful to say, yt a man in dishonouring of god and gyuing example
unto his neighbor does none evil at all? Then is their Idolatry which passes
all ungodliness, to worship a pyece often bread as God, and to say that it is
no more bread but god him self. If that same were the supper of our lord
which there were duly mynistred, we grant well than, that there should be a
true spiritual receyuinge of the body and blood of Jesus Christ. But yet
therefore were not this as much as to say that ye substance of bread were
changed: or yt the body were hidden within it. For the supper is given to
cause us to lift up our minds on heyght unto heaven not for to fyxe them upon
these visible things and signs of bread and wine, which be there present with
us.

Now then / if this were the very supper in deed, it were aperilous and a
dampnable fantasye, to worship a piece of bread in the stead of Jesus Christ.
Other else to seek him there. But it is not now necessary to enter into his
disputation. For by what means belongs it unto the mass this promise of
Jesus Christ, when in giving of the bread he said take, eat, this is my
body, which shall be delivered for you. For before he promises any thing,
he commands that the sacrament be distributed among the faith full. Is
this done at the mass? No but rather contrary wise, the priest does his
busynes alone aparte as though he would exclude and excommunicate yt whole
congregation.

Think we then that in doing altogether contrary to yt Christ ordained, we
have him yet tied to our gyrdles for to play with him as with a little babye? Or
else rather as a tenys Ball for to whirle him here and there even as it
pleases us? Furthermore, he adds, that we do celebrate his sacrament in ye
memory of him there by preching his death with praise and gyuynge of thanks.
Now, how ca^ this be done in ye mass, where there is not so much as one word
understand: but altogyther is done and spoken in an unknown tongue. Moreover
it is unto us yt Ihesus Christ directs him self in promising us in the
communion of his body, when he gives us ye sacramental bread. In the mass is
there nothing of all this, but ye Priest after the fasshion of Inchau^ters or
Iugglers blows upon the bread to charm and cuniure it. Wherefore, think ye
this to be good? To be short, ye shall as sone prove, that there is any
similytude between the Popes mass and the supper of our lord as that the day
should no more be contrary to ye night Then what else can the worshipping be
which men do there to the bread, than abhomynable Idolatry. yea more gross and
more folysshe then ever was any among ye Painyms. Now let us se with how good
a conscience a christian man may be present there, for to fashion him self
there like unto other men. Behold an Idol that is lift up on high on the
shoulders to be called upon and worshipped as God. I shall fall down on my
knees I shall make protestation to worsip it. And then afterward I would not
that any man should reprove me what means all this? Though no man should
speak a word does not the act it self accuse me enough wherefore though men
do spare me, yet god will not spare me. Now if there were no more but this, I
se not what cloak any faithful man can find for to purge him self, that he
should not be faultye in thus doing. And yet nevertheless perceyuinge that
they have no thing to lay for them, do not yet cease to find cauyllations
pretendynge the authority of this man, or that man, for their buckeler. But to
what purpose must we set thopinyon of men plat against the word of god? I
apeale their own conscience, if the same do not condemn the^, what shall it
then help the^ to be absolved of men when before god they be conuynced for to
do evil. But this is it that I said at the beginning that, many do ask me,
not for to know the verite but to have an answer agreeable to their desire. And
our lord to punysshe their hipocrisye, suffers them to find such as they
seek: but yt is none other but unto their more grievous confusion.

But for as much as this evil is wont to sprede it self abroad very far
even almost among all me^, for to have more clear and easy declaration of
this matter: let us consider in a some, that which men be co^monlye accustomed
to do. Behold then, what every man will do for his own part, I speak
specially of the better sort of yt worldely wise people, which will
enterteyne and keep them selves in the favor of ye world: on the sundaye he
will not only take holy water (as they call it) with other like cerymonies and
also go to the Mass, but also upon all other holy days, of yt which one part
was institute, of very manyfeste superstition: there one syngethe Mass in ye
honor of a Saint, yea, often such one where of there is none other probation,
then that the Pope has put him in his paradise. But yet although it were a
Saint approved, shall one sing Mass in the honor of him? Can there be any
gretter abhomynation, the^ to transfer the Sacrament of our lord unto such an
abuse? And think we that the lord will make him self subject unto such
fylthynes? Besides this, what prayers do they make there? Wicked ones and
stuffed with blasphemies. Let him that does communicate with the^, excuse
him self if he can. Now every man does this commonly. If yt I or any other
would flatterre them in this, were it not even to betraye the truth?

Now when any man shall be married, where as he ought to represente him self
before god and his church, that his mary age might be blessed. First there
shall be many folysshe gandes, which be mete do defyle him. Finally, he shall
pollute him self altogether by byinge of a Mass with his own monye. I
demand this of you? when the Priest sells the Mass, is it not sacrilege?
What shall we say then of him that byethe it? Our lord says, that a good make
is a special gift of his goodness, now the^ it were mete for him to give him
thanks and to desire him to accomplish that which he has begone in making
the marriage to prosper. Is not this to provoke his wrath, for to use such
abhomynatio^? We know all how much our lord does honor marriage, and in what
estimation he would that we should have the holiness thereof, when he compares
it to ye spiritual union, which he has with his people through ye virtue of his
holy spirit. Shall we polute yt thing which is ye image of ye coniu^ctio^ which
we have with ye lord Jesus, and begin ye same with the denying of his death? Do
not we think that the lord will punysshe greuousely such outragiousenes? The
marriage fynisshed, they have a child: where as he should be presented unto
the lord for to receive baptysme puerly after his institution: in the stead of
the same he is defiled with very many perverse and profane cerymonies. It is
truth that because of the same, the baptysme cease not to have his virtue as
touching the child, because the holy ordinance of god can not be abholished
by the folyshe inventions of men: but ye father shall not be excused of sin
in consenting to such a mynystration of baptism, which is altogether faulty
and corrupt. I pass over the Jews superstition which is used at ye churchyng
of the mother and at her coming abroad. Now we will come unto instruction
off a howsholde. Who is he that has any care to have his servants ryghtly
taught for to serve god after his word? Is it not rather a thing to common, to
let them live in ignorance like brute bestes, and without carfulness of
withdrawynge them from Idolatry? But there is great danger (say they) to
speak unto them. Let us pass over to speak of the danger for this present
time. Shall yt be a let that men should not do it? Is it reason yt we should
be served every man in his house and that god be there not with sta^dyng
dishonored? Think we that a household deserves to prosper in which god is
not ye sovereign lord? And what do I speak of servants, how many fathers
are there which dare instruct (as they ought to do) their wives and children?
yet nevertheless, for as much as these faults do rather declare one to be
neglygent in doing his duty, then to offend god in doing expressly the
contrary: I do not prosecute in every thing against them very bitterly. For
as much as my intent is, to speak of such deades as men commyt against the
commandment of god: and be transgressynges of his law.

All we which have received the pure doctrine of the gospel do grant well that
their diryges and obsequies for the dead be very abhomynable. First, for as
much as, they were at ye beginning invented falsely against the scripture,
and also yt they be derogacion to ye death and Passion of our Lord Jesus Christ.

Now if that a man's father or friend do dye or a neighbor he that calls him
self a Christian man will go with the other, making as though he prayed for
his soul. What cloak have they for this, except it be such a one as can not
keep away the rain? Now, if the father or wife dye, he will not only approve
these sacrileges in standinge by them: but will also bye them with his money: if
the priest in sellinge the Mass do follow the market of Judas.

Now he that puts ye same in practyce and gives him wages, shall he be
gyltlesse? I will speak nothing of that men do all the rest of the year: I will
only entreat of the feast of Easter What do al they then communly, which do
profess the Gospel They stick not to go unto confession, not only to
satisfye the tyrannous commandment of Antychriste: but also consent to ye
blasphemies that shall please the Priest to pronounce over them, and by such
consentinge as it were sealed to the^: for as the Priest does give absolucion
by the auctorite of the seat Apostolyke (that is to say) of the Idol of
Rome, which can do none other but destroy and curse, even so must he receue
it as a very holsom thing. I ask whether this ca^ be found good that a
Christen man should present him self and fawle down before the vicare or
depute of Antichrist, for to receive remission of sins, in the stead of yt
which he ought to seek at the minister of the Gospel. In like wise, he
enioyneth him penance but what is it? It is most communly to mumble up certain
Aue Mary's, before a crucifix, to cause Masses to be done, or to do other like
Idolatry, And to what purpose? Forsothe to make satisfaction unto God, and to
recompense him. If this work may be allowed, I can not see, what sin one may
reprove in all the world.

But to the intent I be not ouerlonge, let every man reckon with him self the
dampnable superstitions which they then commit in three or four days And who
is he that absteyneth from them, it is possible that there be some, but the
number is very small. A Christen man wha^ he has lived continually in this
fylth and mire, yet comes there worse at the death, for then is it, that the
deuell troubles him and gives him most assautes, for either friars or priests
shall be at his elbowe, for to seduce and deceive him, unto whom although he
consent not yet must he nevertheless grant them somewhat, and make unto them a
good face. What torment shall he find in his heart, which must immediately
appear before his judge Jesus Christ, after that he has been ashamed or
afraied to confess him? Consyderinge that this sentence is given already, Mark.
8.
that who so ever is asshamed of me or of my words before men, of him will I be
asshamed when I shall come in mine and my father glory with the Aungelles. I
thought I would set out this myrrour before men in the which every faithful
man (that lives among the papists) might behold the faults, which he does,
and the cursed estate wherein he is.

Now have I brieffely comprehended them in a gross some louinge rather to
dyminish and leave many things out, then to amplify and enlarge ye same
which of it self is but to bad.

Even so, when a man truly fearinge God and comparinge of that he does, with
that which is here written, shall knowledge that he synneth double so much in
other things which I have not spoken of. And then he shall have good occasion
to condemn him self: and shall not dare to open his mouth to defend him.

But because there be some which think all good enough when they have so^me
excuse, as it were a buckler for to put before them. A man must beat out of
their hands all that wherewith they were wont to arm, and help them selves.
It is a very commun thing to alledg thexemple of Naama^ the chief Captain of
the king of the 4. Reg. 5.
Assirians wars, who after yt he had made profession, yt from thence for the
he would worship the god of Israel: nevertheless asked leave of the prophet
Helizeus for to enter with the king his master into the tempe of yt Idol
which was worshypped in his country. And because the king leaned upon his
shoulder he demanded, that whether when ye king enclyned or bowed down him
self, if it were not lefull for him to stoop or bow. Now for as much as ye
prophet did grant him this, it seameth unto diverse that it were not evil
done for a man to feign or dyssemble in a like case. I will then direct my
words against him which would pretend this color for to justify him self and
will answer him. My frynde I meruell to much, that saying thou haste the
general word of God as a great high way already made and beat on, in the
which thou canste not fail, how it comes to pass, that thou haddeste rather
declyne unto one partyculer example which is (as it were) a narowe pathe and
little used in the which thou may lightly go out of the way. How happens it
that thou art so subtle to seek out stertyng holes, and can not see at all
which way to enter in at the gate? Doeste thou not know well, that it is a
thing not very sure, to follow the particular examples with out having other
approbatio^? For our lord did some time permyt unto some of his faithful (as
it were by privilege) that which he did forbid to all in general. In like
wise, he has suffered that thing which he has not therefore approved. We
read not that Naaman, of whom we now speak, was at any time cyrcumcised: and
it is not very like that he was in deed. Will thou excuse thy self therefore,
that thou should not receive baptysme? And will thou say, if I will now
reason the contrary, that in as much as the worshyppynge and the confessing
of his name proceeded of faith: look how much more clear knoweledge thou
haste then Naaman, so much art thou more bound to give glory unto god? I put
case I answer the thus. It is no marvel of Naama^ though he were by the
prophet sent again with such permyssion, seeing he had but a very little
spark of the veryte: but thou which haste a great measure of knowledge
should thou order it so as though thou were not more bound to confess god
the^ he? God is no sophister to receive such euasions, shall thy conscience
then be in rest? But yet I have an other answer for such manner of people:
for I do say, that they do falsely abuse ye scripture in this place, when al is
well considered. First we must consider that the kings chief capytayne in his
ydolatry was wont to do many sacryfices, seeing that every particular person of
mean estate did so. And what does Naaman promise among other tynges? He
protests that he will never do sacrifice more but only unto the God of
Israel. Now is it certain, that this was as much as to make profession
openly and known unto all ye world, that he is no more an Idolater: eue^ as he
had caused it to be proclaimed by the sound of a trompet. For who is he that
can doubt yt he had not forsaken those gods to who^ he ceased to make all
those sacrifyces, which he was wont to do before time? Furthermore, he
requires to carry away of ye earth of Israel as much as two Moiles might carye,
that he might sacryfyce there unto the living god: to thentente he might not
defyle him self by sacrifycynge upon an heathen grownde. Have ye not here now
a another sole^pne declaracion which he makes to put away all doubt, that he
would not live any longer in ye superstition of the Assyryans? yea but
afterward he asked leave for to woship in ye temple of Remmon. If that were to
make as though he worshipped the Idol, it should have some apperaunce for
them, but now a man may se the contrary. Be hold the words which he uses,
if the king my master do peradventure enter in to the temple of Remmon, and
that he do worship there leaning upon my hand: if I worship also likewise,
that the lord impute not the same unto his servant. This word worship is
as much to say, as to enclyne or bow down. Wherefore is it then that he says
expressly, if the king leanyng upon my hand do worship? Forsothe to signyfie
that he would not bow down, but for good manners sake, that he might be no
let unto the king. Then in that he enclyned or bowed down his body it was not
for to make as though he worshypped the ydol, but for to render and give his
accustomed duty to the king. Let him then that will defend him self with
thexa^ple of Naaman, first pourge him self of all superstition and ydolatry,
and declare that he will in no wise consent unto any. Now when he has made
this known, we shall be no longer in controversy. But I pray you, what a
mocking is this, to allege thexample of Naama^ to cover or cloak them with:
when there is so great a difference in the matter? For yt they do, is nothing
else but to show that they will play the Idolaters with other Idolatres. A man
can not satisfye God with such vain and tryflinge cauillations.

I have heard some also allege that that is on this wise written in the
Epistle that is ascribed unto Ieremye, Baruc. 6.
when ye shall see the Babilonians bear about their gods of gold and
silver and that all men do fall down before them, ye shall say in your
hearts, it is thou lord which ought to be worshipped. But does thauctor of
this epistle in exhortyng the people of Israel, to give glory unto god in
their hearts, suffer them to make curtesy unto ye ydoles? What helps them so
folyshly to abuse that same sentence?

And I pray you, he that outwardly does honor unto Idols, how can he say in
his heart that unto God he ought to do it: except he do accuse his own deed
and condemn him self before the judgment of God? As for me, I require not
of the faithful, that when they see the Papists bear about their relics
and other mamettes, yt they should snatche them out of their hands or else
cast dirte at them, for it belongs unto Princes and higher powers to correct
such abhominacio^s: but that they do absteyne from fylinge them selves with
them And seeing they may not be suffered to worship God openly that they do yet
at the least glorifye God in their hearts and absteyn from outward Idolatry.
Thexemple of S. Paul likewise, which they allege, has a little more
appearance with it, but it serves them much less then that same of Naama^,
which we have proved to serve them nothing at all. Act. 21.
S. Paul (say they) knowinge well, that the ceremonies of ye law were
abolysshed, yet for to please his nation did use them in shauing and purifyeng
of him self, after the custom of the law, for to offer in the temple. Now it
seems unto the^, that, if S. Paul sinned not in doing thus: yt it is no more
evil done to go unto Mass for a face, and to do other things which I do
reprove. I answer, that they do great iniurye: first unto god, for to compare
a ceremony which he has institute with an ydolatry all together wicked and
abhomynable: as is the papisticall Mass. Secondarely, unto S. Paul, to lay to
him yt he has done such an act, as they them selves do: but look what it is
when men will clear them selves in evil doing: a man does always defyle him
self double. This Ceremony that S. Paul used the^, was it reproved of god of
else was it indifferent yet during the time until ye gospel was better and
more openly sprede abroad? There is no man which will not grant me, that of it
self it was none evil thing, neither yet dampnable: for it was in very deed
of it self a sacryfice of praise and giuynge of thanks that he did unto god.
The shauynge and ye puryfyeng were in deed of the shadows of the law: but
there was yet no inconvenience in the^, but that a christian man might use them
unto edifiynge. And this is it that Saint Paul him self says, 1 Cor. 9.
that he was become a Jew unto the Jews, to the intent that he might win
them: and did observe the law because he might draw them to the gospel. In
this Mass what thing is there like unto this? I take ye Mass for all other
manner of fasshions of doing, wherein there is any euydent Idolatry or else
superstition altogether fyghtyng against the word of god. What reason is it
then to apply the deed of Saint Paul, which was none other but good, for to
maynteyne things that be all together naught? if it be al one a man to shame
him self and to fall down before an Idol: then would I grant them to follow
the example of Saint Paul: but to put things together in a rome that be
nothing like, it is to confound all together. How be it, there is yet more to
be regarded, that is thente^t and end of the thing: for if S. Paul to keep him
self in favor of the world, and for the fear of his flesh, did use such
dissymulation, he should be the first that would reprove him self. But we
know that he had none other consideration, then for to edify the poor
ignorante and rude people, and that he might offend no person. Who be they now
a days which dare boast them selves of such a zeal, for their own conscience
does repreue them? yet nevertheless, must we contend about this matter, as
though there were some doubt in it, for ye shall see a great nombre of them,
which do counterfaicte for to enter in them selves with the papists, and do
color and cloak them selves with this goodly cloak. We do it not but because
we would not offend. First I do send such kind of persons unto the
judgment of god and to the witness of their own consciences, where ye shall
find that they have none other respect, but to avoid trouble and danger.
What wyn we now I prai you, to flatter our selves eue^ against ye verite? etc.
What shall it help us to defend our selves by lies, when I have invented an
excuse? Behold my honor is decked that I am not addicte neither to my belly nor
yet unto ambition: and yet not wythstandynge I know well and can not deny that
there is none other thing that dryueth me unto it. But now some man will lay to
my charge, yt I do rasshly to judge the secret thoughts and that the same
belongethe only unto God. I answer, yt my judgment is proved true enough, by
that every man sees with his eyes. Let us not mock with god. If there were
no fear of losing of the life or of the goods or auctoryte or acquayntaunce
or the favor of friends, which do hinder a man, freely to do or speak: should
a man find among a hundred yea one among a thousand which would dissemble so
as all men do now? But seeing the world is come unto such an
unshamefastness for to mock with god so, I grant that their intent be such
as they pretend and I will no further inuey against their hipocrisy. Let us now
examyne the deed it self, for fear to offend (say they) we be constrained to
make a good countenance in fasshionyng our selves unto the superstitions of the
papists.

Now to see whether it be so or no, we must first understand what it is to
offend, for when S. Paul uses this word, offend, he signifies ye troublyng
of a conscience whereby it is let to come unto Jesus Christ or cause to fall
or draw back from him, now when he handeleth this matter of which we speak
of, he commands us to be well ware yt we offend no man, well how is that?
Take heed (says he) that thou eatest not of the Offerynges made unto Idolles
in the presence of a weak person that is scrupulous, 1 Corin. 8
for yt is an offense. Wherefore? For sothe in as much as his conscience is
thereby edifyed to do evil, for he thinks that such meat is defiled, and yet
nevertheless, he styckethe not to eat of it, following thine example. Behold
now how thou art cause of his ruin, or else, if he absteyn, he is troubled in
his heart, thinking yt thou displeasyste god in so doing: and is by this
means set as it were on fire, and in danger to give over, because he is not
well grounded in the truth of god. We see then from what offense Saint Paul
calls us back it is, when we through our rashness be the cause that a weak
parson does so stumble, that he fall unto ruin, or turn from the right way,
or else be hyndered, and to be short. When we pluck him back, or be a let
unto him to profit in our lord in the stead of that we ought for to further
him. In like manner, to the Romans. Romans 14.
After that he had showed, that it was an vnfryndly thing and against charity,
for to trouble a weak person because he makes his conscience to eat of all
manner of meats and that he should not constrayn him: not to be to importune
against his conscience. Finally, that he should not dysco^fort nor dyscourage
him. And when he would conclude his purpose he says. Let every man please his
neighbor in well doing unto his edyfyenge.

Now, we see the mark whereunto we must have an eye, when we go about to
avoid offense, it is that we give not an occasion unto our neighbor to be
edyfyed in evil, nor yet give him any evil example, neither to say or do any
thing, where by he might ever the sooner, go out of the right way. Where upon,
it is easy for us to judge, whether that they which bow them selves unto
Idolles, and by their dissembling of their christianyte dishonor god, do, by
this means avoid offendynge? First, they show them selves that they have no
great zeal unto the glory of god, the which they do dishonor so. Then do
they entyce other to do the same. I speak of the feeble and simple oons,
which have already some taste of the truth. And where as otherwise they would
make conscience to defile them selves with Idolatry, they do take courage and
boldness, through their example. Finally, they confyrme the unbelievers and
harden them in their errors. If this be not to offend, I confess yt I am
out of my wit. It is very true in deed, that they do not offend the worldly
people or do run into their displeasure: neither do they provoke any person
for to persecute them, nor give the^ any occasion for to murmur or cry out
against them. But in norysshyng of all Idolatry through their faynyng, they be
the cause yt breaks his neck, other be grievously hurt, some do fall and
some be caused to halt, or else to wander out of ye right way. And by this
means they altogyther, even from the first unto the last be blind and leaders
of ye blind, for in following one an other like Cranes, they do seduce or lead
an other out of the right way. For as much as never a one of them does follow
the word of God which is the only true rule. Moreover we must note, that
when S. Paul byddeth us to condiscende unto the rudenes or infirmite of our
neighbors that we give the^ none offense, he would not that we should do any
evil thing, for to do them pleasure with all: or else use any dissimulacion,
that is not lawful for us: but that in all indyfferente things which God
has left in our lybertye, and which of them selves be but good, we should,
have respect unto them, and not to trouble the^. Wherefore the first foundation
should be ever to consydre whether ye thing where of we entreat, be letfe us
free, yt we might use it in one sort or other puerly with out offe^dyng god,
that is to say, to do a deed or leave it undone, to use a thing or to absteyn
from it. Now to include ydolatry in this row, it is to no purpose. Therefore in
as much as to counterfaict in such sort that one should commit all abhomynation,
is against the express prohibition of god, there is no reason at all, to
bring forth offense, to be an excuse in this behalf.

Now, they that see me to be more indyfferente perceyuyng them selves to be
void of all lawful excuses, do not wholely defend that this is well done or
that it is no sin to commit Idolatry, for the fear of men: but do allege
that it is a small fault and easy to be pardoned, when the heart is not there
with and therefore that it is to pass all measure, for to reprove it so
bytterly. And for to give some show unto their saying, they do object, that
there be many vices remaynyng in the world much more grievous then that ye
which ought to be reproved first of all. And therefore men ought not to
begin at this small infirmyte (as they do take it) if we will not follow the
hypocrisy of the Pharyses which swalowed up an whole Camel and strayned the
little pieces there of through a seife. Mat. 23.
I will begin to Answer at this last poyncte, grauntyng that there be now a
days very horrible faults in the world, against which there is much need
to cry. I confess also that when one passes over them lightly to tarry upon
this only sin of outward Idolatry, that he goes not well to work: even as
now I should spare whores, dronkerdes, thieves, disceyuers perjured persons,
and that I should wynke at couetuousnes, that I dissembled with extorcioners,
and finally, the pompes and pride, or this world, being only and altogether set
to reprove this vice whereof I speak now. For then I should not do well, and
also a man might, by good right reprove me of lack of discreatio^, as one
that left many secret wondes alone for to be occupied about the healyng of
one. But for as much, as I do not see who shall let me to reprove every vice
in his order, without leaving any untouched, now that this is one of the
nombre, it ca^ not be denied. yea (say they) but yet it is to bytterly: for
some me^ hearing you to cry so much against it do think that they have done
all their duty toward God, when they have not feigned the^ selves to be
ydolatres, as other me^ do. And even as all their holiness lay in yt, they pass
not to lead an inordinat life, or to begyle their neighbors, or to do such
like things: notwithstanding, I answer yt such people putting al their
perfection in absteyning from an outward thing and going about to please god
by doing one only poyncte of his law, be even as far out of the way as
the other which thynk yt they offend not God by forsakyng of him through the
vsyng of outward superstitions before men. But it is no reason, yt their fault
should be imputed unto me: considering I give them none occasion. My doctrine
is, that a faithful man ought to sainctify and consecrate unto god as well the
body, as the spirit: but yet that the spirit as the most pryncipall, have the
first place. Who is it now that can conclude upon this, yt I would bring in
any hypocrysie for to pay god with outward gestures only? Touching that
they do pretend yt it is a small fault, a man to feyne for to worship Idolles,
and therefore that it may lightly be forgeuen. To that I answer, that if a man
come to make comparyson of ye commandments of god from the one to the other, yt
tha^ he may well find the one greatter and the other smaller: even as Jesus Christ
said, Math. 23
that the pryncipal poinctes of the law, be justice, judgment, and faith.
But when we consider every one of them severally, there is none of them which
ought not to be of great estimation unto us, for we know this, Math. 5.
that Jesus Christ our master says. Who so ever shall break one of the least of these commandments and shall teach men so to do, he shall be of no
estymation in the kyngedome of heaven. What is it to teach me^ so to do? It is
to make them believe, that it is not very evil done for to transgres some
commandment of God: as though it were of small valor, and by yt menes to
give them ye bridle to do evil, and to dymynyshe the syn. Now, if he which
makethe the breaking of the commandment of god (how little so ever it seems
to be unto our understanding) more light than it is, be so condemned: what
shall become of them which say, that a man, when he does plain against it
in deed, may dissemble his fault all together and not be a known of it at
all. And in deed, if we had not a very perverse and corrupt judgment, we
should not dare open our mouths, for to say, that it were a small thing to do
clean contrary to the will of god. For in as much, as our lord has vouchsauyd
to open to speak of any thing, what so ever it be, were not this good reason,
yt every creature should be moved at it for to give ear there unto in fear:
and dylygently to observe the same, that he speaks? Belongethe it unto us to
inquire, wherefore he commands or forbyddeth any thing? As thoug his only
will were not sufficient unto us for a reason.

Now, to thentente that we dysceyue not our selves, we ought not only, to
look unto ye thing commanded or forbidden: but unto god which speaks, in so
much yt we can not disobeye his word without dyspysynge of his majesty.
Therefore it is after his hyghnes, yt we ought to esteem thoffence, and in so
doing, it shall never seem small to us. For this cause, he says by his prophet
zachary. zacha. 5.
That he would send a book of curse, by which every perjured person and every
thief should be accursed together. Whereby, he signyfyeth, that no man can
tra^sgresse his law, in what sort so ever it be: but that it is altogyther
da^pnable. Iaco. 2.
Which thing Saint James does expound yet more clearly, when he says. He
that has kept the whole law and offe^deth in one poynct, shall be counted
gyltie of all together. For he that has forbidden to murder, has also
forbidden to play the whoremonger, to rob, or to lie.

Now, to show, what offense it is to fail in any poyncte, he sends us unto
God which gave the law, as though he would say, that the fault ought to be
measured and wayed by this that we do against the will of god, even by
contempt, as it were, setting nothing by his severity, as much as is in us.
Wherefore our lord Jesus Crist reprouynge the hypocrisy of ye Scrybes and
pharisees: Mat. 23.
which in such wise did apply their study to observe the smallest
commandments, that the pryncypall were left behind undone, said not unto
the^. That they should go about to do yt which he had most chiefly
commanded and pass over the rest: but contrarywyse, he speaks even thus.
These things ought you to do and not to leave the other undone: as though he
would say, there is never a one of the commandments which one ought to
despise from the greatest unto the least: nor one should not utterly reiecte
the one, for to keep the other. We see then, that it is a perilous fa^tasy to
conceive, that it is a venyall sin and lyghtlye to be pardoned, for to
transgres any commandment of god, what so ever it be: considering that, look
what fear and reverence we bear unto his majesty: eue^ the same should we
show toward all the poynctes of his law, even from the highest, to the
lowest. And in deed, when we ones begin to extenuate or dymynysshe the word
of god in any poyncte, for to bring us here unto, that we pass not to do that
which is commanded, it is an entrance for us, for to cause us afterward for
to cast it of altogether.

Thus, every thing that man does against the will of god in one sort or other,
indifferently ought to be rebuked and vehemently reproved. For in this do we
show our selves to fere him and that we will be subject unto him, if that we do
not omyt one only title of all that he commands. How be it, I would feign
know what reason it is, to call outward Idolatry one of the smalleste
offenses that a man may do. Some man will say unto me, it is because I have not
the will or thentente to do it, but do it by constraynt, desiring to do
otherwise, if I might be suffered. I will axe of him then that says so. My
friend, if that thou for fear of dysplesure, or for dread of some danger,
do a great outrage or vylanye to thy father, shouldeste thou therefore be
holden excused? And how much less ought thou to dishonor God by
prophanyng or vnhalowing his holy name, by gyuyng glory unto a Mammet. Thou
art constrained (thou say) think thou the^ yt he estemeth not much more
his glory, tha^ thy life etc. But for to put away all contentions altercations,
I desire all them which be holden in such error, that they will bethynke
them a little, if it be a light fault to maynteyne that by which S. Paul
says. That god is provoked even against one which would fight against him, by
which he says, that Jesus Christ is offended that one forsakes his holy
table, 1. Cor. 10.
and that one is made partaker of the dyuels table, here be words (as me
thinks) able enough to make us tremble: yea, and to say the truth, they
beat down all outward Idolatry more mightily than I ca^ express. But some
man will reply against me, and say, yt I abuse the^ for to wrest the^ to my
purpose. Let us se the^ whether it be so or no. The christian people either for
fear of danger, or for other worldly respects, did assemble in ye company of
ye infideles, for to make solemn bankets in ye honor of Idolles: and their
excuse was. In our hearts we condemn al their superstition, and know that
there is but one only God, unto whom all honor is due. Upon this Saint Paul
ceasyth not to cry, that they provoke the lord unto battle, and pollute them
selves with communycating with the Deuyls table. What is it that they do less,
which come to knele down at the Mass, for to approve all thabomynation that
is done there: and which is using of all the paruerse ceremonies, and such
as be repugnant unto God, which men do in the kingdom of Antychrist, do show
them selves to be obedyent children, yt is to say do feign that they consent
unto them and receive the^ as good? If they deny this, let us se whether ye
causes for which Saint Paul is so sharp against the Corynthians shall not be
found in them. It is certain, that he considered two things, it is that the
Corynthyans by such dissemblyng, did give occasion unto the Infydeles, and
Paynyms to harden them in their evil, and not to regard the christian relygion.
And that on the other side, the simple weak people were subverted and their
consciences troubled.

Thus, because of the double offense yt followed of their act, he threteneth
them so sharply. And what do they now a days yt be conformable to ye papists
in their folysshnesse? Let us all ways take the Mass for an example. They
know well, that it is an abhomynatio^ set up as it were in ye dispite of god,
they know well for what purpose ye people come together there, and if there
were none other thing there: they know that men do worship there an Idol,
lyftyng up a piece of bread in the stead of God while they know this well
enough, do they not yet make as though they worshipped it as other men do?
Would not they yt men should think that they do it of good devotion. In this
doing (I pray them) do they not lay forth the glory of God to be mocked of the
wicked? Do not they offend the weak by gyuyng them an evil example with
casting them in doubt and scrupulosite that they wot not what to believe? It
is but lost labor then for them to go about to make a light matter of it,
which we see to be so sharply reproved of God. And yet yt more is, it is a
known thing, that the Mass is taken of the enymyes of Jesus Christ as a
gage for to bind me^ to live in their ungodliness: and to serve their tyranny.
For if any man go unto the Mass devoutly, he is taken for a good and a
laudable supporter of Antichriste, contrariwyse, to despise ye Mass is as it
ware to forsake the kingdom off the Pope. Seeing yt it is so, that a christyan
man in going to the Mass, does give a testymonie and make a profession that
he will live in Idolatry, and maynteyne thabomynations which reign this day
in the world, is not the same a cloked forsakynge of Jesus Christ, and a
plain denyeng of his gospel by craft? What answer will they make me unto
this, which would color their sin and because they can not make it
altogyther white, they would by some means darken it, that it should not
appear at all. I say that we ought not to esteem ye Mass alonly in it self:
but with all the circumstances and all ye inconveniences that follow it. I say
further, that the inconveniences be such, that there a man makes an
obligation for to approve, retain, and follow the present estate of the popysh
church, which all Christen me^ ought to abhor and defye, if they can assoyle
me this argument with a good conscience and without sophistry, I discharge
them, but that will not be this year.

I will yet recite unto this purpose for the further confirmation thereof, an
History that is in Josephus and in the book of the Machabees, 2. Machu^ 6.7,
it is of Eleazarus and a woman of the Iues with.vii. children that she had,
who al be it it were so, that men would constrayn them for to eat swynes
flesh, had yet rather dye then to consent thereunto. It might seem at the first
sight that this was rather a selfwilfulnes, to suffer death for so small a
matter, then a right ordered zeal. But if we take heed whereunto these
tended, they might do none otherwise without forsakinge of God: for in
constrayninge them to eat swynes flesh, which God had forbidden them, their
purpose was to have a wytnes of them that they were content to condescende unto
the gentiles manner of lyuinge. This History is not of the holy fcripture, but it
is an act that was done in very deed and no fable, if we do commend these
persons as martyrs and praise their constancy, does it not become us to
condemn that that is done to the contrary? Now to make an end of this
article, I say, that all they, which take it for a small fault, such a fayning
or dissemblinge, to make as though they agreed with ye Idolaters do not know
in what estimation God has his honor, and have never tasted of this sentence
which he speaks by his prophet Esaye. Esai. 42.
I do live, I will not give my glory to another: neither yet my honor unto
Images, for by the same he shows us that he will never suffer, that his
honor be given unto an Idol: but that he will at one time or at an other,
take vengeance of it, I say also, that they did never conceive the grace that
God has showed unto us, in ordeyninge that our bodies should be the temples
of his holy spirit, after that he had redeemed them by the precious blood of
his son our Lord, and in promisynge them glory and immortality in his
kingdom. For if they understood this thing, they would make this conclusion
with S. Paul, yt it were mete for us to pourge us from all fylthynes as well
of the body as of the soul, and to bear God as well in the one, as in the
other, considering that both of them be his

Now, after all these cauyllations be beaten down, my Lady worldely wisdom
comes in with her five eggs, bringing in a perylouse reason. What good should
come of it, if every one would declare him self for to serve God puerly? I
answer with one word, yt if it pleased God, there might follow of it much
persecution, and that some might be constrained to flee, forsakynge all their
goods: either might be poyncted at with the finger some put in prison, oother
banysshed, yea, and some might lose their lives. I understand, even as I have
said if that God would suffer it, but we ought to give this honor unto God,
to commit unto him all that might come of it: trusting that he would so order
the matter, that he evil (which we feared) should not come to pass for this
is the refuge, where unto our father Abraham brings us by his example, Gene.
22.
who having commandment to kill his own son, when he was demanded in
the way, what he would sacryfice, said. The lord shall provide. It is trewly
a sentence, which ought to be written in our hertes, that it might come unto our
memory by and by incontyne^tly, when we be amassed in any thing: and driven as
it were unto an extreamyte, if we could do so, yt is to wit, to cast all
our care upon God nothing doubtyng but that he were wise enough, for to direct
us unto a good end, when we be destitute of counsel and in perplexite, he
would not fail us more then he did his servant Abraham, in delyueringe him
from all heaviness, when it was against all the help of man. But because of our
unbelief, we be not worthy to feel the goodness of God toward us. When our
Lord commands us any thing, think we, that he sees not the dangers
before hand, or else that he does not consydere them? And when he sees them,
think we, that he is not able to pluck us out of them? And that more is,
will we make him a liar, as though he would not keep his promise that he made
unto us, for to preserve them that follow his ways? wherefore in stead of
alledginge, what shall become of us, if we serve God, let us learn to say,
seeing that all counsel does fail us, God has some other in stoore for us.
Are we in straight / out of the which we think there is no way, to escape
out?

Then will he make the way wyder, only let us do what our Lord God byddeth
us, and in what peril so ever we be, he shall surely help us.

Above all thing the lord God loves this confydence, yt when we keep his
commandments, we do commit the end unto his providence, and yt our spirit do
quietly rest upon the same. But if that a thousand perils do present them
selves before our eyes in such wise yt we know not which way to wind us:
shall we therefore say, that gods commandment is in vain, and yt it ca^
take no more place? No, but we know that it ought not to be vyolate nor broken,
though heaven and earth should go together.

Nevertheless, belly wisdom will not that it be thus answered, for she
obiecteth an other inconuenyence, that if every man should wythdrawe him
self from Idolatrye. First all lands where Antichrist reygneth, should be
destitute of faithful people. Secondarely, that when they be departed from ye
place where they were, they should not know where to dwell, consyderinge the
regio^s where God is purely called upon, can not hold them with ye
inhabitauntes that be there already. I answer, that this, fear is very vain,
for if that all they, whom our Lord has illuminated, with one accord and
commune consent, were so strong rather for to dye or to leave all together,
then to defyle them selves with wicked superstityons, he would help them by
some mean that we know not of: for either he would convert the hertes of the
princes and of the Magistrates, and move them to put down al Idolatrye, and
set up the true service and worshippinge of God, or else at the least would
mollyfye them so, that they would not constrayne the poor faithful people for
to defile them selves against their consciences, nor use no more such crueltye
against the^. Furthermore, that we enter no further in disputation, I say that
we shall not now doubt, that every one will trusse up his baggage for to set
forward. For always thus will the world good, that some shall have their
eyes so blinded that they can not perceive in what mire and fylthines they lie
in: and other, although they do so, and acknowledge ye miserable estate
wherein they be, shall nevertheless be hold in through the infirmite of the
flesh for to abide there still. And some shall be so wrapped with diverse cares
and burde^s, yt they can not avoid it, al be it they would feign do it.

But it is very lykly (will some man say) yt they which have the better zeal
and more knowledge for to edifye other, will go their way: what will come of
this then; how can the doctrine of yt gospel be multiplied, if the sede be
taken away? To this I answer, that if every one of them which be here and
there, unto whom our Lord has given the knowledge of his truth, did but the
half of his duty to his power, that there should not be one corner of the
world which should not be filled there with. The fault is, that there is no
boldness nor courage in the most part, but yet although all they that could
not live in one Country with a quiet conscience, because they might not live
after Gods word, did depart away, think we that the seed of God should
utterly be extyncte? We should rather hope, that god in the stead of one,
would raise up four. In conclusion, we shall be alwaes fools, so long as we
will reason against God. I know also, that there be some which think to clear
them selves very well by saying, that it is an eaysye thing for me to say thus
seeing I am far from danger: but that if I were in their place, I would not be
so hot, but would do as they do. I answer, that I say none other thing, but
yt which my conscience constrayneth me to speak: and that, if I would say
other wise, I should wickedly blaspheme the truth. Wherefore, if I were in a
place where I thought that I should not avoid Idolatry without danger, I would
pray our lord, that he would strengthen me: and yt he would give me this
constancy to prefarre (as reason requires) his glory, before mine own life,
and I hope yt he would not forsake me.

Nevertheless, let us leave to dispute what I would do, for I do not boaste my
self: but do only show that, which as well I my self, as every man ought to
do. And therefore, whosoever did otherwise (were it I my self or any other) he
were to be reproved. But what does it help them for to look upon me If I do
otherwise then I have preached, woe be unto me: for as much as I should
condemn my self by mine own mouth. But are they therefore to be excused? let
every body prove his own work, Gala. 6.
says S. Paul, and then he shall have glory in him self and not in his
neighbor, it is a very common thing in the world, yt one does make him a
buckler for to defend him self, by the faults of an other, but a man may
not use thus for to do before God.

Furthermore, to the intent they should not say, these be words, but find
me one (I pray you) that does so. I require nothing off them, but to follow
that which so many thousand Martyrs have done before us, men and Women,
Rich and Poor, great and small. This doctrine then is no speculation, that I
have invented, ever the sooner because I my self am (as I and they do think)
safe and well at ease / but it is the same which the holy Martyrs of our
Lord Jesus Christ / have occupied them selves with in the mids of the
torments that they suffered.

And by this medytation they were strengthened and helped to overcome the dred
and fear of prisonnes, of rackinge, of the fire, of the gallouse, of ye
sweard, and of all other kinds of death. If they had not had this thoroughly
prynted in their hearts, that it were better for them to dye an hundred times,
then to do any thing against the honor of God, they had never had the
courage, to present the^ selves unto the death, for to confess the christian
faith: but they would rather have suffered the^ selves to be induced for to
honor Idolles

Now, their conscience is not recited unto us, only because that we should
praise it: but yt it might be an example to us, and that we forsake not the
veryte which they did so manfullye maynteyne, that we do not set at naught,
nor corrupt the glory of God which they esteemed so hyghely, that they shed
their blood for to seal and confyrm it: if they had the^ thought it lawful to
escape by symulation or dissembling, when men would constrain them, to incline
unto Idolatry: then had it bee^ now no need that they should have given over
them selves, for to endure such torments as they suffered. For they might
have worshipped God secretly, and made as though they had worshyshypped Idols,
for to satisfy their persecuters with all. But they have taught us that that is
nothing else but moccage, to pretend that a man does honor God in his heart,
when he betrayeth the truth before men, and so defyleth his honor by gyuinge
it unto Idolles. And truly when every thing is well weyed, this is no small
condempnation upon us / for to see what an ardente and a burning zeal the
holy Martyrs had in times paste in comparison of the cold zeal that we show
our selves to have, for by and by as soon as a poor man in those days had
but only a little taste of the true knowledge often God, he made no doubt to
cast him self in danger, for the confession of his faith / and had rather to
be slain quick then to counterfayte or dyssemble so much, as to commytte an
act of any outward Idolatrye. We that have so great knowledge, which
should set us on fire, be more cold then Ise, and besides that, goo about to
excuse or iustyfye our selves. But if we do so, we shall heap unto our
selves a more greuouse curse and provoke the sorer, the wrath of God upon our
headdes, and let every man for his own part mark this diligently.

Now even as hitherto, I have foughten against them which for to wasshe and
iustyfye them selves, do falsifye the truth of God, or for to extenuate or
mynysh their faults, do derogation unto the majesty of his word, and diminish
thauctorite of his co^mandme^tes, or else yt by vain clokes would excuse
themselves, that it might be lawful for them, to do evil, and no man to
reprove them. So on the other side, it is good reason to preuente the question
which many good persons and such as fear God might happen to ask, that is
to wit, whether yt I do reprove and condemn all the faithful, which be
dyspersed through out France, Italy, England, Flaunders, and other Realms: in
as much as (in many of these) they be constrained to use many superstycious
ceremonies. Before I answer to this question, I protest before God that so
far is it of that I do delight to rebuke and reprove my poor brethren which be
in such captivity, that rather for the pity and compassion that I have upon
them, I would deuyse some way to excuse them: but yet so, that I speak as my
conscience does compel me to say, yea, and that for their own health. And
after that I have said all, I do mourn for them, desyryng God that he will
comfort them: touching the reprouynge of them, this is not my mind, where as
I rebuke any vice in them, therefore to condemn their persons: God knows
that I have this estimation of many that be dispersed abroad, that they live
much more holyly than I do, and in greater perfection. Moreover, I knowledge
and consider well that it is a greatter and more excellent virtue for the^ to
keep them selves in the fear of god, in the mids of such of confusion, than
I which have no such occasyon, and am not so much tempted to do evil: but
contrarywyse have daily the word of God to draw me back. In likewise, if
they happen to fall that I ought to bear more with them, then I my self ought
to be favored or to be borne with. Therefore, so far is it of, that I do
reiecte them, as though I should not take them for brethren: in that I do else
laud and praise them before God and also before men, countinge them more
worthy to have a place in the church of God than I: let us set aside then this
false opinion, that I would exclude the^ from the nombre of the faithful, or
compte them for no Christian men.

Nevertheless, though I have their persons in such honor and reputation,
yet I cease not (if I see any vice in them) for to judge it evil: for
although a man be very faithful, yet one can not say, that all his works be
good and laudable: it is possible they may find other fautes in me, let them
condemn them in the name of God: but let it not be of evil will or through
the desire to disprayse or backbyte me, or for to revenge them selves through
accusynge me again. That notwithstanding, let them receive this correction
with humblenes, if they will show them selves to be the children of God: or
else they shall declare them selves to be led with a spirit of rebellyon, and
bytternesse: seeing that theye would not receive the truth.

But one, will demand of me, what counsel then I would give a faithful
person yt dwells so in some Egypt, or in some Babylon, in the which he is not
suffered to worship God puerly: but is constrained after the common fasshyon to
conform him self unto evil vsages.

The first were, that he should get him from thence if he can, for all things
well rekened and debated, happy is he that is far from such abhomynations, for
as much as it is very hard to be so nyghe and not to be defiled with them.
Let him the^ draw him self unto the place where he shall not be constrained
to meddle with such fylthinesse: nor yet to blaspheme the name of god, nor his
word, by holding his peace and dissembling as though he consented on the
other side, where as he might be suffered to make profession of his christian
faith, in the assemble of christian people, to be partaker of the holy
doctrine of the gospel, to have the pure and wholesome use of the Sacraments,
to have his part of the common prayers.

Here, have ye my opynion, what were best to be done: but if any man find no
way to get out, I would counsel him to look, whether it were not possible
for him, to absteyne from all Idolatry, and to keep him self pure and
undefiled toward God, as well in body, as in soul. Then, that he worshipped
god privately, desiryng him that he will restoore his poor Church unto her
right estate. Finally, that he do his dilygence for to instruct and edyfye
the poor Ignoraunte, as much as he may: if he abject that he can not do this
with out danger of death. I grant it: but the glory of God where of we
entreat now, ought to be more precious unto us then this vain and transitory
life which (to say the truth) is nothing but a shadow.

I know, what the most part will say unto me, alas it is very truth that we
ought to prefer God before all things: but we have no such strength nor
constancy, where we have father and mother which do retayn us here, where we
have charge of householde, how can we well get away? Unto this I say, for as
much as their infirmytie does let them, to follow the counsel which they do
acknowledge to be most sure and healthful, that for as much as for the fear
of men they do bow from the right way, they ought to confess their sin
before God: and with tears and syghes to bewail it, accusynge them selves in
the stead of iustifyeng. Then, I do admonysshe them that by custom they
sleep not in their evil: but from day to day, endeuer them selves to myslyke
them selves and to be sorry, that they may obteyn mercy before god. Then,
afterward to desire, their good father (for as much as his office is, to
redeem prisoners) that he will once draw them out of bondage: or else prepare a
right form of the church through out all the world, that they may give him the
honor, that belongs unto him. Finally, to seek all the ways possible, to
get out of this mire, and this miserable and cursed estate, where in they
be: and take those same means which shall be offered unto them, that they may
show that it was for no hypocrysy, that they desired of God delyuerance: if all
men would thus do their dyligence, I doubt not, but that our lord would work,
otherwise then he does, for to destroy all abhomynations and Idolatry, that
reign upon the earth. But because we feel not our mysery nor be not touched
with it, as we ought to be: but rather as indurate persons, do not pass upon
the matter / it is no marvel, that he does thus suffer us, so long to
corrupt, in our fylthines. It is to be feared, if we do not bethink us the
sooner, that he will let us root altogether therein.

Translated by R.G.
Matthew the.x. b Whosoever knowledgeth me before men, him will I knowledge also
before my father which is in heaven. But whosoever denies me before men, him
will I also deny, before my father which is in heaven.

Romans the.x. d If thou knowledgest Jesus with thy mouth / that he is the lord
/ and beleueste in thine heart that God has raised him from the dead thou shat
be sauid. For if a man believe from the heart / he shall be made ryghtuous: and
if a man knowledge with the mouth / he shall be saved. etc.


Imprinted at Ippyswiche by me Ihon Oswen the.x. day of August.

Cum priuilegio ad Imprimendum solum.


