THE Lectures or daily Sermons, of that Reverend Divine, D. John Calvin,
Pastor of the Church of God in Geneua, upon the Prophet Jonas, by N. B. Student
in Divinity.

Whereunto is annexed an excellent exposition of the two last Epistles of S.
John, done in Latin by that worthy doctor, August. Marlorate, and englished by
the same N.B.

Math. 12.39. An evil and adulterous generation, seeks a sign, but no sign
shall be given unto it, save that sign of the Prophet Jonas.

Jmprinted at London for Edward White, dwelling at the little North door of
Poules, at the sign of the Gunne. 1578.

To the right honorable Sir Fraunces Walsingham knight, chief Secretary to the
Queens most excellent Majesty, and of her Highness most Honorable privy
Counsel: And to the right worshipful Sir John Broket, of Broket Hall, and Sir
Henry Cock, Knights, N. B. Minister of the word of God in the town of
Ridborne, wishes grace and peace from God the father, through Jesus Christ.
THE first view of this small book may move you right honorable Sir, to deem
the same of small price if you mesure (as the common forte of men do) the
inward excellency by the outward appeara^ce. Which thing I confess, at the
first did some thing stay me from either the publishing or the exhibiting
thereof unto any manne: much less durst I presume to present the same unto the
sight of any honorable personage. But when I more deeply considered the
wisdom of godly men in our age, which judge not the conscience all together by
the coat, nor the book by the bynding, I then endeavored without casting any
more doubts, to make that common to others, which first I privately red for
mine own commodity. And truly if there be any thing that first moved me
thereto, the ignorance together with the vanity of many of our own people was
one, who being utterly unskillful of God and godliness, do yet apply their
minds to the vain delights of this flattering world, quite forgetting both
the justice of God which daily hangs over them, and death which continually
follows and suddenly strikes them, yea, and eternal destruction which
gapeth wide for them, and hops in the end to swallow them. It grieved me to
see what baits are laid for them by the world, death, and hell, (as pride of
life, and contempt of gods word) of purpose to entangle both their souls and
bodies. As touching pride of life, I need not speak much thereof, it is to
manifest. What man ^eeth it not? Esai. 1. Mich. 3. Romans 8.
who is he almost that is not infected with it? what nation is void of it? do
not heaven and earth and all creatures groan and grieve at it? do not all good
men bewail it, preachers cry out of it, and God ready to punish it? yes
verily. As for contempt of gods word, is it not in most places found. Are not
the ministers contemned, their preachings discredited, and their ministry
skorned by papists and Ruffians, and old cutters, called lusty and tall
fellows, who can swear out a matter at a pinch, and blaspheme the sacred name
of God most horribly? Are not profane Comedies and tragedies (most of them
being monstrous lies) with great pomp celebrated, when the holy word of God
the food of our souls (being preached) ought with reverence to be heard?
Amos. 8. Mat. 4.
it is certainly true. We have right honorable in many places the tables and
tennis in steed of the Testament, the cards in steed of the Catechism, the
boules in steed of the Bible: yea and that more is, men think they have made a
very good change. We see some men bestow their time in writing, some in
printing, and mo men in reading of vile and blasphemous, or at lest of prophan
and frivolous books, such as are that infamous lege^d of K. Arthur (which with
shame enough I hear to be newly imprinted) with the horrible acts of those
whoremasters, Lancelot du Lake, Tristram de Liones, Gareth of Orkney, Merlin,
the lady of the Lake, with the vile and stinking story of the Sangreal, of king
Peleus, etc. some again study the lives of Huon of Bordeaux, and king Oberon,
the king of the Fairies, of Valentine and Orson, and the lady Cleremond, with
the Iuggler Paccolet and king Trumpert, and the giant Ferragus: and the lives
of the four sons of Aymon, with the worthy acts of Oliver and Rouland,
Guichard and Richard: some are expert in Beuis of Hampton that notable man,
with the death of Boniface, Arundel and Trunchifice: some in the court of
Venus, some in the Iestes of Skoggen the kings dizzard: some in the subtleties
of Howleglas, and Garagantua: some again (and to many) in the pestilent
policies of that Mahound Matchiauile: in the puddle of pleasure, and Folist of
histories, and such like, which do manifestly show that gods word is either
shamefully neglected, or despitefully condemned. For if any good book be
written, it lies in the printers hands, smally regarded, seldom enquired
after: so that the printer is scarce paid for the paper that goes to the
book. And this makes many printers which seeks after gaynes, to take in
hand rather those things that are profitable to the purse (though they be
ridiculous) and so satisfy men's humors, then to printe without profit those
books that be godly: which being once printed, serve for nothing else but for
waste paper, acceptable to very few. It could not therefore but grieve me, to
see those enemies of mankind, the World, Death, and Hell, so prevail by their
flattering illusions, that they have drawn after them the most part of the
people at this day, yea and sought in time past, even in my youngest years, to
have taken me in those their nets together for company. Whereupon, Ephe. 6.
I determined amongst others, to give them one blow more with the sword of the
spirit, the word of God, according to my duty, calling, and profession, and to
ring the Alarm bell together, with all godly preachers, unto our sleepie country
men, aduertising them of the approaching of our deadly foes long ago descried
by the sermons and writings of the Martirs. Once before this time I attempted
by mine own book lately published, to abandone the security of this our
nation: the Lord grant that it has any thing awaked them. But now the second
time I have caused that Divine Doctor of the Church, John Calvin, the Lords
vigilant watchman, even in our own tongue to sound the trumpe, if by this
means either he or I may give them warning before their fall, to eschew these
baytes of wily Satan, who knows whether the Lord by this means will open
the eyes of some men to see their own sins and to be sorry for the same? But
if they be never the better, but rather the blynder, my conscience is
discharged, and these few lines shall be unto their consciences a witness, that
they are from henceforth with out excuse before the throne of God: And I fear
there will be denounced against them the judgments of God, The things that
may in this book be found.
that it shall be more easy for the land of Catha^a at the last day, then for
them. For in this discourse they might see:

First, the sins of Nineveh, and in it their own sins. 2 Again, the mercy
of God in sending Jonas unto the Ninevites, being heinous offenders, and
thereby see that the Lord is also merciful unto themselves, that he warns
them of their fall by his preachers.

3 Then the disobedience of Jonas and his punishment, To what end God punishes
his Children.
and thereby may they see a lively image of the fall of Gods children unto
sin, and Gods justice even upon his servants, to the end to reclaim them,
and not to condemn them.

4 Also they might see here the working of gods spirit in Jonas, being in the
bottom of the sea, and his delivery, and thereby might they learn, that God by
punishing his servants, makes them more strong, and tries their faith, and
when they cry unto him, he delivers them out of all their troubles.

5 And so again might they see how severely Jonas preached unto the Ninevites,
(having no commission to entreat of Gods mercy unto them) and yet that kind of
preaching wrought in them repentance, being the very end why God sent Jonas
unto them (although Jonas considered it not) and also gods mercy in pardoning
their sins. And by this might they learn, that though God speak angerly
unto us, yet he never speaks so, but for our profit, and will surely pardon
our iniquities, if we from the heart repent us of the same.

Lastly they might see how Jonas being once forgeuen, yet eftsoone offended
more grievously, yea, and murmured against God, and yet God vanquished him with
reason, and of his great mercy forgave him also that his sin. And by this
might they learn how frail the children of God are, if they be not still
governed by gods spirit, and how merciful God is unto those that be his, with
many other things most necessary for all men. If they therefore neglect or
contemn these things, let them know that they neglect the very word of the
lord and their salvation, and so purchase to them selves eternal death. The
lord therefore for his mercy sake, heal their blind eyes, and help their
unbelief. Now right honorable, if I be asked what moved me to dedicate these
my labors unto you: I must needs answer that the sweet and comfortable
matter therein contained, (whereof I know your honor will be a willing
partaker) and the good liking that you have had always of M. Caluines works,
together with my duetifull remembrance of your honors friendship to me
sometime showed, would have forced me (if I had been of my self unwilling)
humbly to have submitted this work unto your honorable tuition (being the
Lectures of M. Calvin most nere his sermons) upon the prophet Jonas, by me now
(at the earnest suit of some of my dear friends) turned into our English
tongue. The gift I confess is but small, but I desire your honor to accept it
in good part, as the gift of him that remains still (notwithstanding this)
bound unto you. And as touching you, right worshipful knights and Christian
gentlemen, many causes there be, why you also should be partakers of these
fruitful sermons or lectures. The one is to the end, that since the most
part of you have heard my lectures or readinge upon Joshua, Daniell, Jonas
and Malachie you might also by readinge this book, call to remembrance, to
your comfortes, some of the things which then you heard at my mouth.
Another cause is, that excellent doctrine of the prophet Jonas not unmeet for
your callinges: and again the great study which you have to further and
promoote the glory of god: And further your manifoulde frinshipes unto me
declared at sundry times, as well in defending the truth by me uttered, and in
studiyng to benefit me both in your words and deeds, as also your daily
desires to do me good, as well openly to me protested as secretly intended, I
omit now other causes contentinge my self with these few, which certainly
ought to bind any Christian that knows you, and is like ease bound unto you
as am I, (and again is of ability) to dedicate his labors unto you alone*
which though I have not done, yet am I parswaded that you will (according to
your good natures) take the matter well, as it was by me mente, to this end,
that sith you are joined together in this work with a man of honor (whom I
know both you love and honor in the Lord) you will also join together with him
in following the gospel, and defending the same, at al times when it shall have
need, and also make accounte of me to be always ready, when the Lord shall
give me occasion, to testify with all humility and reverence of your
worshipful good wills, unto me showed, as well in other of my works, as in
this. Thus therefore Right honorable and worshipful, for this time I end,
making my prayers unto God for you, that as he has by his providence caused
your names by me his servant to be mentioned in the preface to this one book,
so he will also vouchsafe, to link you all together in perfect frinship the
bond of perfection, and increase his graces in you, mainetaine your estates
and bliss your callinges, houlde up your houses and advance your seats in
this Israel of god, to the benifit of the church, to the joy of the Queens
most excellence majesty; (who as god long continewe amoungst us) to the
terror of the wicked, and the encoraging of the godly, and finally to your
own eternal comfortes Amen. From my house in Ridborn this 22. of January.
1577*

Your Honors and Worships most humble in the Lord Christ. Nath. Baxterus.

Baxters complaint, with an admonition to the Reader.
TO see the Dove of Architas, being all of woodde to fly,
To hear Albertus brazen head to speak effectually.
To view with aegiptian Arnuphus, with wings the clouds to pierce
To see a Rock fall from the Sun; as Pliny does rehearse,
To see a deadly Corpse, by man calde out of griezely grave,
To see these things or ^yke to these, how many should we have.
In thronging troops of each estate, with winged feet to haste,
In pompous pride on earthly sights, their golden times to waste?
What youthful dame, what man, what child, does stick ye path to tread?
Which unto pleasures flattering sightes; the ready way does lead?
But to thy sacred shrine to fly, O love celestial king,
What slouthful steps, what lingering haste, what lazy waltering wing
What drousie sleep does close the eyes of men of each degree,
What long delays these days are made, when men should com to thee?
What farms are bought and must be seen, what wives are married eke,
What lets almost in all men are, when they thy grace should seek?
O sovereign God, thou know how men in earthly things did toil,
To find out Arts and handycraftes, with pain in every soil.
For Menno he first Letters found, among Th'Egiptians,
And Rhadamanthus did the like among Th'Assyrians.
And Letters for the Romans, first Nicostrata did find,
And Phaenices the like for Greeks first found by studious mind:
And Grammar first that royal art, by learned Crate was shown,
Eke Poetry by Homer first, and Hesiod were known:
And Zenophon that worthy wight, first wrote an Hyssorie,
And Rhetorike that glyttering Dame, was found by Mercury:
Yea gladsome Musicks sovereign found, that Hebrew Iubal brought,
And treasures of Philosophy, were first by Vulcan sought.
Eke Atlas and Prometheus first found Astrology,
In Physic eke Apollo shyned, and Aesculap in Surgerie:
Thus ganne the world, though for a time as in a novelty,
The troublous gulfes of arts and skylles, to seek with ardencie.
So that Pythagoras and Democritus, these iourneyes took in hand,
From Greece to sail to Egypt and to Persea, and Calde Land:
To know some worthy strataugem, to search the secret skyll,
Of learned arts, whereof they had their long desired fill:
The Athenians they first planted Trees, the Phrigians Chariots made,
Aristeus, Oil and H^nny found, Phaenicians Crosbowe trade,
The Samian Theodor first found keys, and Jason Shyps to sail,
By Ericthonius Silver first was found for man's avail:
And Gold was found by Cadmus first, and Copper, Lead, and Brass,
By learned wit of Cinira (^ee) first invented was.
Yea Danaus first dug Wells, and Bacehus found out Wine,
And Corn first Ceres fought to sow, to stop the hungerie pine.
With painful toil thus men found out, these things Terrestrial,
But ignorance did blind their eyes, in things Celestial.
For we do see,
Diagoras and Theodor denied God to be:
The Sun and Moon, and Stars, were Gods as judged Aleine,
Parmenides thought God to be as cyrcle all of light,
Calde Stephanen, Cleanthes thought God was an ayrie spright,
Crisippus terms God to be Divine Necessity,
And Aristotle calls God Mental Divinity.
And as they er'de concerning God in definition,
So erred they as touching God in constitution.
For lo:
When mortal men did once offend, by original corruption,
They thought by Sacrifice to Devils to get remission:
Unto Mineru an Owl they gave, an Heart unto Dian,
A Sow to Ceres offered they, to Venus eke a Swan.
The wakefull Cock they sacrifizde to Aesculap^as,
To Fannus Goats, to Neptune Bulls, the Ass to Priapus.
To Mars the Pie they sacrifizde, the Phaenix to the Sun,
To Juno, Pluto, Pallas, and to others like was down.
And hoped by their sacrifice, the direful furious rage,
Of Gods conceyude against their sin, to mitigate and ^^^age.
No God, no Christ, no death of Christ for man's redemption,
No ways but such knew they, to purge their vile corruption:
In sacred sink of dreadful death, all plunged in myserie,
In gulf of hell, in mornefull plaint, in pinching penury:
O woeful wights therefore they devil, with ^^ndes in da^^ued state,
With wayling tears and gnashing teeth, to morn their ^^full fate.
O mortal wights in these our days, that made this rusticke verse,
With diligence attend unto, the words which I rehearse.
Consider well,
That learning wanted not in the^, if thereby they might know,
Whence mercy grace and pardon for offenses all did flow,
But mighty love had ^losde their (...) and would not grant there grace,
With penitence to vewe themselves and see their sinful case.
And so with fixed minds hold fast our Christ the appointed mean.
Who by his preciouse death has made repentaunt sinners clean:
Again behold your joyful time how Christ to you is shown,
Who unto the Philosophers was utterly unknown.
For if he had been known to them: sith they such labor took,
With paynefull toil to travail far to read each human book,
Which treated of Philosophy and moral virtues ^aught.
And fram'de their lives accordingly, would they have set at naught.
That preciouse geme and Jewel ritche of life celestial?
They would have made it certainly their joy continual.
They would have took it thankefully: yet we contemn the same,
And spend our time in tryfling toys, to our perpetual shame:
We do delight in Matcheuile his cruel pollecie,
And read the book of Arthurs knights being full of Papistrye.
And Guy of Warwick, Scoggins gests, and Gargantua,
The court of Venus, Howleglasse, Legenda Aurea:
And watsoeuer book com'th forth of lies or tales profane,
(Yea though it teach mere blasphemy the name of God to stain)
By mortal man's invention, if it once printed be,
The same most men of each estate desirouse are to see:
O: this they like, they praise his wit that first this fable fram'de,
They like his style, commend his vain, A Poet he is nam'de,
They paynte his praise in siluered leaf, each man his book will buy,
They say: Lo here a famous work croun'de with eternitye,
But if to write some sacred book some one (...) bends his evil.
Tushe (says the world) we her^eache day in Church of this our ^ll,
We ^a^e not (...) these ^er^^ use works, ha'^e and history,
New (...) books, pleasant conceyts, or any Poetry.
Well, well, (...) grant (...) to see what book is best to read,
That we to perpetuity she (...) way may tread.
Leave of to crave the sight of books which lead to vanity,
Seek how to bring your sinful souls to immortality:
This, Calvin shows in Jonas here translated for your sake,
It is but small: the sooner then to made it undertake.
FINIS.
Marsilius. Beat viuere est ^erum intelligere consultare been, velle bonum,
agere bona.
Doctor John Calvin upon the Prophet Jonas.
The prayer that Master Calvin used at the beginning of his Lectures.
The Lord grant unto us to be occupied in the Mysteries of his heavenly
wisdom, with true increase of Religion unto his glory; and our edifying.
Amen. WHat time Jonas exercised the office of a teacher, may after a sort be
gathered out of the 14. Chapter of the second Book of the Kings. For certain
it is that this was he, whom the holy scripture in that place does name:
because expressie he is called the son of Amittai. For there it is said that
Jeroboam the son of Ioas enlarged the bounds of the kingdom, from the
entrance into Hemath, unto ye Sea of the wilderness, according to the word of
Jonas the servant of God, the son of Amittai, which was borne in Geth. It
follows therefore, that then or a little before, this Jonas prophesied. And
certain it is, that not only was he sent unto the Nineuites, but among the
people of Israel also he held the room of a Prophet or Teacher. And the same
thing which I say, seems he to grant at the beginning of this Book, even
that he was an ordinary Prophet in Israel, because he begins with a
Conjunction copulative. etc. saying: And the word of the Lord came to Jonas.
So also sometime speaks the holy Chosse: But I do not doubt but Jonas
signifies that he was called from his accustomed office, and a new prophecy
enjoined him. viz: that he might deuounce unto the Nineuites their destruction
even at hand, as hereafter we shall perceive. Now therefore it is to be
holden that Jonas taught among the Israelits, and this to be commanded him by
the Lord, that he should go down to the Nineuites. But of this
commandment in due order we shall see more: it is sufficient to hold this
that he was not at that only time created a Prophet, when he was appointed a
Teacher to the Nineuites. But that he was then sent to the Nineuites, when as
long time he had bestowed his labor in the service of God and his Church. This
book is partly Historical, and partly instruction, or didascalye^. For he
declares what came to pass unto him after that he would fly from the
calling of God: and afterward, also what was the effect or end of his
Prophecy: and all this is one part. But in the mean time he shows what
kind of doctrine he was commanded to deliver, or carry to the Nineuites: In
the end he writes a song of thanksgeuing. Therefore this later part
contains the doctrine, and is not a simple narration only, Now I come to
the words.

Chap. 1.
Jonas seems here (as I have touched already) covertly to note that he was
before this time called to the office of teaching: for that, after that sort he
speaks, as if he compiled this History together with his ordinary function.
The word of God therefore began not only to come to Jonas when he was sent
to Nineueh, but when he was an ordinary Prophet, the Lord would also
transfer his labor to other Nations. But that he was sent unto Nineueh: it
might be that the Lord, werie of the obstinacy of his own people, would
show an example of godly docilitie, in a profane and incircumcised Nation,
whereby he might make the Israelites the more inexcusable. They outwardly gave
honor to true piety: they bosted that they were a holy people. Circumcision
was unto them a token and pledge of the covenant of God: yet despised they all
the Prophets, that teaching with them might be unprofitable. It is therefore
propable, that the Prophet was taken away from them, that the Nineuites with
their example might augment the crime of the people of Israel, for that in
three days they were converted unto God, after that Jonas preached there. But
with the Israelites and their Gentiles, nothing long time he profited, when as
yet sufficiently was his authority established, and that unto their profit
as we have said of late. For Jonas prophesied that the kingdom of Israel as
yet should continue: although they were worthy to perish, the Lord yet
performed that which he had spoken by the mouth of his servant. They ought
therefore to have embraced his doctrine, not only because it was of God, but
also because the Lord would have it to be amiable unto them. And I truly
do not doubt but that the ingratitude of the people by this means was
increased, seeing that the Nineuits repented at the voice of Jonas, and that in
short time: but the Israelites always continued hardened in their
stubbornness. And therefore certain men more subtly then wyselie, do
expound this place of Math. 12. This perverse generation seeks a sign, and
there shall no sign be given unto it, but the sign of the Prophet Jonas:
thus they say, that the Gospel should be transported unto the Gentiles, even
as Jonas was led away from his own Nation, and given a Teacher unto
foreign and profane Nations. And under that they will have to lie hidden the
calling of the Gentiles many years to come: as if Christ said that he would
after come to the Gentiles, when he had proved the desperate wickedness of his
elected people. But because Christ plainly applies the simylitude: it is
not our part this way or that way, to draw his words. And he restrains the
figure to this one sense, that is: even as Jonas, was three days in the bellye
of the Whale: so must he be three days in the bowels of the earth, as if he
should say, that in this he will be like unto Jonas, because he shall be a
revived Prophet. And this thing said Jesus advisedly, because he perceived
both him self to be contempned of the Jews, and his labor unto them to be
unprofitable. Seeing that at this time now you give no ear unto me, neither
get I among you any estimation, hereafter will I be a new Prophet, that is:
after the resurrection, so then will I begin to speak more effectuously,
as well with the Jews, as with the Gentyles, even as Jonas converted Nineueh,
when he was returned to life. This is therefore the plain meaning of this
place: Therefore was not Jonas a figure of Christ for that he was sent away
unto the Gentiles, but because after three days he was revived, when he was in
a manner a dead man. Whatsoever it be we see that Jonas is appointed a Teacher
to the Nineuits, after that some while he had exercised the office of a
Prophet among the people of Israel. They which say that then was made a show
of the calling of the Gentiles, yet to come, they bring some thing plausible,
or to be borne with: but they seem not to use sound reason, for this was an
extraordinarye thing. Therefore not as yet did God manifestly show, what
thing he would do by the coming of Christ: 2. King. 5. ver. 15.
Even as when Naaman the Syrian was converted unto the faith, and a few
others, God then altered nothing in the accustomed order. For always there was
a special calling of the generation of Abraham, and always Religion was shut
up within his ancient bounds: Psalm. 147. ver. 20.
and always this was certain that God dealt not so with other Nations, as
with the Jews, because he revealed not unto them his judgments. God therefore
until the coming of Christ would have the adoption of the generation of
Abraham continue fyrme and sure, so that the Jews might excel, above all
other people, and might differ in this free privilege or prerogative, that
they might be a people holy and elect. But the Authors contrary opinion, do
say, that the Nineuits were turned unto the Lord without cyrcumcision: that
is true, but I know not whether their conversion were true and right, of the
which mention shall be made hereafter: and then of that matter I will,
God-wylling, more at large entreat. But this seems rather probable, that the
Nineuits were so touched with the rebukes and threatninges of the Prophet,
that humbly they besought God to auerte his indignation. God then once forgave
them: what after came to pass it evidently appears not. Truly, it is not
lykelie that all the whole City was converted unto God. For immediately after,
that Cttie was very hurtful, as well to the Israelites, as to the Jews, and
with continual destructions, was the Church of God afflicted by the Nineuits:
and seeing it is so certainly, it wants all likelihood or coulor of truth,
that they truly repented from the heart. But the full discourse of this
matter I leave to another place.

Let us go forward now in the text. Arise, go to Nineueh into that great
City. Nineueh is called a great City, and not unworthily, which was, as
profane writers testify, in compass about, 400. furlongs, and we shall see
that Jonas walked three whole days through the streets of the City, whereby
it follows that it was a most spacious City: and so it is agreed upon with
all writers. Profane writers call it Ninus, and say that this name was given
it by the founder thereof, because Ninus the son of Betus builded it. But
more truly judge they, which think it to be an Hebrew name. Then those
things which Herodotus and Diodorus, and the like do write, as well of
original of the City, as of the whole progress of the kingdom, are
certainly ^aygned, and those fables may with (...) all labor be refelled by
the testimonies of the sacred Scripture. And yet was this set forth by the
g^^er all consent of all men, that Nineueh was an ample and well defenced
City. Babylon was after builded by Semyramis, which was the wife of Betus:
She after the death of her husband, would declare that she also did excel
in courage and industry, and that she was not of a woman's disposition.

But as much as concerns the buylder of Nineueh, it is certain that City was
first builded by Assure: I know not whether it were augmented by Ninus. I leave
this therefore in the plain field, because I will not contend about a
doubtful matter, but certain it is the first beginner of this City by the
testimony of Moses was Assure. As Much as touches the greatness of the City:
Gene. 10. verse. 14.
although profane writers had never spoken word thereof, yet this testimony of
Jonas ought to satisfy us. But when he is commanded to arise and go to
Nineueh: the Lord gives now some hope of profit, even as also effectuouslie
he wrought by the hand of his servant Nahum: when he remained at home, he
prophesied against Nineueh: but by another advise, and to another end. For
because the people then were myserablie afflicted, and saw the Empire or
Monarchy to florishe in Assyria, they might have dispayred, had they not been
comforted. Nahum therefore shows that God will be Judge against the Nineuits:
and although for a time he do nourishe them and comfort them: yet the horrible
vengeance of the which he preached, he declared to be even ready to fall upon
them. Nahum therefore was not given as a Teacher to the Nineuits, but only a
foreshewer of Gods vengeance to fall upon them: that the Jews by this comfort
might fortify their faith, when they perceived that the Lord had not
altogether rejected them, but that he once would revenge their injuries. The
care of Jonas was otherwise. For he was sent into ye very City, that he might
move the Nineuites to repentance. Now, whereas the Lord spoke plainly of
the greatness of the City, by this meane^ he would arm his servant with
constancy, least he might be terrifyed with the gorgeousness, riches, and
force of that City.

For we know how hard a thing it is to undertake great and weighty charges,
cheefely when we perceive our (...) destitute of Abilytie. If we have to do^
with many and mighty adversaries, we are not only discoraged but even our
very spirits fail us. Therefore least the greatness of Nineueh might stryke a
terror into Jonas, he is in good time h^^re made ready and armed with constancy
hear says God: Go^ therefore to Nineueh, neither let the strength of that
Monarchy stay thee, (...) fulfilling my commandment, that is: that tho^^he
we^^ Nineueh their ^^^^^nesse, and denounce unto them their (...) except theyr^
pe^l^. Now therefore (...) to what end it was called Nineueh that great City:
neither ye^ for any other cause ought this to be spoken to Jonas* For I doubt
not but at that time the Israelites understand that the City was (...), and
also that it was (...) with strength, and a great multitude of men. But the
Lord would set before his servant eyes the thing that might stay him from
doing his duty* Go^ therefore (says God) into that great City: In fine, God
would by this manner try the mind of Jonas, whether he preferred his
commandment, before all the impediments of this world. And this is a true
trial of our obedience: when as we simplye obaye God, howsoever diverse
impediments do set them selves against us and do stop us, and no way to
escape do appear, but yet with shut eyes as it were we follow on whether God
sends us, and do not despair that he will give us strength: and that he
will reach forth his hand as often as ^^de shall require to the over coming of
all difficulties, the Lord would therefore thus deal with Jonas, as if he
should say, Cast in thy mind who I am, and he content with mine authority.
For if any thing hinder thee. I have remedie^ always ready in my hand (...)
yield thy self into my power a^de^e (...) the thing which I command ^hee
this in the same. Therefore as often as God requires any thing of us, and yet
we think either the thing to be impossyble or hard to be accomplyshed that
the some o^ duty does require, let this come into our minds that nothing is in
the world, what he ought not to yield to the (...) of God* it shall (...) to
pass, that we shall gather (...) spirits, and take (...) to us, neither shall
any thing (...) our right (...), although the whole world should resist^ God.
It follow the Cry against ^^, for the wickedness then to come before (...)
(...) against i^^* This (...) are lothesome (...) For we know that men in
their power are puffed up with pride. And seeing at that time there* was (...)
only Monarchy in the world, whose chief feate was Nineueh, scarce with
patient cares (...) any teacher be admitted with them, although he (...) in
(...) be^ with some exellency or had gotten: (...) also bring unto the^^
pleasant tidings. But Jonas (...) a for rai^er a man of base degree: without
authority: and beside that, even at the first he denounces destruction to the
Nin^^uit^, he eryeth against them, he chideth them, he (...) against them and
threa^^eth them: and (...) sooth we see them how hard was this commandment,
which God commands his Prophet to cry against the Nineuits. Moreover there
is: For their wickedness is come up before me. God by this parcel confirms
his servant Jonas: as if he said. There is no reason, that as a mortal man
thou should, brable with them? but I do appoint thee my messenger, that
thou may cite them before my throne. And this ought to have been of great
force to have animated Jonas, even for that he dealt not with the Nineuits as a
man, but as the messenger of God. And this also might bend their hearts, that
they might understand, although no mortal man could punish their
wickedness, yet that they could not escape the vengeance of God. This
therefore is the reason, why the Lord pronounces him self to be the Judge of
Nineueh. And also it admonishes: that although the Nineuits do flatter them
selves, and do bear now the plause and glory of the whole world, by reason
of their power: all this notwithstanding to be of no moment or force, because
in the mean time their sin and wickedness ascended into the heavens.
Therefore when we are rebuked, there is no reason, why we should turn our
eyes unto men hither or thither: but immediately we ought to offer our selves
to be examined of God: yea, we our selves ought to make of our selves a
voluntarye examination, which thing God of us requires. So shall it come to
pass, that we nourishe not our sins with wicked flatteries, as the
Hipocrites always look about on the right and left side, and never lift up
their senses into Heaven. Let us go forward.

Verse. 3. And Jonas rose up to fly, that he might flee,to Tharsis from the
face of the Lord, and he came down to Iapho, and he found a Ship which
passed over to Tharsis, and he paid the hyre, that is, the fare the price of
the carriage, and he went down into it that he might go with them, that is,
with the marchaunts or shypmen, into Tharsis from the sight of the Lord.

Jonas that he sought lurking hooles, that he might conueigh him self from the
obedience of God: not that he deceived him self with so manifest madness, as
though he should not be subject unto God, if he were on the other side the
Sea: but he would as it were flee the light of this present life, when he went
into a strange Region. Neither is it any doubt, but that he was not only of
a troubled mind, but plainly astonished, when he undertook such a devise.

The question is, why Jonas so fled from the commandment of God. The Jews,
as they couldlie tryfle in matters Divine, say that he feared, if he should
come to Nineueh, that he should be destitute of the spirit of prophecy: as
though the like danger were not, if he passed the Seas: this is to frivolous
and chyldishe. And again they feign a matter of no weight or importance,
seeing other reasons weighty enough, do yield them selves of their own
accord unto us. For this was strange and unaccustomed, the Prophet to be
taken away from the elect people, and sent to profane Nations. When Peter was
sent to Cornelius, Acts. 10.17
although he had been admonished before of the future calling of the Gentiles,
yet he doubts, and stays until by a vision, as it were with violence, he
were constrained. What therefore might come in mind to Jonas? if only for
one man, the mind of Peter was so quayled, that be thought it to be a
fantasy, where he was sent to be a teacher to Cornelius: when Jonas was sent
to Nineueh, to a City so populous, what might he think with him self?
Therefore the novelty of the matter without doubt might greatly shake the
mind of the holy Prophet, and make him, that void of counsel, he might
flee or conueigh him self else whether. This thing also distrust might cause.
For what hope had he, that that people could be converted, which did even
triumph in the lycenciousnesse thereof. For he had first tried the hardness
of the elected people: he was faithfully occupied in doing of his duty: he
had pretermitted nothing whereby he might establish the worship of God and true
piety in the people of Israel: but profited little: and yet the Jews were
called even from the womb. What then might he look for, when the Lord took
him away to the Nineuits? For there reigned unbridled lasciviousness, and
then was there extreme blindness: they had not at any time any taste of the
worshipping of God. Lastly, they were drowned in profounde darkness, and the
Devil reigned by all means, there. This distrust therefore might vex or
break the mind of Jonas, that he obeyed not the commandment of God. The
imbecilitie or weakness of the flesh might also hinder him, whereby he
followed not his lawful calling. He might reason thus? what? truly I shall
come into the principal seat of that Monarchy, which this day treads all
the earth under feet: I being a contemned and obscure: and moreover shall
bring a message full of hatred, which immediately shall stir up the minds of
men unto fury. What shall I say to the Nineuits? you are wicked men: God can
no longer suffer your impiety: therefore horrible vengeance is at hand unto
you. How shall I be entertained? Therefore Jonas might, being as yet environed
with the infirmities of the flesh, conceive fear in his mind, which might
cast away, or shake off from him the affection of obedience. And I doubt not
for my part, but Jonas pondered all these things with him self: for he was
not like a block. And this is not superfluous as I said before, that he
declared that City to be great. God truly was wylling to remove the offense:
but Jonas argues on the contrary part; I see sharp war shall come upon
me, yea an heap of troubles to invade me, which an hundred times might
ouerwhelme me: when the Lord not in vain foretold him of the greatness of
the City. And although he might conceive hope, if they were rebuked that they
would yield due honor unto God, yet he confesses that this comes as a let
into his mind, that he should not go forewarde in the course of his calling.
Therefore as well distrust, as fear of the flesh, did delay or stay Jonas: and
that novelty or strangeness, might even as I have said already, move him,
that he had rather as it were enter the grave, then to undertake that office,
God Commands things contrary to our reason, but he knows before to what
end.
which in a manner was void of all reason. For to what end are the Prophets
sent, but that they might profit somewhat by their labor, and might reap some
fruit: but Jonas hoped for no such thing. Moreover, to the Prophets is given
some authority, or at the least some liberty to teach. But Jonas thought
that al ways to enter were shut from him. And further, Jonas thought that this
was contrary to the covenant of the Lord. For he had chosen one only people
to him self: and now Jonas thought that he was as it were tied to one stake,
when he was ordained a Teacher in his own country. He could not therefore be
taken thence to another place, but he felt in him self great resistaunce. I
therefore think that Jonas obeyed not the commandment of God, partly
because the weakness of the flesh, partly the st^aungenesse of the case:
third lie, his despair of fruit or success of his doctrine were an
hinderaunce unto him. But now there is no doubt, but that he sinned or
offended greeuouslie. For the chief rule of all our actions is (...) follow
God, calling us. Although any man excel in princely virtues, yet vanishing
smooke shall all his virtues be, which shine before the eyes of men, unless
his intent be to obey God. The calling of God therefore as I have said,
holds the principality in the governing of man's life, and except we lay
that foundation, we do even like as if any man would build a house in the
air. Confused therefore shall be the whole order of our life, unless God help
and govern us, and as his workmanshyp to sustain us. Therefore when as Jonas
ouerturned the chief and certain foundation of good living, what could
remain? There is no reason therefore why we should extenuate his fault, because
he could not sin more heynously, then when he left God him self, even
because he submitted not himself unto his calling, this is as it were to shake
of the Lords yoke, the which thing he also confesses. Therefore they dote to
childishely, which will be his patrons or defendors, seeing that he twyse
accuses himself, as* Jonas rose up two flee from the face of the Lord, that
he might goo to Tharsis from the sight of the Lord. Why the second time
repeteth he might flee from the sight of the Lord. No doubt but that he would
here more plainly express his fault: and that the repitition is here full of
vehemency, or emphaticall. Moreover, that saying plainelye shows that it was
no small fault that Jonas fled to another place when he was sent to
Nineueh. For he could not depart from the Lords sight for God fills heaven
and earth: and as I have alredie said: he was not with so gross an error
bewitched, that he would think that he were out of the reach or hand of
God, when he was a fugitive. But what is it to free from the face of the Lord,
but that he here confesses, that he fled from the presence of God as though
he desired, as fugitive servant are accustomed, to reiecte the rule and
impery of his God? Since therefore Jonas was carried away with such violence:
there is not now why with any vain and frivolous cloak we should go about to
excuse his offense: this is one. As much as touches the name Tharsis or
Tharsia: I doubt not but yt it may be here taken for Cilicia: There be some
that think that ye City Tharsus is meant by it, but they are deceived. The
whole region therefore is noted by it. They which turn it, the sea, are
likewise deceived. For Jonas would not only mount upon the sea, but would
passover into Cilicia, which is right apposite to the sea of Syria. But the
Jews called that sea Tharsis, as by many places it may appear, because they
used very often to sail thither, and they seeing that, that region on the other
side the sea, was unto them more known then others were: (and moreover) also
because they carried thither, their marchandice, and again used their
companies: therefore called they the sea Tharsis, by reason of the neerenesse
thereof, as it is well known. Jonas would f^ee into Cilicia when the Lord
sent him to Nineueh, as he says: That he rose up that he might flee, moreover,
that he came down to Iapho, found there a chippe, which went over to
Tharsis, that he gave the price of his carriage over, that he went down into
the ship, that he might goo with them into Cilicia. Seeing that Jonas
sets down in order every one of these things, it does show that he was
fully settled in his purpose, and might not be withdrawn but with a violent
hand because in his Ior^aye he was not, touched with repentance. For there
may many things come into our minds when the calling of God seems too
burdenous unto us. There is none of us when obedience is to be performed unto
God, which casts not in his mind this or that thing: one thing or other,
either: what shall the end be: how wylt thou come thither as thou hopest to
come? See what dangers abide thee. For Satan always comes between,
as soon as we study to o^eye God: but there we strive: Moreover, we do repel
those things which we see to be contrary to our calling. But Jonas shows
that he was obstinate in that his devise of sleeing. Neither only would he
go down into Tharsis, but in deed he came to the City Iapho, which truly
is a near to Iewry, and therefore certain men think Tharsis to be Aphrica,
but that is too much ra^^ed: Others again guess it to be Thunet, or Carthage,
as though at that time those Cities were builded. These men are to hold to
blaze their dreams. But what need is it against the most received use of the
Scripture, to give i^ this word a new signification, sith it is evident
enough that Tharsis is Cilicia? But now when Jonas came down to Iapho* is
asmach as if he would strayte way depart out of the land of Judea, and take
him self to the Sea: yet when he says that he paid the fare, that he came
down into ship, that he might go, etc. Since he by degrees proceeds, as
already I have said, he accuses evidently his own obstinacy: even that he
did not only admytte that froward cogitation: to refuse the calling of God,
but also confyrmed him self in his contumacie: and when as many things which
came in the way, might constrayne him some thing to stay, yet always
followed he, whether that perverse and blind violence did carry him. It is
no doubt, but Jonas by plain words expresses, not only that he was a
fugitive: but also that he was so by diverse means. Now as much touches the
flight, dyligently that is to be marked which I have spoke before: that they
flee from the sight of God, whosoever do not willingly obey his
commandments: not that they can depart far away from him, but that as much
as in them lies, they will shut up God in certain strayghtes or narrow
places, and so exempt them selves from his power and hand. No man verelie
confesses thus much openly, but the matter it self shows notwithstanding,
that no man departs from the commandments of God, but is wylling to
deminish and take from him his rule or imperie, that he might rule or govern
no more. Whosoever therefore wyllingly submytte not them selves to God, do
even as if they turned their backs to him, and refuse his government, least
any more they should be subject to his power and might. This is to be noted,
that even as Jonas here showed him self guilty before all the world, so by
his example he would declare how heinous and detestable a crime it is, not to
receive the commandments of God, and to undertake what he commands.
Again, even as to eschew the government of God, augmenteth haynousnesse of
his offense: by his example he declares that we can not be rebels unto God:
but covertly we would pluck him from his throne, and so shut him up within
some straights, that he may not contain by his government, both heaven and
earth.

The Prayer.
Grant O almighty God, seeing that unto us, which were far from al hope of
Salvation, thou have not sent any Jonas: but thine own Son have thou given
to be a Teacher unto us, which might openly show unto us the way of salvation,
and not only with terrors and threatenings call us to repentance, but gently
might allure us to the hope of life everlasting, and might be a pledge of thy
fatherly love: Grant I say, that we refuse not so notable a grace offered unto
us, but that willingly and from the heart we may obey thee. And also though
hard does seem the condition, which thou in thy Gospel layest before us, and
though the enduring of ye cross be grievous to our flesh, grant that we may
never turn our backs, but may obey thee, offer our selves up in Sacrifice, and
al lets of this world being overcome, we may go foreward in the course of thy
holy calling, till at the length we may be gathered into that thy heavenly
kingdom, the same Christ thy son our Lord, being our guide. Amen.

Verse. 4 And the Lord sent a great wind upon the Sea, and there was made a
great tempest in the Sea, and the ship thought to be broken.

Jonas after what sort he was violently drawn back of the Lord, when he
endeavored to conueighe him self from his face. He says therefore, that, There
arose a great tempest in the Sea. But he also expresses that the tempest was
not raised by chance* as profane men are accustomed to attribute whatsoever
comes to pass, unto Fortune. The Lord (says he) sent a great ^inde upon
the Sea, f^^n turn it. God raised from, N^tal. But more rightly do^ others
deduct it from the root, T^l: and we shall see a little after in the, 5. verse.
the same word. Now touching the sum of the m^ster, he says: That there was
a great tempest, in so much that the ship was at the very point of breaking.
For this speech: The Ship though^ to be broken, agrees to the propriety of
our language, Ia^auire ^^idoit pe^ir. For where some take the ship, for the
shypmen or Mariners: that is to far fetched: and we know that in many ^^^es
of speech, our mother tongue agrees with the Hebrew. Now therefore Jonas
signifies that the tr^^pest rose not by chance, but by the certain counsel
of God, even that he being taken upon the Sea, might know that he was
deceived, when he thought that he might escape the sight of God after he had
passed the Sea. And though here the Prophet makes me (...) but of one only
tempest. From he^re notwithstanding generally is it lawful to gather that
neither storms, nor yet other (...) of the air, which either engender rain,
or else styerre up tempests in the Sea, happened not by chance, but that both
heaven and earth are so ruled (...) about, that nothing can come to pass,
unless from thence it be both forseene and decreed.

But if any man will object, that it was not agreeable to reason, that for the
fault of one man, so many men should suffer shypwracke, or be tossed with
that violent tempest: the answer is easy, that although God properly
respected Jonas, yet were there other hydden causes why also of good right he
might enwrappe others in the same danger. That is probable, that many men at
that time sailed on the sea: for that one ship only was not in the Sea,
seeing there were so many parts, and also many (...). But although the Lord
enwrapped many men in the same punishment, whereas he would persecute but
only one man: yet never is he destitute of cause, why every one of us, yea
even him that seems most innocent, he may call into his judgment. And the
Lord marueylouslie works in the governing of men. Therefore were it a wicked
thing to measure his works by our capacity, because God might punish one man
to the end that he may abase and make others lowly, others again he
chasteneth for their manifold offenses: again, by punishment he tries the
patience of others.

So therefore are the mouths of profane men stopped, least they should brawle
against God as often as he requires his judgments, that they agree not to our
fleshly judgments. But of this matter more at large strayte way, I will
entreat. Because every where in the Scriptures examples do occur, that God
has taken vengeance of the whole people, when notwithstanding one man alone
has offended. But if any be murmr, and exempt them selves as innocents,
always shall a cause be found, which shows that God is not cruel toward
them, but rather if it please him, he might with just cause handle them more
sharply: fynallye, when as God seems, as without cause, to be severe
toward man, yet spares he them, and deals with them favorably. Now let
us go forward.

Verse. 5. And the Shypmen feared, and cried out every man unto his God, and
they cast forth the vessels, which were in the Ship, into the sea, that the
Ship might be lyghtened of them. But Jonas went down into the sides of the
Ship, and laid him down, and slept.

Jonas here in order follows so many circumstaunces, for that, as we shall see
anon, he would make manifest his sluggishnesse, and set it out before our
eyes in the right colors thereof: But this comparison which lies hidden in
the circumstances, does make much notable ye careless, yea almost, brutish
security of Jonas. First he says, That the shipmen feared, then that they
cried, even, every one of them to his God: and that they cast out also into
the sea the loading of the ship. When they therefore were al thus careful,
was not this a monsterous thing, that Jonas for whom the Sea was troubled, thus
does sleep? Some are diligent and careful, they ran about the ship, they
spoil themselves of all their riches, to the intent they might safe come to
the haven, for they had rather make them selves destitute and naked of al their
goods, then to perish: and eke they cry to their Gods. But that Jonas made
none accounte of these things, yea that sluggishely he lies, whence comes
so great negligence, but that not only he was in a dead sleep, but that he
seems deprived both of all reason and sense? it is no doubt therefore but
Jonas for this respect reckneth up so many circumstaunces, he says, The
shipmen feared, and we know that Mariners are not accustomed to be terrified
with small and usual storms: for they are a hard kind of men: and are the
less fearful for that they daily see diverse motions in the air. When as
therefore he says, that the shypmen feared: here hence we gather that it was
no mean tempest, which so terrifyed them, being men by long use and experience
accustomed to all kind of storms. Well, they then which before were hardened,
were now stricken with fear. After that he adds that, Every one cried unto
his God. Jonas certainly should not have slept so soundly, but might have waked
himself almost every moment. For he carried in his heart his own tormentour,
when he perceived himself to be a fugitive. For we have spoken before, that it
was no light offense, that Jonas conueighed himself from the face of God,
contempned his calling, and as much as in him lay, cast of the yoke, that he
would not obey God. When as therefore Jonas of so great wickedness was guilty
in his own mind: ought he not being a sleep to tremble and fear? And
again, while other men do cry unto false Gods: he yet either despises, or at
the least neclecteth the true God, toward whom he knew him self to be a
rebel and dissobedient. Hitherto tends the comparison or Antithesis. But in
the mean time we see, how that in peryls, men are constrained to call upon
God. For although a certain perceyueraunce, or sense of the Divine essence be
engendered in our hearts, so that every man, will he, ^yll he, perceyueth that
there is a certain Godhead: yet by our malice choke we that light, which
should shine in us: For wyllingly do we reject all cares, and heaviness, and
wyshe good unto our selves: as though tranquillity were unto men the principal
benefit or chiefest goo^. Hereby comes it to pass, that every man desires
without fear and ^are to live, and therefore naturally all men desire to be
secure and safe. Now secoritie brings forth contempt, from hence therefore
comes it is pass that no Religion almost appears in the world^, where God*
leaves us in idleness. Fear compels vnwylling man to come unto God.
Wickedlie ^^dly; says one, that fear is the cause of Religion, and was the
original cause why men thought that there were Gods: also it is altogether
contrary to common sense and experience. But Religion, which was either well
wye extincted, or at the least overwhelmed in the hearts of men, is raised and
styrred up by dangers. Of this matter Jonas brings for the notable example,
when he says: That the Shipmen cried unto their Gods. We know how rude that
kind of men be: therefore gladly would they drive from them selves all feeling
of gladness: and in very deed they shifts of all fear, and mock even God
him self, as long as they may. That they therefore cry unto the Gods:
certainly, very urgent necessity extorted this at their hands. And hereby
gather we how profitable it is for us to be disquieted by fear: because if we
were in safety, immediately a dead steeple would reepe upon us, as it is too
well, or more then enough known. And seeing that no man almost of his own
accord comes to God, we have need of prickings forward. But God earnestly
or sharply pricketh us forward, when he lays any dangers against us,
whereby we are constrained to fear. But by this means, as I have already
said, does he solycite us, because that we see every one to wander and to
vanishe away in their luskishnesse: therefore draws he back vnwylling men
unto him.

But Jonas says not simply, that each man cried unto God, but also adds,
Unto his God. Even as therefore this place teaches, that by necessity men are
constrained to seek God: so also on the other side he shows that the same
men, unless they be governed by the celestial doctrine, and then also by the
spirit of God, do err in the seeking of God. There shall be therefore in men
a certain study, but it shall be erroneous, because no man can keep the right
way, except the Lord dyrect them by his word and spirit, as is aforesaid.
Both these things do we gather out of the words of the Prophet. The Shipmen
feared, being rough fellows, and almost as hard as iron, which like a Cyclop
tontempne God, They feared (says he) and cried unto God: but they cried not,
having faith for their directrix or guide, and hence came it to pass that each
man cried to his own God. When we read this, let us first of all consider,
that we ought not to wait, till God violently constrain us, but must prevent
this last extremity that we of our own accord may seek him. For what
profited it these Mariners or other Sailors, that once they cried unto God?
for it is cre^yble that a little after they reuoulted to their profane
ne^lygence: when they had escaped that peril, afterward they laughed at God,
and all Religion also was of them contempned. And so is it accustomed to happen
to men profane, which never s^bmitte them selves unto God, except they be
thereunto compelled. Therefore let every one of us of his own accord offer
him self unto God, yea, even while we be out of danger, and do enjoy
chiefest quietness. For if we imagine that any pretense of unadvisedness, or
of error, or folly may be objected of us, we are far deceived, because no
excuse shall be admitted, seeing that experience does teach that the knowledge
of God is naturally grafted: and again, this principle to be engraven in all
men, that God governs our life, that he only may deliver us from death, that
it is his proper office to succor us and to help us. For how can it come to
pass that these Mariners cried unto God? Came there thither any new Teacher
which might preach unto them of godlynes, and which in order might show God
to be the delyuerer of mankind? No verily: But already this thing, as I have
said, by nature was imprinted in their hearts.

The Sea being calm, none of them called upon God: but even very danger
chaseth away this drowsinesse from them. By this it sufficiently appears,
whatsoever excuse they take which unto God yield not his glory, that the same
shall be frivolous and vain, because there needs not any law, there is no
need of Scriptures, there is no need finally, of any doctrine, that men may
perceive their life to be in the hand of God, that salvation of him only is
to be required, as we have already said. For invocation it self, bears
record that men are so persuaded of God. For invocation or calling upon,
comes not from any other place, then from a certain secret instinct, and
thereunto nature being truly guide and maistresse. This is one thing. But in
the mean time also we may learn out of this place, that so often as God is
to be sought of us, we must not trust to our own wit, because we shall
immediately err. God therefore is to be desired, that he govern us with his
word, for otherwise all men shall flow headlong to their own superstitions,
even as we see here every man to cry to his peculiar God.

And further the Prophet admonishes here, that the multitude of Gods was not
hatched of late. For always men were prone to lying and vanity after the fall
of Adam, we know what great corruption possesses our minds, so that every one
faygneth to him self horrible wonders. Seeing it is so, it is no maruayle that
superstitions have always raunged in the world, because the wit of man is
the workehouse of all errors. And herehence again we may gather that which I
touched of late, that nothing is more wicked, then to follow the motions of our
flesh, because every one will cast him self further into error, yea without
any impulsion of others, and sometime one draw another, even as it is
customably seen. Now he adds that: The vessels were cast forth. That is,
the loadings of the ship, according as we see this to be the last refuge in
shypwracks, even that men for life sake do wyllingly spoil themselves of al
their riches, and here also we see how precious man's life is to him, which
sticks not to strip him self naked of all his goods, least he should
perish. Truly we flee poverty, and many purchase death unto them selves,
because poverty is unto them intolerable. But, when they come into some
extreme danger, always men prefer their own lives before all their
rytches. For what are all the goods of this world, but even a certain
accident to our life? But Jonas to another purpose declares the Ship to be
unburdened, even that we may know that this was no common tempest, but when
the Shipmen were even at deaths door, they used this last remedy. Now
follows that other member, which is: that Jonas descended into the sides of
the Ship, or side, and Lay down and slept. There is no doubt but that
Jonas sought some secreete place before the tempest rose: When as therefore
they losed from the Haven Jonas departed into some secreete corner, that he
might sleep there. But this security in him was not excusable, for when he
knew him self to be a fugitive from the face of the Lord, he ought therefore
to have been tossed with continual terrors: yea, he himself ought to have been
ye exact or of his own care. But even so it oftentimes falls out when a man
has gotten squylking hooles, that at the length he induces upon him self
almost a brutishe astonishment, he thinks upon nothing, he cares for
nothing, he is troubled with nothing.

Such a luskishnesse therefore had invaded the mind of Jonas when he went down
into some secret place of the shipe, that there he might give himself to
sleep. But if this happened to the holy Prophet, which of us may not fear his
own state? Therefore let us learn often times to call back our selves to the
judgment seat, and when our minds are withhoulden or occupied with sleep,
let us learn to stir our selves up, and to take account of our selves,
least the judgment of the Lord do ouerwhelme us being a sleep. For what
let why that this ruin might not altogether have drowned Jonas, but that
the Lord pitied his servant: and watched and provided for the sauegard of him
sleeping? except therefore the Lord had taken such care for Jonas, his end
had been come, we see therefore how oftentimes the Lord respects his people,
while he is of them nothing regarded, and takes continual watch, while they
sleep. But this ought not to stand in force to nourish our licenciouse
liberty: for every one of us flattereth himself now more then enough, but
rather while we see Jonas to have been so nigh to his final destruction^, this
exampel might stir us up and move us, least (if at any time any of us shall
goo astraye from our calling,) we do securely lie still, but rather
immediately that we do run back unto God. But if God cannot withdraw us
unto him but by ^violent mean ^en, at the least in this part we immitate
Jonas, as we in order shall see. It follows.

Verse. 6. And the shipe master came unto him, and said unto him: what meanest
thou O thou sleeper? Arise, cry unto thy God, if peradventure God may show him
self peaceable toward us other turn it, do think upon us, or gratify us,
and we perish not.

Jonas declares that he was rebuked of the governor or Master of the ship;
because he only slept, when al others were heavy and fearful, what meanest
thou (says he) O sleeper? It is not to be doubted, but that reproochfullie
the Shipmaister cast in the teeth of Jonas his drowsines. But he moreover
chydeth him for that he almost wanted all sense, and memory: What meanect
thou, O sleeper, said he? seeing that thou see all others to be at their
wits end with fear, how can thou sleep? is not this against nature?
Arise, therefore, and call upon thy God. We see commonly lycenciousnesse to be
so tolerated, where there is no certain rule of faith, that every man may
decline hither or thither. Whereby it comes to pass that the Shypmaister
says unto Jonas, Call upon thy God: He urges him to the certain rule? even
for that this was an usual thing in all ages, that men were content with a
certain general apprehension: but yet remain after that according to his
own will, feigned or invented his own God. For neither, as I was wont to
say, could it otherwise be, where men are not retained within some sacred
band. All men agree to this principle, that there is some God: and again,
that there must not any dead Idol be invented, but that the world is governed
by the providence and power of God: and that salvation is of him to be
required: this is received by the general consent of al men. But when they come
unto the forms and specialties themselves, then every man vanishes away: how
that God is to be souhht, they know not. Therefore every man here usurps
liberty, saying: This way will I try to please God with: This mean will I
use to get his favor: The Lord will accept this manner of obedience, and so
shall all mine iniquity be abolished, that I may obtain favor at Gods
hands. So they every one feign unto them selves winding ways about the b^sh,
that they may come unto God, and then every man makes a God for him self.
Therefore there shall be no steadfastness or constancy in men except they
agree together within a certain bond or compass, that is, that the rule of
piety be certain, so that men waver not, nor dispute what is good to be done,
but that they determine, and be certainly persuaded that there is one God, and
that they also know who that God is: then that they per^eyue the mean how
God is to be sought. We gather therefore out of this place, that there is in
faygned Religions a horrible liberty, and whosoever are carried away with
their own sense, are even drowned in a Laberynth, so that men werie and vex
in vain nothing more then themselves, when they seek God, and are ignorant
of the way how. For in deed they run courageously, but more and more they
depart from God. But that also then they conceive in their minds some God, and
agree unto some principle, it sufficiently appears, by the second member of
this verse, where he says: If peradventure God will be favorable unto us.
Here the shypmaister restrains not this talk to ye God of Jonas, but
speaks simply of one God: for how soever the world by his discencion,
teareth or deuideth God, that then Jonas worshipped a God contrary to others:
there was to be short, an innumerable company of Gods among the Shypmen: yet
says the Shipmaister, If the Lord peradventure. Now then he acknowledges
some one principal God, howsoever every man notwithstanding, had their own
proper Gods. Further, that there has been always a certain general principle
received by the consent of al men: we see that it is most ^^ue that I have
said, even, that by the providence of God the world is governed, then that the
life and safeguard of men are in his hand. But for as much as they are too far
off from God, then, they do not only slowly creep, but more prone do they
bend to the earth, then aspyre unto heaven: Constaunt are they also, and
always waver they, therefore seek they Gods nigh at hand, and when they can
find none, then dare they be bold even to make them some. When he says, If
peradventure, we have seen already that the holy ghost uses this phrase:
although there is no doubt, but that only difficulty is noted. Here
notwithstanding is it probable that the Shipmaister was, as profane men are
wont, perplexed and doubtful, and could determine nothing certainly of the
aid of God. Therefore while he thus wauered in mind, he says that all
remedies are to be tried. And here as it were in a glass may we see, how
wretched is the estate of all those, which call not upon God with a certain
and sure faith: they cry truly unto God, because the knowledge of Nature
enforces them thereto: But they know not whether by their crying they profit
any thing or no, they do repete their prayers, but they know not whether their
words vanish away in the air, or whether they come unto God. So does the
Shypmaister declare thus, he had a doubtful mind, saying, If peradventure, God
be favorable unto us, Then also call upon thy God. If he had been certainly
persuaded that he had called upon the true God, truly he had not tried this
doubtful remedy. But now least any thing should remain untouched, he
exhorts Jonas, that if he had any God, he should also call upon him. We see
therefore, that the goings about the bush are maruaylous: where we keep not
the right way. An hundred times shall men run round about heaven and earth,
sooner, then attain unto God, except where the word shyneth before them. And
why so? Forsooth because, when as they have tried the way, then does a
frantike motion draw them to the contrary part, and they are carried hither
and thither: thus: peradventure this shall be profitable unto me, because by this
way, the matter prospered not, I will try another way. God therefore thus
takes vengeance upon unbelieving men, because they hold not the right way.
He shows further how great madness it is, where men let loose the rain to
their own affections, and can not submit them selves to the celestial
doctrine.

As Much as concerns the word, I have said, that interpreters have otherwise
turned this place. For some say, If peradventure God may think upon us:
Othersome again: If peradventure he gratify us. This word (...), properly
is to shine. Now seeing it is here put in the co^iugation Hit^pael, it
signifies, To show himself clear unto us. But this is a Metaphor much used in
the Scriptures, that the face of God is duskie or observe, when he is not
favorable unto us. Again, God makes his face to shine, and appear clear
unto us, when as in very deed he declares that he is beneuolous. Seeing that
therefore this manner of speaking best agrees, I maruayle why other men seek
strange interpretations. Afterward he adds, Least we perish. Here the
Shypmaister sufficiently declares that he perceyueth the life of man to be put
in the disposition of God, because he finally decreede that they must needs
perish, except the Lord succor them. Therefore this intelligence or (...)*
that is, Anticipacion is imprinted in the minds of all men, that God being
angry and against us, we are miserable, and imminent destruction is at hand
unto us: also the other Prolepsis, or presumption brings to pass in the
hearts of men, that even so soon as the Lord has looked back upon us,
immediately his favor and good will brings safegarde unto us. In this place
the holy ghost speaks not, but a profane man. Further we see what manner of
thing the ungodliness of the Shypmen is, yet by the instinct of Nature he
utters this saying, and in this place there is no fiction: For God as I have
already said, wresteth from unbelievers, in necessity a certain confession,
from the which willingly they would turn their backs.

Now what excusation may we hope for, if we think that our salvation
consists in our own hands? if we depend not wholly upon God? if we in
prosperity make none accoumpt of him, as if we could be safe without his
help. Therefore these words ought to be well weighed, when the Shypman says:
If peradventure the face of the Lord appear clear unto us, and we perish not.
It follows now.

Verse. 7. And every man said to his fellow, Come and let us cast lottes,
that we may know for what cause this evil is come upon us: and they cast
lottes, and the lotte fell upon Jonas.

Jonas also does not rashly put in this thing, that the Shypmen consulted among
them selves of casting lottes: For hereby we gather that it was no usual
tempest, therefore there appeared some sign of the anger of God: for if some
wind aryseth, this because it often comes to pass, it shall not seem so
great a maruayle: if a tempest also follow, it is also an usual thing, it
must therefore be some thing more grievous, that should strike fear into ye
minds of men, that they might perceive that God was pressed to take vengeance:
even as we also know that this has been a common thing among profane men,
that they never perceived the vengeance of God but in matters extreme. But
when God takes vengeance upon wickedness, by unaccustomed means, then do
men begin to acknowledge that vengeance of God: the same thing even now
testifyeth Jonas: They said (therefore) every man to his fellow, Come let us
cast lottes. Was this then a common thing that they cast lottes as often as any
tempest happened? No verelie. For there is no doubt but that they fled to
this refuge, because they knew that God styrred not up this tempest, without a
most great and weighty cause. This is one. I can not at this time prosecute the
rest, I will defer it therefore till to morrow.

The Prayer.
Grant almighty God, seeing that here we are dryue^ and tossed among so many
surges, that yet notwithstanding, we may learn with quiet minds, to repose
our selves upon thy grace and promise, whereby thou have testified that thou
art at hand unto us, and not that we wait till thou with a violent hand
drawest us unto thee, but rather always that we may be attentive unto thy
providence: that we may know not only that our life does hang by a threede,
but that it is like a vapor vanishing away, except it be so far forth as
thou take care for the same, that so we may rest wholly upon thy power, and
also grant even in joyful and quiet matters we may so invoke thee, that we
enjoying thy protection, may live in safety, and in the mean time, yet we
may be careful that a dead sleep creep not upon us, which may quite take
away our minds and affections from the meditation of heavenly life, but
rather that carefully, early and late, and at all seasons so we may seek
thee, that in all our life we may proceed unto the end, which thou put
forth unto us, till at the length we may come to that heavenly kingdom, which
Christ thy son has purchased unto us by his blood. Amen.

Jonas here speaks. If a man had demanded, whether they were altogether
without fault, every man had confessed, that he had been before God an
offender: but in the mean time they cast lottes, as if one man only had been
subject to the judgment of God, and why so? Forsooth, even because they
imagined that their offenses deserved not so grievous punishment. Howsoever
therefore they offended, and be convicted, and perceive this thing certainly,
yet so great matter make they not of their sins, that they think them selves
to have deserved any such punishment. This therefore is the reason why they
fall unto lottes because when ye matter came to that trial, every man thought
himself innocent. This place declares, which thing also even by common
experience is to well known, that men although they perceive them selves guilty
before God, do extenuate their sins, and promise pardon to them selves, as
though they could indent with God, that he should not deal with them by
extremity, but favorably should handle them. Hearehence therefore springs
hope to escape with out punishment, for as much as of most greeuouse sins
we make but light offense. So see we in the papacye that diverse means have
been immagined, whereby they might obsolue themselves, and wype away their
spots, in the presence of God. The sprinkling of holy water puts away almost
all sins, except a man be adulterer, an homicide, a sorcerer or ten times
pariured, he thinks himself not culpable of any crime, therefore the
sacrifices which they use, are of force, they think to blotte out al
iniquityes: Whence springs this error. Even because they esteem of God by
their own wits, and think not their sins to be so great an abomination
in the sight of God. But this is no new thing. For we see what now happened
in the time of Jonas: and out of profane histories we may gather this error
then every where to have occupied the minds of all men: they had their daily
sacrifices, even as the Papists have their Masses, their Pilgrimages, their
holy water sprinklynges, and like tryfles. But even as in the Papacy there be
certain cases reserved, so also if any man had slain either Father or mother,
if a man had committed incest, he had need of an extraordinary sacrifice: and
if any were of a notable virtue upon earth, him they use, that they might seek
a new kind of Sacrifice, here is an example of this error laid before us,
when as they say: Let us cast lette^. For except they had thought one man and
not many to be guyltie, each man would have brought his sins to light, and
after would have acknowledged the heap to be so great, that it might fill
both heaven and earth: But this they do not. For here must one man be wicked:
but no man will come forth in presence with this title, and therefore cast they
lottes.

Now ryseth a question, whether this was a lawful mean to find out the truth:
whether, when they were ignorant for whose offense the tempest arose, it were
lawful to ^^ye unto lottes. Certain men have been too superstitious in the
condempning of lottes, because precisely they affirmed all lottes to be wicked:
From hence was the name given to the Lot prophets, and they thought that these
Diuiners by lotte differed little from Magicians and Inchaunters. But this thing
took his beginning of error, because we know that it was at some time
permitted to cast the lotte. And Solomon truly, as it were of a politic order
speaks, Pro. 16.33
when he says: The lottes are cast into the lap, but the disposition thereof
is of the Lord. Solomon there speaks not in that place of arts Magical,
but says, when the lottes are put in, they come not forth by chance, but by
the providence of God. Act. 1.26
When Matthias was to succeed in the place of Judas, it was done by lotte. And
did the Apostles rashly use that name? And again, the holy ghost had a stroke
in the election. There is therefore no doubt, but that God allowed of that
lotte. Even as also when Joshua tried out the matter by lotte, Joshua. 7.14
for that the cause of the wrath of God was unknown: and yet it appeared
evidently that God was displeased with his people. Joshua perplexed in that
obscure ^are, casts lottes: and so is Achan brought forth with his
sacrilege. No man dare condemn that lotte. Therefore sufficiently appears
that which I have said, that they were superstitious, which without any
exception condemned all kind of lottes. But this is with all to be marked,
that confusedly, or without any difference, lottes are not to be used.

It is a part of politic order: If any heritage be common, when division is
made, it shall be lawful in that case to cast lottes: because it neither lies in
the one nor other to choose, let every man take the part which falls unto
him by lotte. So also it is lawful of Provinces to cast lotte, where men are
sent any whether: and if they divide the labors between them, least any envy
should arise, where as every man would draw some part to him self, in that
case, Lottes take away all stryfes. Such kind of casting lottes is as well by
the word of God, as by the laws permytted. But if any man without any cause
will cast lottes, the same shall be superstitious, and shall not much differ
from a Magicien or Inchaunter. For example sake. If any man would take a
journey, or go about any other thing, if he cast into the cappe two lottes, a
white and a black, saying, I will see whether this journey shall be this day,
prosperous or no, that dealing is deuilishe, even as Satan with such deceiptes
deludeth miserable men.

Therefore if any man without cause would deal by lotte, this thing as I have
already said is void of all excuse. But as much as touches other lottes,
such as this whereof we now entreat, that ought not to be brought for an
example which is mentioned in some other place. For if Joshua cast lottes, to
the intent to make evident for what cause God was angry with his people, it is
not lawful to immitate that fact: for that it is not to be doubted, but that
Joshua by a peculiar instincte was admonished, that he should cast lotts. So
also when Saul cast lottes, 1. Sam. 14.40.
and then was his son Jonathan deprehended and found out which had taffed
honny, this was a particular example. The same thing also is of this lotte to
be spoken. For because the Mariners were afraid, neither find they for what
cause the tempeste happened, and the fear of shipwreck had invaded them, they
flee unto the lotte if we will immitate this thing daily, certainly so great
liberty pleases not God, neither is it agreeable to his word. Therefore it is
to be houlden, that there were certain peculiar instinctes, when as the
servants of God used lottes in doubtful and extreme matters. Let this
therefore in few words be an answer to that question, whether it were
lawful for the shipmen to cast lottes, that they might find out for whose
cause they were so indaungered. Now I come unto the rest.

Verse. 8

Verse. 9 And he said unto them, I am an Hebrew, and I fear the Lord God, of
the heavens, which made the sea and the dry Land.

Verse. 10 And the men were exceedingly afraid, and faide unto him, wherefore
have thou done this thing? for the men knew that he fled from the presence
of the Lord, because he told them:

AFter that the Lotte fell upon Jonas, they doubt not but that he was guyltie,
as well as if an hundred times he had been convicted. For to what end cast they
lottes, but that they were certainly persuaded, that whatsoever doubt there
were, by this means it might be taken away, and whatsoever lay hydden, might
be brought to light? Therefore because this principle was rooted in their
hearts, that by the Lotte being cast, the truth might be boulted out, and
after a sort drawn out of darkness, therefore now inquire they of Jonas what
he has done.

For this take they for a thing confessed, that all they suffered the tempest
for his offense: and then that he had deserved such vengeance of God by some
detestable offense. We see therefore that they cast lottes, because they
certainly persuaded them selves this, that no otherwaye could the crime be
found out for whose cause they suffered, and also that the lottes are governed
by the secret disposition of God. For how could certain judgment be made
by lot, were it not that God by his counsel dyrecteth and moderateth yt which
seems to be most casual? These principles therefore in a manner were sure
grounds with profane men, that God brings forth the truth, and makes the
same manifest: and also that he governs the lottes howsoever they were
thought to be casual and to depend upon Fortune. This is the mean, how they
now demand what Jonas has done. Declare (now) unto us wherefore this
evil is happened unto us, what is thy work. Here by this word Opus, work, I
understand not, Offense, but rather a kind of life, or order of living, as
they say. They inquire therefore in what things hitherto Jonas has been
conuersaunt or occupied, and what order of life he has followed. For
immediately it follows, Tell us (also) whence thou come, which is thy
country, and of what people are thou? There is no doubt but that they in order
enquired of every of them: but Jonas mencioneth briefly the tytles of the
matters. I come now to his aunswer^. He said (then) unto them, I am an
Hebrew, and fear the Lord God of Heaven, which made the Sea, and the dry
land. Jonas seems here yet still to run backewarde, and to post away the
fault from himself for he professes himsefe to be the worshipper of the true
God. Who would not say, that here he was wylling to have ^lyden away by a
privy escape, seeing that he opens his piety or godliness, wherewith he may
cover that fault, of the which mention was made before? But here al things
are not mentioned in the first verse, for that a little after it follows, that
the Shypmen knew of the flight of Jonas: and that he obeyed not the calling
and commandment of God, they knew by his own declaration. There is no
doubt therefore, but that Jonas plainly confessed his fault, although he
mencioneth not the same. But we know that this manner of speaking is much used
among ye Hebrews, even that they place that last which first was to be spoken
of: and the Grammarians call that, (...), Hysteron, Proteron, when any thing is
conceled in that place where it ought to be placed, and after is rehearsed for
explication sake.

When as therefore Jonas says that he is an Hebrew, and the worshipper of the
true God, this rather tends to the aggrauation of the crime or offense: then
to any pretense or coulor of excusation. For if he had simply said that he
had been guyltie in his own sight, because he was not obedient unto God, the
offense had not been so heinous. But when he makes his preface, that the true
God, the maker of heaven and earth, was known unto him, even the God of
Israel, which manifested him self, his law being given and published: when as
therefore thus Jonas makes his preface, therein takes he away from him self
all coulors or excuses of ignorance, or error. He was trained up in the law,
and from a child had learned who was the true God. He could not therefore
fall by error, he also worshipped not counterfeyte Gods, as did the other men,
and he was an Israelite. Seeing then he was instructed in true godliness, his
offense was the more grievous, when he fell away from that God, when he
contempned his commandment, and as it were, shaked of his yoke, and was a
fugitive. Now therefore we perceive for what cause he here calls him self
an Hebrewe, and testifyeth him self to be the worshipper of the true God.
First when he says that he is an Hebrew, he discerns the God of Abraham from
the Idolles of the Gentiles. For in all those places, the Religion of the
elected people was sufficiently known, although by the consent of all men it
was disallowed: For both the Cilicians and all the Asiatikes, and Grecians also,
and on the other side, the Syrians knew, what thing the Israelites vaunted of,
even that the true God appeared unto their father Abraham: and also had made
with him a free covenant: and further, had given the law by the hands of
Moses: all this by fame was sufficiented blazed abroad. Therefore now Jonas
declares him self to be an Hebrew: as if he should say, that he meddled not
with any faygned God, but with the God of Abraham, which in time past had
appeared to the holy Fathers, and also which had rendered an eternal testimony
of his will by Moses. We see therefore this, that he is an Hebrew, to be put
Emphatically, or for the more plainer expression of that which is intended.
Afeerwardes he adds: I fear the Lord God of Heaven. By the word fear, is
understand worship. For it is not taken as it is oftentimes otherwhere, or in
the proper signification thereof: but fear is transferred unto worship: I
says he, am not given to strange superstitions, but have been instructed in
true piety: God has revealed himself unto me from mine infancy. I therefore
adore none Idol, as almost all Nations have forged or invented Gods for them
selves: but I worship God the creator of heaven and earth. He calls him, God
of the heavens, that is, which only dwells in the heavens, and seeing that
others imagined heaven to be stuffed with a great multitude of Gods. Here Jonas
sets against them one only God: as if he should say, Feign for your
pleasure an innumerable company of gods, yet is there one which bears the
chief principality in the heavens: he also it is which Made the Sea and the
dry land. Now then we perceive what Jonas intends by these words. For
even here he declares that it is no marvel, if so grievously God does
persecute him, for that he has not perpetrated any light offense, but a
deadly sin. Now we see how greatly Jonas profited, when the Lord began
to handle him roughly. For being sleepie as he was, yea rather senseless in
his sin, he had never repented but by this so violent a remedy. But, when
the Lord by his severity had awaked him, by and by not only he confesses
himself guyltie, or lyghtlie acknowledges his fault, but we see how that
willingly, and that unto profane men, he confesses him self to be wicked,
even such a one as has fallen away from the true God, in the worship of whom
he so well had been instructed. This is the fruits of true repentance: and
this also is the fruit of the chastisement which the Lord laid upon him.
Therefore if we will have our repentance to be allowed of God, let us not give
back, as is the common use: neither yet let us make light of our sins, but
with a free confession, let us testify before all the world what we have
deserved. It follows after, that those men feared with a great fear: and
said, Wherefore have thou done this? for they knew that he fled from the
presence of the Lord, because he had told them. This thing is of some weight,
That the Shipmen feared with great fear. For Jonas signifies that they were
not only moved with his speech, but also exceedingly afraid, so that they
gave glory to the true God. For we know how that superstitious men in a
manner ieste with their Idolles. Yet truly oftentimes they co^ceyue
marvelous terrors, but afterward they flatter them selves, and after a sort
kotchell their own minds, so yt they may pleasantly and sweetly laugh in their
own delights. That therefore Jonas here says, that, They feared with a great
fear, he signifies that they were so wounded, that now in deed they
perceived the God of Israel to be a just Judge: and again not to be, as the
rest of the Gentyles feigned him to be, but to be armed or furnished with
fearful examples, as often as he is wylling to take vengeance. We see then
what Jonas means, when he speaks of great fear. Although each is to be
marked, that they feared, even for that it was easy to gather out of the words
of the Prophet, that the God of Israel was the only maker of heaven and earth:
then that which followed of great fear must hither be referred, even as I have
already said, unto an earnest and serious fear, seeing that all fear
immediately vanishes away from those which believe not. But where as the
shipmen and the rest of the passengers did chide Jonas here the Lord pays
unto him the reward which he had deserved. He had fled from the presence of
God, by this means as we have said, had he abrogated from God the chief
souerayntie. For what manner of authority is that of Gods, if every of us
refuses his commandments and flees from his sight? when as therefore Jonas
would privily escape God, he is subdued unto men. There be profane, yea
barbarous men: which cha^ise his sin and which be his censors and judges. The
which thing also we see oftentimes to happen. For they which willingly obaye
not God and his word afterward do throw themselves into many offenses, and
the filthiness of them is seen unto the common people or publiquelye. And then
because they cannot suffer God to be their master and teacher, they are
compelled to suffer innumerable controulers: they are noted with the reproaches
of the common people, they are made manifest every where by the finger, at the
length they are drawn to the galowes, and the hangman is their chief master.

The same thing see we in Jonas: Even when as the Master of the ship first
rebuked his drowsy sleep, when he said, at the least thou yet call upon thy
God: what meanest thou O thou sleepie head? thou lie here like a block: and
in the mean time, see us to be plunged in extreme danger. When as therefore
the Shypmaister so sharply thus first inueyghed against Jonas, and then again
all the other Shypmen with one voice began to bayte him, certainly we
perceive that he is made subject to the censures of all men, because he would
take away from God his emperie or government.

If therefore at any time the like happen unto us, that the Lord makes us
subject to the reproachful tauntes of men, when as we would privily escape or
avoid his judgment, let us not maruayle: But even as Jonas here gently
answers, and neither murmureth nor resists, so also at the length with the
true spirit of meekness, let every of us acknowledge our sins, when they
be reproved, yea, even although children be our Judges, or if any of the most
base or contemptible ryseth against us, let us suffer it patiently, and let us
know this kind of Controwlers happens unto us by the providence of God. Now
it follows.

Verse. 11

Verse. 12 And he said unto them, Take me, and cast me forth into the Sea, and
the Sea shall depart from you, for I know that for my sake this great tempest
happened upon you, that is, is come upon you.

Jonas, thereby it appears they were touched with a certain reverence of
him, so that they durst not touch him. We see therefore, how greatly almost in
one moment they profited, when they spare a man being an Israelite, because in
that people they acknowledge the true God, the chief king of heaven and earth
to be worshipped. For without all doubt, fear was the only let, that
immediately they cast not Jonas into the sea. For when it was certain that for
his offense God was angrye with them all, why deliver they not themselves of
that great offense. That therefore they stay in so great danger, and straight
way durst not snatche up Jonas, thereby is it evident truly, that they were
withhoulden, with the reverence of God, whereof I spoke. Therefore demand
they what was necessary to be done. What therefore, shall we do unto thee,
Quia mare ^at.
that the sea may depart from us? for the sea went, says he. By the verb of
going, Jonas understands that the sea was unquiet. For when the sea is calm
it is said to be quiet, but when it is troublesome, then has it diverse
motions and tossings. The Sea, therefore did go, or wrought, then it was
tempestuous: we see then that God was not contented with the ignominy of
Jonas, but would also further persecute his fault, Jonas therefore must be
brought to the punishment which he had deserved, although myraculouslie he was
afterward delivered from death, as we shall see in place convenient. Jonas then
answers: Take me, and cast me into the Sea, and it shall depart from you:
Here ryseth a question: whether Jonas ought of his own accord to offer
himself to death, for this seems to be a token of desperation. For he might
submit himself to their censure. But here as it were, he pricketh them
forewarde: Cast me (says he) into the Sea, for otherwise then by my
punishment, ye shall not please God. He seems like a desperate man, when so
of his own mind he hasteneth to his end. But without doubt Jonas perceived
that from above he was required to punishment. It is uncertain whether he then
conceived any hope of safeguard, that is whether with present confidence he
rested himself upon the favor of God, but whatsoever it be, we may yet gather
that he comes forth to death, because he understands, and is certainly
persuaded that he was thereunto soommoned after a sort even by the manifest
voice of God, and so it is not doubtful but that patiently he undertakes the
judgment, that the Lord has brought against him. Therefore says he: Take me
and cast me into the Sea, and afterward the Sea shall depart from you. Here
Jonas not only pronounces that God may be pacified by his death, because the
Lotte fell upon him, but else otherwise knows he that his death may suffice
in steed of Sacrifice, that the tempest may cease. And to the same end
follows the reason: I know (says he) that for my sake this tempest is upon
you. When as he says he knows, this cannot be referred unto the Lotte, for
this knowledge was common unto them all. But Jonas here as it were by the
spirit of Prophecy speaks. And there is no doubt, but he confirms the
thing that I first touched, even the God of Israel to be the chief and only
king of heaven and earth. This certainty of knowledge therefore, of the which
Jonas speaks, ought first to be referred to his conscience: secondly, to the
instruction of godliness wherewith he was endued. But now we may gather out of
these words a most profitable doctrine, even that Jonas here reasons not the
matter with God, neither contemptuously does frete that God so severely
punishes him. For he takes upon him willingly both the guyltinesse and the
punishment, even as first when he said, I am the worshipper of the true God.
How confesses he ye true God, whose most heavy hand he at that time felt?
But we see Jonas so to be subdued, that he left not of to yield unto God his
just honor: yea although present death were before his eyes. Although the
wrath of God burned against him, yet we see (as we have said) how he gave
unto God his honor. So the same in this place is repeated: Behold (says he)
I know that for my sake this great tempest is ligted upon you. He certainly
murmureth not against God, that upon him self takes all the blame. This
therefore is the true confession of repentance: when as we acknowledge God,
and willingly also witness before men that he is just, although to our
fleshly senses he seem cruelly to rage against us. When as we give unto him
the praise of righteousness, then truly do we show our repentance. For
except the anger of God constrain us to this humility, always we shall be
filled with bytternesse: and howsoever we wax silent for a time, our heart
notwithstanding will be contemptuous and rebellious. Therefore this humility
always follows repentance, even till the sinner prostrateth himself before
God, and willingly takes upon him his offense, and endeavors not by shifting
sleights to escape. And it is no maruayle that Jonas so far humbles himself.
For we see the Shypme^ to do the same, when they say, that the Lotte is to be
cast, adding withal: Come and let us cast Lots, that we may know why this
evil is happened unto us. They draw not God within the compass of the Lotte,
but they appoint him for Judge, and by this mean acknowledge they, that they
are justly punished. And yet every one thinks him self to be innocent: for
howsoever their conscience did gnawe them, yet no man thinks himself
culpable of so great offense, that he should come under the vengeance of God.

When as yet I say, the Mariners thought them selves free from such
wickedness, they therefore brawle or quarrel not with God, but suffered him to
be Judge above all men. When as therefore so barbarous men contained themselves
within these bounds of modesty, it is no maruayle if Jonas chiefly being
thoroughly awaked, and beginning to feel his sin, and hardly held also
under the hand of God, it is (I say) no maruayle, if then he confessed him
self faulty toward God, and worthelie to suffer so great and grievous
punishment. This is therefore to be noted how he says that he knows, that
for his cause this tempest happened unto them, or that the Sea was so
tempestuous against all men. The rest we will defer till to morrow.

The Prayer.
Grant O almighty God, seeing that daily thou do solicit us to
repentance, and every of us also is pricked with the guyltinesse of his own
wickedness: grant I say that we securely sleep not in our iniquities,
neither deceive our selves with vain flatteries: but rather that every one of
us dilligentlie examine him self, and then that with one mouth and heart we
may confess al of us to be guilty not of a small fault only, but eue^ of
eternal death: and that no other remedy remains for us, but thine
immensurable mercy, and so also that we may seek and embrace that grace
which by thy son was offered unto al men, and daily through his Gospel is
offered, that we having him our mediator, may not cease to hope well even in
the midst of a thousand deaths, until we be gathered together into that
blessed life, which is purchased unto us by the blood of the same thy son.
Amen.

Verse. 13

Verse. 14 And they cried unto the Lord, and said we beseech thee O Lord, we
beseech thee, let us not perish, for the life of this man, and lay not upon
us innocent blood: for thou O Lord have done, as it pleased thee.



But truly, except men deceived themselves willingly with foolish flatteryes,
for certainly, common sense would tell us this, that it is no light offense,
to fly from the government and Impery of God, for as we have already said, by
this means do men take away from God the soueraintye. For what remains unto
god, if he may not govern me^, whom he has made and whom by his power he
sustayneth. The Lord would therefore here show that his ire none otherwise could
be pacified, but by the drowning of Jonas in the sea: although he respected a
deeper matter as we shall hereafter see.

But this in the mean time is worthy to be noted, that the Lord would place
an example in the person of Jonas: whereby all men may know that there is no
dallying with him: but as soon as he commands any thing, he is to be
obeyed. The word which the Prophet uses, Interpreters do diversely expound,
Hathar, properly is to dig: and therefore some think that it is a
Metaphorical speech, because the Rowers do seem to dig the sea: and this
sense might agree well. Others fetch a Metaphor farther, that the Mariners
searched, or sought means whereby they might stryke the Ship on ground: but
the other Metaphor, because it is nearer the matter, pleases me better. The
Latins call this Mol^i, not only when the Rowers do row hard, but also when
they use some greater endeavors. Well, the shypmen then endeavored, to bring
back the ship. Pity in Infidelles, Cruelty in Christians.
But to what end? even that they might spare the life of the man, who had
already confessed him self to be guilty before God, and for his offense that
tempest to be raised up which threatened shypwracke to them all. But he says,
That they could not, because the Sea was troublesome, As already we saw in the
Lecture yesterdaye. Now I come to the next verse. They cried (says he) unto
the Lord and said, we beseech thee O Lord, we beseech thee let us not
perish, for the life of this man, and (Ne des.i. Ne reijcias) Cast not upon us
innocent blood. Now more plainly does the Prophet express, why the shypmen so
greatly labored to return into the Haven, or to come to some shore: even
because they were now persuaded that Jonas was the worshypper of the true God,
and not that only, but also that he was a Prophet: after he had declared, as
we have already seen, that he fled from the sight of God, because he feared
to execute that commandment, of the which we have already understood. A
reverence therefore fell upon the shypmen, when they knew Jonas to be the
servant of the true God. And yet they see Jonas for one fault to stand
before the tribunal seat of God, and was now to be punished: this I say they
saw, and yet they desired to save him from punishment. This place teaches,
that to abhor cruelty, is even by nature grafted in all men? For howsoever
many men are cruel and blood thirstye, because it is grafted in them by
Nature. Yet than they never he void of this knowledge, that shedding of man's
bl^^d is detestable. But yet many harden themselves, and yet have they a seared
conscience, and never can shake of that error of mind, but that they shall
always feel them selves to be abominable both to God and man, while thus
they shed innocent blood. Hence does it come that the Shypmen, which
otherwise had in them scarce one drop of humanity, yet do humbly flee, for
succor unto God, when it touched but the death of one only man, and here
they say, Anah Jehovah, We beseech thee O Lord. And to the confirmation of
the matter, he repeateth the word, Anah, We beseech thee. Which declares
that the Shypmen humbly entreated that God would not impute this crime unto
them.

We see therefore that although these men never tasted the doctrine of ye law,
yet naturally were they so instructed, that they knew, that man's blood was
dear and precious unto God. Now as much as concerns us, we ought not only
to immitate these Mariners, but also far to surpass the^. For not only
ought the rule of Nature to be of force with us: but we also hear what God by
his own mouth has pronounced: Who so sheddeth man's blood, his blood shall be
shed again. And we know also why God takes upon him to defend the life of
men, even because they be created accordng to his Image. Whosoever therefore
violently makes an assault against men, the same as much as in him lies
violateth the Image of the eternal God. Seeing it is so: ought not all violence
and cruelty to be unto us a double horror? Yet must we gather out of this
doctrine another thing. For here God declares by a singular testimon^, what a
fatherly affection he bears unto us, while he would have our life to be
under his safety and protection, and declares in very deed that he takes
care for us, because he will take vengeance, upon them, if any man unjustly
do us any hurt. We see therefore how this doctrine on the one part
restrayneth us from working any thing against our brethren: and again,
assures us of the fatherly love of God, that we being trained on with this
delectation, may learn to deliver our selves wholly into his custody.

Now come I to the last member of this verse, where the Shipmen say: For thou
O Lord have done even as it pleased thee. Here the Shipmen sufficiently show
that willingly they shed not innocent blood. But how can these things
agree between them selves, that both it should be innocent blood, and again
that they should be without fault? they use this excusation, that they obey
the judgment of God, that they do nothing in this case rashly, or for their
own pleasure: but that they follow yt which God has prescribed. For although
God spoke not, evidently yet there appeared what he commanded. For he would
have the tempest continue till Jonas were drowned; as though God required some
Sacrifice in the death of Jonas: and these things do the Mariners object. But
let us mark, not to lay the fault upon God, as blasphemous men do, who
while they covet to acquit them selves, they make God in fault, or at the
least set him in their place. Why (say they) sytteth he also as a Judge to
condemn us, who him self is the first author of our transgression: because
he so appointed it? At this day truly many phrentike fellows speak thus,
and even take away all difference of good and evil, as if the lycenciousnesse
of men were unto them in steed of a law: and do in the mean time pretend
the providence of God.

Jonas would not that this should be understood of the shipmen: but they
speak this, because they understand that God does govern the world with
righteous judgment, although secret be his counsayles, and can not in our
capacities be comprehended. Because therefore they were of this (...) to
worship God. But in this place, that which is added, does show that the
manner of speaking is more restrained: for there is added, A great fear.
Therefore Jonas signified that the Mariners and other Passengers were touched
not only with a certain fear of God, but also perceived the God of Israel
to be the chief king of heaven and earth, and to hold all things in his
hand and Imperie. Neither is it any doubt but that this fear so brought them
to true knowledge, that they perceived that they were mocked before, and that
whatsoever the world has faygned, to be a mere toye and deceypte. And that
the Gods made by the minds of men are nothing else then mere Idolles. We
understand now the mind of Jonas.

But here are we to speak some what more largely of the fear of God. The
scripture when it speaks of the fear of God, The fear of God two ways
taken for outward worship, and true piety.
sometime means outward worship sometime again, true pietye. Where
outward worship is touched there it is a small thing. For hipocrits are
accustomed to use their ceremonies and testifye that they worship the true God:
but yet because they submite not themselves unto God with a sincere affection,
neither bring forth faith nor repentance, therefore do they nothing else but
mock and counterfeyt. But the fear of God is oftentimes taken for godliness*
it self: and then is it called the beginning and the head of wisdom, and also
wisdom it self, as in the book of Job: Job. 28.28
The fear of God therefore that is that reverence whereby the faithful
willingly submytte themselves to God, is the beginning or head of wisdom. But
oftentimes also it comes to pass that men are touched with a servile fear,
so that they desire to obaye God* In the mean time yet they rather desire that
he were plucked from the throne. This servile fear is full of contumacye,
because they which cannot exempt themselves from his power and Imperye, yet do
gnawe the bridle. Such was this fear whereof Jonas he^^ entreats. For all
the men whereof Jonas here makes mention so suddenly were not changed, that
they wholly addicted themselves to God. For they had not proffited so much,
neither was the conversion of their minds so perfect and true, that they were
thereby changed into new men. How then feared they? Even as God wrested from
them a certain confession for a time. It may yet be that some of them
proffited them for the more and more: but I now speak generally of all.

Because therefore they feared God, we cannot thereby gather that they so wholly
were converted, that they al afterward were addicted to the God of Israel. But
yet they were constrained to perceive and confess the God of Israel, to be the
only and true God. By what means? for that the fearful judgment of God had
strocken a terror into them, so that they perceived him to be only God which
contained under his government both heaven and earth. Now then we see in what
degree this fear is to be placed which Jonas here touches. For if afterward
there followed no better progress, or going forward in ye truth, this was
only of force to conde^pnation, because when as these shipme^ by this manifest
instruction, acknowledged the only God, yet they mingled their wicked and
impious superstitions with his worship, as in many men it is seen at this day.

The Papists hold one principle with us, that the only God is the maker of
heaven and earth: yea, they come nearer also, even that the only begotten
Son of God, is our redeemer. But in the mean time we see how they pollute
the whole service of God, and turn his truth into lies, and mingle God with
Idolles, in such sort that there is nothing pure among them. But that principle
is much worth, if God do reach his hand to miserable men. For if in the
Papacy this were not certainly held, that the word of God is to be
credited, and Christ the son of God to be king and head of the Church, there
were long circuitions to be used with them: but we have a familiar enteraunce
unto them. For when we object both the law, the Prophets, and the Gospel, they
are held then with a certain reverence, neither dare they contempne the
authority of the most high God. We see therefore how this fear of it self
is to small purpose, if men stick still in their old mire; but if the Lord
will call them further, this fear then opens to them the gate unto true
piety. So (as I have said) it might be, that some of the Mariners and other
shypmen after that profyted more: But that fear of it self could nothing
else do, but convince them, in such sort that no excusation might profit them
before the judgment seat of God: because a token was showed, whereby they
might know that there was none other God, then was called upon of the elect
people. Afterward he adds, that they Offered a Sacrifice unto the Lord. They
were accustomed before, to offer sacrifices to their Idols, but now they
declared that they worshipped the God of Israel: for to this end do belong
the Sacrifices. But withal this is to be noted, that this confession was of
them expressed, that God might confirm the faith or credit of his word. For
when they perceived this whole matter to be governed by ye will of God, they
were compelled to confess that he was the true God, and this was the end and
scope of the Sacrifice.

But here it may be demanded, whether that Sacrifice pleased God. It is
certain that so s^^ne as men bring in their own inventions, by that mixture
is corrupted and vitiated, whatsoever else in them might seem worthy of
praise. For God will have no fellow, as it is sufficiently known. And always
that saying of Ezechiel is to be kept in memory: Go ye, and Sacrifice to the
devil, and not unto me, says the Lord. God there refuses all Sacrifices
which they were wont to offer among the people of Israel, even because there
were superstitions mingled with them. God therefore declares that he so
disaloweth these mixtures, that he had rather that superstitious men should be
wholly given to the devil, then that his sacred name should so be profaned.
Therefore of it self this sacrifice was neither lawful, nor could please God:
but by Accidens, or outwardly (if I may so speak) this Sacrifice pleased
God: because he would have his glory by this means to flourish and shine.
How the work of a wicked man may please God.
And although he refused the shypmen them selves, yet would he have this work
to be some testimony of his glory: as for example: Oftentimes the work in
respect of the man may be corrupt, and yet after an accidental manner it shall
tend to the glory of God. And this is dilygentlie to be noted. For at this
day there is a disputation or rather a sharp contention about good works:
And the Sophisters in this subtyle argument or Paralogisme deceive them selves,
because they think or imagine that works, morally good, either are
preparatorie to the obtaining of grace, or else are meritorious or deseruers of
eternal salvation. When they say works morally good, they only respect or
regard outward appearaunces: they neither respect the fountain from whence
they come, nor yet the scope whereto they tend. If the heart of man be impure,
certainly the work that proceeds from thence shall be always vnpure and
shall stink in the sight of God. Again, if the end be wicked, that is, if
the purpose of men be not to worship God, and that with a sincere heart, even
that work which is otherwise most excellent, shall be most filthy in the sight
of God.

To chyldishly therefore and far are the Sophisters deceived, when they say
that works, morallie good, do please God, or be preparatiues unto grace, or
deseruers of salvation. But how may it be that a work should not please
God, and yet tend to his glory? I answer, that this very well agrees,
neither is there here any contrariety, which easily cannot be accorded. For
God after an accidental manner, as I have already said, applies those things
to his glory, which of them selves (I say, of them selves, that is in respect
of men) are very corrupt. So also in the Papacy the name of a Christian
serves to the glory of God, for always some remnau^t of Christianity
remains. For how comes it to pass, that in this time the light of the
gospel has appeared out, when as yet at the least in few places true piety
has been restored? Forsooth, because the Lord never suffered true Religion to
be quite extinguished or quenched, in that place where yet it has been
corrupted. In the Papacy therefore, Baptism, the very name as well of Christ
as of the Church, Finaly, A certain form of godliness: All these of them
selves were unprofitable altogether, but yet after an accident all sort, are of
force, even as I have said. But if we consider as well the Sacrificers, as also
the common sort of people, we shall find, that they do nothing but paruert
the worship of God. When as rashly and like a hodgepodge, they join their
superstitions and inventions to the word of God, no sincerity is observed.
When therefore they thus confound heaven and earth together, nothing else do
they but provoke upon them selves the wrath of God. Now therefore we know why
Jonas says, that the Shypmen and Passengers offered Sacrifices to God. But yet
this also is to be remembered that I lately said, this Sacrifice to be a sign
of the worship of God. For from the beginning, always this opinion remained in
the hearts of all men, that Sacrifices were not to be offered, but to God
only. And profane men in all ages none otherwise deemed of Sacrifices, but
even that by them, they showed forth their Religion toward the Gods.

When as therefore Sacrifices from the beginning have been offered to God
alone, it follows that they at this day are inexcusable, which adioygne some
as fellows, with God, and unto mortal men or Angels, offer their Sacrifices.
How may this be borne in Christians, since the Gentiles always have confessed
that they took them always as Gods unto whom they were accustomed to offer
their sacrifices? But seeing now God pronou^ceth his chiefest Sacrifices? But
now seeing God pronou^ceth his chiefest Sacrifice to be Invocation, as we read
Psa. 50. Psa. 50.15
In the Papacy al Religion is quite perverted, when as they not only
invoke God, but also the very creatures, neither doubt they more often to
flee for succor unto Peter or Paul, yea, even to Saints of their own making,
counterfeyt and feygned, then unto one God. When as therefore they spoil God
of that his chiefest right, we perceive that with that their sacrilege they
tread under foot all piety and godliness. If therefore profane men
testified that they worshipped the Lord, and the God of Israel only, with
that their outward sacrifice: let us at this day learn not to transfer the
honor of good right belonging unto God, to the creatures, but let this honor,
even that he only may be inuocated, remain wholly and inviolable unto him:
because this, even as I have said, is the chiefest and most precious sacrifice
that he requires and allows.

Now also Jonas adds that, The Shipmen vowed vows to God. This appertains
to giving of thanks, or is a part of thanksgeuing. For we know that in vows
always this has been the intent, not only of the holy Fathers, but also of
superstitious Hipocrites, both to bind them selves to God, and also to give
him thanks, and testify that they owe unto him or stand bound unto him both
for the preservation of their lives, and also for any other benefit that
happened unto them. And this was the continual course in vowing vows, in all
ages. Therefore when as now the shipmen made vows unto God, certainly they
renounced their Idolles. First they cried out to their gods, but now they
understand that they brayed in vain, and without profit: for that rashly
they cast abroad their voices in the air. Now therefore they direct their
vows to the true God, because they know that their lives be in his hand. And
hence is it easy to be collected, The Sophisters mistake the Scripture.
how foolishly the Sophisters heap together at this day all the places of
Scripture which entreat of Vows, or where any mention is made of Vows. For
they think, when we condemn their wicked vows, that we are utterly
overwhelmed, and vanished with their vain collection of that very word,
Vow. And yet none of us ever denied, neither do deny, It is lawful to make a
vow so that we make the word of God our warraunt.
but that it is lawful to make a vow, so that it be done by the prescription
of the law and the gospel: that is, so that men do not rashly obtrude unto
God, whatsoever comes in their mind, but do vow that which is acceptable
unto him: and again, have with them a right and just end of their vows, even
that they may thereby testify their thankfulness in the sight of God. The
end of vows.
But in common vows there be most palpable corruptions, as there is also in
all the Popes Religion: because they do confusedly vow this or that to God,
Why there be corruptions in the vows of the common people or of the papacy.
and never respect what the Lord requires or allows: As one man for
certain days abstaineth from eating of flesh. Another man kombeth not his
head for a certain time. And another wandereth in some pylgremage. We know
that all these things are refused of God. Again, admit, they vow nothing
but that which is allowed of God, yet is that also very prosperously done,
because they will needs by this manner bind God unto them. And always that
deuilish opinion of Desert or Merit sticks in their minds. Lastly also,
they never respect what they them selves are able to do, but they vow
perpetual chastity, when as yet incontinencie does burn them: and so we see
that after the manner of the Gyaunts, they fight and strive against God him
self, and withal do permit unto them selves an unbridled liberty, to vow
any thing what they list. Let us know therefore that as often as the Scripture
speaks of vows, Two principles used of the scriptures when it speaks of
vows.
it takes these two principles, even that vows, because they belong to the
worship of God, ought not to be undertaken without any difference at the
pleasure of men, or as men list, but ought to be reduced and referred unto
their rule, even that men bring nothing unto God, but that which they by his
word know to be allowed of him: and again, that they keep the right end,
even to declare by this token their thankfulness toward God, and witness
that by his benefit they are saved: even as when the shypmen vowed, certainly
they thought no other thing, but that God was their deliverer: and so testify
yt at what time they shall safe come to the Haue^, that then they would make
this manifest, that the God of Israel has had mercy on them. It follows.

Verse. 17

Jonas was swallowed up of one fish, and there remained for three days and
three nights. But yet although Jonas neither amplifieth nor sets out after a
Rhetorical sort the things which we so slightly pass over, neither yet uses
any brauerye of words, but makes mention thereof as of a common matter, If
Jonas so were punished
yet let us see what the matter it self imports Jonas is cast into the Sea:
He was before this, not only the worshiper of the true God, but also a
Prophet, and faithfully without doubt executed he his office. For God had not
determined to send him to Nineueh, What deserve we?
but because he had bestowed upon him some notable gyfts: and knew also that
he was sufficient to undertake so great and so weighty a burden. Seeing
therefore that Jonas faithfully studied to worship God, and all his life to
attend dilygentlie upon him, and now yet is cast into the Sea, as unworthy of
the day light, is rooted out from the company of men as unworthy of the
vulgar and unaccustomed punishment, which other men sustain, but is cast (as
it were) out of the world, that he might be deprived of the common elements,
which punishment in time past as it is well known, was appointed unto
parricides, or murderers of their Parents.

When as Jonas therefore sees him self so handled, what might he think?
Again, now when he says that he was three whole days in the belly of the
Fish, certainly so did the Lord awake him, that he was troubled with
continual disquyet: for he was drowsy then when he was swalowed up of the
Fish: but, even as though the Lord had violently dragged him to his
judgment throne, so suffered he continual torment. Continually also he might
thus think: how art thou dealte with all? For God kylleth thee not once
only, but also will give thee over unto a thousand deaths.

Job. 14.6.
We see what Job says: That when he is dead, he shall be quiet, and free from
all myseries. Jonas without doubt was always vexed with this grief, that he
knew that God was against him, and his mortal enemy. His conscience might
tell him: Thou dealest not now with men, but with God him self, who now
persecuteth thee, because he was a fugitive from his presence. When Jonas
therefore of necessity must needs recoumpt him self after this sort the
anger of God, this was more grievous unto him then a hundred deaths. For Job
and many other in this case most earnestly desired that they might dye. But
now because Jonas is not killed, but languisheth in continual torments,
certainly none of us can comprehend in mind his griefs, so far is he
from the uttering of those things, which in those three days might come into
the mind of Jonas. But I can not make an end of the rest now, I will
defer it therefore till the next Lecture.

The Prayer.
Grant O almighty God, since thou set forth unto us at this time thy holy
Prophet to be a fearful example of thy wrath against all that be disobedient and
rebels against thee: grant (I say) that we may learn so to submyt al our
senses and affections unto thy word, that we refuse nothing that pleases
thee, but that so we may learn to live and dye unto thee, that we may wholly
depend upon thy will, and may imagine nothing, but that which thou by thy word
have testified to be acceptable unto thee, or allowed of thee, so that we may
march under thy conduct, and al our life long obey thy word: till at the
length we may come to that blessed rest which is purchased unto us by the
blood of thine only begotten son, and laid up for us in heaven through the
hope of the gospel of the same Christ. Amen.

Jonas said that A Fish was prepared of the Lord. We said that it could not
otherwise he, but that Jonas, when as he was in the belly of that Fysh, did
feel most grievous torments, as though now he were appointed to eternal
death, so long I say as he was deprived of the taste of Gods grace. Which
thing again more evidently shall be declared in his Canticle or Psalm. But
now one question is to be handeled of us, whyther God created at that time the
Fish which received Jonas. For so much that saying (that: God prepared a Fish)
seems to infer. For if the Fish had at that time swamme in the Sea, the
Prophet might have used another word, as thus: The Lord caused that the Fish
should Occur, or: the Lord Sent a Fish, for so the scripture is wont to
speak. But here, the Fish is said to be prepared. But this doubt may be
resolved thus, that although God created not the Fish at that time, yet did he
dispose the same to this use: because we know that this was not done
naturally, that a Fish should swallowe Jonas: The fish was prepared, that it
was ordained for the sauegard of the Prophet. Gul. Rondelerus.
and again, should three days and three nights keep him unperished in his
belly. I therefore refer that which here is spoken of (that a Fish was
prepared) unto the conservation of Jonas. And certain it is, that there be
some such Fishes which are able to swallowe men whole. And Guleielmus
Rondeletus, who wryt a book of the Fishes of the Sea, by probable reason,
gathers that it was a Fish called Lamia. He saw that Fish whom he says to
be of so large a belly and broad mouth, that easily may swallowe one man:
and faith also, that sometime there was found in the belly of that Fish
Lamia, an armed man. Therefore as I said, either a Whale, or a Lamia, or some
Fish unknown unto us, may deuowre a whole man: but he which so is swollowed
up, lives not in the belly of the Fish. Therefore Jonas, that he might note
the miracle, says that this Fish was prepared of the Lord, because he was
received into the belly of the Fish, as into a friendly harborough or
lodging. For there although he rested not in mind, yet in body he was as safe
as if he had walked on the land. When as therefore contrary to the order of
Nature, the Lord preserved his Prophet there, no maruayle it is, if he say
that the Fish was prepared of the Lord. Now I come to the second Chapter.

The.2. Chap.
verse. 1

verse. 2 And he said, I have cried in mine affliction unto the Lord: and he
heard me, or he answered me, out of the belly of the grave cried I, and thou
heardest my voice.

Jonas says, That he prayde out of the inward parts of the Fish, he first
shows with what a fortitude of mind he was endewed. Then therefore he takes
him to a new mind, because when he was at liberty, he thought yt he might
after a sort mock God: he was a fugitive from the Lord: but now when he is
shut up in outward myseries, he begins to pray, and of his own accord
sets him self in the sight of God. This is a change or alteration worthy
the noating. And here hence we gather how greatly it is expedient for us,
that we be drawn back with chains and be detayned, shut up in fetters as
it were, because when we are at liberty, immediately then we straye abroad
without any measure. Jonas when he was at liberty waxed wanton as we see, but
now when he perceyueth that he is fast bound by the violent hand of God, he
alters his mind, and prays out of the belly of the Fysh. And this
circumstaunce is also of us to be marked, for the words sound, as if he
should say, that he prayde out of the very helles. But how could it be,
that he then dyrected his prayers unto God, by whose hand he saw himself to
be so severely punished? For God most severely handeled him. Jonas was after
a sort driven to eternal destruction, for the belly of the Fysh, even as we
shall hereafter see, was as the belly of hell, or ye grave. And yet in this
desperation, Jonas gathers his spirits to him and takes courage, and can
take him self the right way unto God: this is a wonderful and almost an
incredible example of faith. A lawful and fyt time to pray, is when the Lord
punishes us.
Therefore let us learn to weigh well what here is said: that when the Lord
punishes us hardly, then is there a lawful and a fyt time to pray. But we
know how the greater part of people despair, and are not wont to offer their
prayers unto God: but when their minds be quiet. But God himself then chiefly
inuyteth us unto him, when as we are brought to greatest extremity. Let us
therefore remember that which Jonas tells of himself, even that he cried
unto God out of the very helles. And with all he also confyrmeth, that his
prayer proceeded of true faith: for he says not simply, that he prayed unto
the Lord, but also he adds, his God. But he speaks earnestly and very
delyberatelie. Well: Jonas although he were not only like a dead man, but
almost condemned, yet persuaded with him self that God for all this,
notwithstanding would be merciful unto him, if he fled for succor unto him.

We see therefore that Jonas by chance as hypocrites are wont to have the
name of God in their mouths, when they be oppressed: but he prayed seriously:
because he was persuaded that God would be merciful unto him. Now it is to
be marked that the prayer of Jonas was not uttered in these words which here
are mentioned: but Jonas while he was in the belly of the Whale meditated with
himself these cogitations.

After what sort therefore he was affected, he declares in this Canticle, and
we shall certainly see that he was drawn every way: as in temptations it must
needs be that our minds should be moved hither and thither. For the servant
of God enjoy not the victory without great trouble, we must therefore play
the soldier and that valiauntly, that we may get the victory. Jonas therefore
in this Canticle shows that he was tossed with great disquietnesse and sharp
torments: but with all he shows that this principle was steadfastly fyxed in
his mind, that God must be sought unto, and again, that he seeks him not in
vain, because he is always ready to help those that be his, as often as they
shall cry unto him. And therefore he says: I cried unto the Lord when I was
in trouble, and he answered me. There is no doubt but that Jonas mencioneth
after he came out of the belly of the Whale, what happened unto him, and gave
thanks to God. This first verse therefore conteyneth two parts. First that
Jonas in his distress, fled for succor unto God: The second part
conteyneth a thanksgeuing for that, marueylousie and contrary to all fleshly
imagination he was delivered: I have cried (says he) in my tribulation unto
the Lord, I cried out of the belly of hell, and thou heardest my voice. Jonas
as we shall hereafter see, not without great contention directed his prayer
unto God: he striued with many difficulties: but howsoever many impedimentes
did concur, yet went he forewarde and stayed not from prayer.

Now he also declares that he prayed not in vain: for that he might the more
amply set out the grace of God, he says: out of the belly of the grave: He put
this word, Affliction, in the first member of the verse, but here more clearly
does he express how notable and worthy of memory was the benefit of God, that
he escaped safe out of the belly of the Whale, because the same belly of the
fish was as the belly of the grave. Schol the Hebrews call the grave, Schol
very often taken for ye grave.
of the corruption that is therein. And the Latin interpreter almost in every
place has translated it, Hell: and sometime Schol is taken for Hell it self:
of the estate of the reprobates, whereby they perceive themselves condemned in
the sight of God, but more often is it taken for the grave, which since I
gladly in this place keep, even that the fish was like the grave. But he
signifies that he was so enclosed in the grave: that there appeared no way
out. What is the belly of the grave? even the most inward and deepest part of
the grave. And when Jonas was in this state and case he says: that he was
heard of the Lord. And here again it is expedient to repeat that which I
lately touched, even: that Jonas although in most greeuouse tentation, was not
so oppressed, but that his prayer escaped into the presence of God. He prayed
therefore, and not simply prayde but he also expresses his vehemence and
affection when he says that he cried, and made a strong noise, and it is no
doubt, but that very necessitye wrested from Jonas greeuouse complaynts. But
how so the matter ^e? he howled not, as the unbelievers are wont, who feel
their sins, and sufficiently complain, but yet they power out vain
bellowings to no purpose Jonas here discerns himself from them, saying that
he cried and called unto God. Now it follows.

verse. 3

I Read this place opposit^lie, that is, that Jonas here for amplification
sake declares his estate. This was sure a great thing, out of the belly of
the Fish to cry unto God: but far more difficil a thing it was, to lift up
his mind to prayers, when as yet he might make a coumpt that God was his
enemy and against him. For admit that he might call upon God being cast into
extreme dangers, but when it came into his mind, that whatsoever evil he
suffered, was laid upon him from above, because he endeavored to flee away
from the calling of God, how could he pierce through with prayer even unto the
heavens, when such a let came between? We see therefore to what end his
words tends, when he says. But thou had cast me into the deep, even to
the midst of the Sea, the flooddes compassed me, all thy waves and surges
passed over me. Briefly, Here Jonas shows, what grievous tentations were
laid upon him, while he endeavored to think upon prayers: For this came first
into his mind that God was his utter enemy. For Jonas then never made a
coumpt that he was cast into the Sea by the Mariners and the rest, but his
mind was thoroughly fixed in God. This is the reason why he says, Thou Lord
had cact me into the bottom, in the heart or midst of the Sea: Again,
Thy surges and thy waves, etc. Here he respects not the nature of the Sea:
but as I have said, he sets all his senses on God alone, and acknowledges
that he has to do with him, as if he should say: Thou O Lord do put me
to flight, or driuest me away in persecuting me, and yet I approach unto thee.
Thou in fearful sort do show that thou art offended, and yet I beseech
thee: so far are these terrors from pulling me far from thee, that as I
were pricked forward, I come willingly unto thee, because there is not else
where for me any hope of salvation. Now therefore we see of what force this
Antithesis, or Oppositio, is when as Jonas sets that terrible punishment
that he sustained, against his prayer. Now let us go forward.

verse. 4

Jonas again confirms that which I said, even that, when he would pray
not only the gate was shut against him, but that there were (as it were)
mountains in his way, that he should not aspyre with his prayers unto God.
Neither yet regards he only in what state he was in, but rather chiefly he
marketh the cause, even that he had provoked the anger of God upon him self.
And therefore he says, I said, I am rejected from the sight of thine eyes.
Some there be that couldlie expound this place, thus: That he was only
expelled out of his country, least at any time he should behold the Temple.
But I doubt not, but Jonas here mencioneth that he suffered even utter
torments, even as if all hope of pardon were cut of from him. What? (thinks
he) shall I yet hope that the Lord will be merciful unto me? it is not to be
hoped for. This is therefore the reiection, of the which he speaks. For God
is said to drive us from his sight, when he forbyddeth us all access unto
him. And therefore Jonas thought him self altogether alienated from God. If
any man object, Exoposito: for otherwise there should be no trial of our
faith, but even in this inward conflict. For if having quiet minds we can
think certainly that God is merciful unto us, what proof were there of our
faith? But when flesh tells us that God is against us, and that there is now
no hope of pardon any more, then faith begins at the length against this, to
cast up his buckler, and drives away that assault of temptation, and
conceyueth hope of grace: Howsoever for a time the Lord seems to be
displeased: then I say is faith truly tried. Such therefore was the state of
Jonas. For according to the imagination of his flesh, he thought that he was
altogether abiected of God, so that in vain might he come unto him. Well,
Jonas then, which had not yet put of flesh and blood, could not by and by
conceive the favor of God, but these difficulties did rise against him.

The later part of the verse is diversely of Interpreters expounded. Some
turn it negatiuelie: I will not look toward thy holy Temple: but the words
will not admit this interpretation. (...) Amongst the Hebrews signifies,
But, Or, But yet notwithstanding, it signifies also Certe, truly: Sometime it
is taken for: Peradventure, doubtfullie. The greater part of Interpreters do
translate it: But I will behold thy holy temple, As though Jonas had here
reproved that his diffidency, whereof he lately made mention: as always the
faithful bridle them selves, when they are carried away into any doubt. As
thus: What? wylt thou for this cast away all hope, seeing that God will be
peaceable and pacified with thee, if thou come unto him? Interpreters do
think that here is a figure called Epanorthosis, that is, (...). Correctio.
a Retraction: because Jonas here changes his sentence, and recanteth the
false principle which be first took of his fleshly imagination. For he said
first, that he was rejected from the face of the Lord: and now he repelleth
that tentation, according to the minds of those Interpreters, and says: But
yet I will see thy holy temple: although now I see me to be rejected of thee,
yet shall thou at the last take me into favor. We might notwithstanding
without any alteration, so expound this verse, that it might be full. At the
least, or yet I shall see thy holy temple. In manner of wishing, therefore might
ye future tense, be taken as the Hebrews are accustomed both to use the future
tense, when they pray, or when they wish any thing. Well, therefore will this
sense agree, that Jonas wauoringlie as yet does thus pray: Yet, or at the
least, Lord, I will add this, even that I may see thy holy temple. But
because the former interpretation which I brought, is probable, therefore I
will not contend. Whatsoever it be, we see that Jonas wholly dispaired not,
They say: He has cast me away from him, and not as Jonas said, thou have
rejected me, etc.
although the imagination of the flesh pricked him forewarde to desperation,
because that by and by he converted his words unto God. For they which murmur
against God, they rather speak in the third person, as turning them selves
from him.

But Jonas here sets God before his eyes, I am cast away (says he) from thy
sight. He does not expostulat or debate the matter with God, but declares that
he yet does seek God, howsoever he thinks that he is far cast off. And
then he adds. At the least I will see yet again thy holy temple. Whereas he
speaks of the Temple, there is no doubt but that he set before him the Temple
of God in Jerusalem, as the substance of faith. For when he was abiected, he
gathered together all those things which might seem to be able to establishe
and erecte his hope: For he was Circumcised; he was a worshipper of God
according to knowledge, he was brought up in the law, he was exercised in
sacrifices: under the name of the temple therefore, he comprehends al these
things briefly we see therefore how he animateth himself in extreme danger
and necessity. Note.
And this admonition is profitable for while we see al passage or entrance
unto God to be shut up against us, there is nothing more profitable then to
call to mind, that yet from our first infancy he has adopted us, and again
that he manifested his grace with many signs chiefly that he has called us by
the gospel into the society of his only begotten son who is the life and
salvation: and again that he has confirmed this grace both by baptism, and
the supper of the Lord. When as therefore these things shall come in mind, we
shall be able to break through all impediments by our faith. Now let us goo on.

verse. 5

6 I went down to the To the roots signifies to cut out, some turn it: to
ye uttermost bounds. The word differs from Seholl. being sechoth. Calvin.
bottom of the Mountains: The Earth with her bars was about me for ever, yet
thou have caused my life to ascend out of the To the roots signifies to cut
out, some turn it: to ye uttermost bounds. The word differs from Seholl.
being sechoth. Calvin.
pyt or sepulcher, O Lord my God.

HEre in many words Jonas prosecuteth how many things might occur, which
might ouerwhelme his foul with terror, and might withdraw him forth from God,
and take away al desire of prayer. But always this is to be kept in memory
which we said: even that he had to do with God. And truly this is to be marked
which the Prophet David said in the 39. Psalm: Thou notwithwstanding have done
it. For after he had complained of his enemies, he then again turned his mind
unto God, saying as it were thus: what do I? what profit I by these
complaints? For men do not only molest me, but thou O Lord have done it. So
Jonas here sets always before his face the Ire of God, because he knew that
no such misery could fall upon him but for his sins, he therefore says that he
was compassed about and again that he was with the deep closed about, but at
the length he adds, that God has caused his life to ascend out of the pyt.
Wherefore hither tend these circumstaunces, that Jonas could not without great
meruayl have access unto God, when as by all means his life was oppressed when
he says that he was compassed with the waters even to the soul. I understand
it that he was compassed with the waters deadly, for other expositions are to
small purpose or wrested. We say: we are grieved at the heart: This went to the
heart of him. etc.
And the Hebrews say that they are pained even to the soul, when as they are
in danger of their lives: and the Latins say also, that ye heart, the
entrayles, or the bowels them selves are wounded. And so in this place, The
waters compast me about, unto the soul: again, The deep encloseth me. Some
translate Seph, the Sedge: some again translate it the Herb Alga, which has
leaves like Lettice: others translate it a Bulrush: but al comes to one
sense. Certain it is that the Hebrewe word signifies a kind of Sedge: Yea,
some think that the red Sea was so called, because it is full of much Sedges
and Bulrushes. And they think Rushes take their name of their soon rotting.
But what Jonas means is evident, even that the weeds were fast wrapped about
his head, that is, the weeds did grow over his head. For it is hard to
expound it, as some do of the head of the Fyshe.

But Jonas speaks Metaphorically, when he says, that he was enwrapped in the
Sedge, because there is no hope when a man is enwrapped in the Sedge in the
bottom of the Sea. For how should he escape from destruction, which in the
Sea is held as it were bound. Metaphoricallie therefore Jonas means, that
he was so drenched in the deep, that he could thence by no means escape, but
by the incredible power of God. In the same sense he also says. I went down
even to the bottom of the mountains. But he speaks of the mountains which
adioyne to the sea: as if he said: that he was not only cast into the midst
of the sea, but so overwhelmed that he was fast fixed as it were in the bottom
under the very roots of the mountains. All these tend to this end, even
that there might no going out be hoped for, except God reached him the hand
from heaven, and deliver him by a strange and incredible example.

He says that, The earth with her bars was about him. By this manner of
speech he gives us to understand, that he was even so shut up, as if the
whole earth were like a gate. We know what manner of bars, the bars of the
earth be, if we will grant bars unto it. For if a gate be quite shut up by
bars, we know what and how great is the portion of the earth. And if we
imagine the earth to be the gate, what manner of bars must there be. It is
even thereafter therefore, as if Jonas should say, that he was forbidden this
vital life, even as if ye earth were set against him, he should not escape out
to the sight of the Sun. The earth (therefore, says he) was opposite unto me,
and that for ever. Afterward, her comes to thanksgeuing, saying: But thou O
Lord God have made my life to ascend out of the pit. After that Jonas had
used a long description, that he might declare yt he was not once dead only,
but with many and diverse deaths oppressed: here now he adds a thanksgeuing,
because he was delivered by the Lord. Thou (says he) O Lord my God have
caused my life to ascend. Now again he confirms that which I have once
already said, even that he powered not out fryuolous prayers unto God, but that
he prayed with a serious affection of faith. For he would never have called the
Lord, his God, but that he was so persuaded of the fatherly love of God, that
he might hope for certain and sure salvation at his hands. Therefore he
says, Thou O Lord my God (he says not, have delivered me) but, have brought
my life out of the grave, or pit. Jonas therefore here being revived,
testifies, that he was by the help of God, not only delivered from extreme
danger, but was raised up from the dead, by a certain form of resurrection.
Hither therefore appertains this saying, when he says, that his life was
brought out of the Sepulcher, or from very corruption it self. It follows.

verse. 7 Or wrapped it self together over me.
fainted within me, I remembered the Lord: and my prayer entered into thy holy
Temple.

Jonas in one verse comprehends the things which he first said, even that he
was afflicted with most grievous torments, yet so he was not dismayed, but
that always he conceived some taste of the favor of God, that by this means
he might be encouraged to pray. For first he confesses that his soul felt a
certain kind of faintness, or was inwrapped in woeful and perplexiue
cogitations, so that of his own nature he could not unfold him self out of
the same. As touching the word it self, Asaph, in the Hebrewe signifies to
cover: it also signifies in Niphal and Hithpael (in which conjugation it is
here taken) to Fainte: But the former signification may well be kept, even that
his soul wound up it self together as in the 102. Psalm, the prayer of the
afflicted when as in misery he gathered himself together and prayed. They
which expound it: To multiply prayers, are void of all reason I therefore
doubt not, but that Jonas here means, either that he was overwhelmed with a
certain faintness of mind, or else that he was so perplexed, that he could
not but with a violent contention mount up unto God. What so it be, he would
by this word express the perplexity of his mind. Therefore when as we ponder
in our minds diverse Imaginations, and continue as it were fast bound in utter
danger, then is our soul said to tumble or roll it self up and down in
us. And when the soul wrappeth it self up together, all the cogitations of
the perplexed man fall down upon him. We covet to ease our selves, when as we
reuolue diverse imaginations, but what so we endeavor to aduerte else whether,
by and by redoundeth upon our head, and so our soul windeth it self up
together upon us. Now we know what Jonas means in the first member of this
verse, While my soul gathered it self up together, or fainted in me. Then he
says, I remembered the Lord. By this we gather that Jonas was not a victor
without great difficulties, even to the faynting of the soul, as we have
said, and this is one thing. In the mean time we gather again, that he never
was so oppressed with temptations, but that he sought the Lord at the least
with his prayers. This principle therefore Jonas kept with him, that God is to
be sought unto, although for a time so hardly and severely he handeled him.
For that Remembrance whereof he speaks, proceeds of faith.

The wicked remember God, and fear, because they find him a severe judge
against the^.
The wicked also remember God, but they are therewithal sore terrified, because
they find him a terrible Judge: yea, and as often as mention is made of God,
they conceive nothing else but destruction. But Jonas applies the remembrance
of God to another end, even that with some solace he might lighten his ears
and griefs. For it follows immediately, that: His prayers piersed, or entered
in, even unto God. We see therefore that Jonas so remembered his God, that with
faith he acknowledged, that he would be merciful unto him. And from this
proceeded his desire to pray. Now that he says, that his prayer entered into
the Temple, there is no doubt, but that he alludeth unto the rytes of the
Law. For the Jews were accustomed to turn them selves, as often as they
prayed, toward the Temple, and this Ceremony was not superstitious, because
we know that Doctrine was propounded unto them, which invited them unto the
Sanctuary and the Arc of the Covenant, when as therefore this manner was
under the Law, Jonas says, that his prayer came in unto the Temple of God:
because the Temple was a visible token whereby the Jews might conceive ye God
was amongst them: not that they might with a wicked imagination faste^ or
ioygne God to the outward signs, but because they knew that these helps
were not in vain given unto them. After this sort therefore Jonas not only
remembered his God, but also called to mind the signs, in which he had all his
life long exercised his faith, as we said of late. For they which take Temple
for Heaven, altogether straye from the mind of the Prophet. I know very well
that Heaven is sometime called ye Temple, but ye sense agrees not here with
this place. Jonas therefore means, that although he were most far from the
Temple, that yet God was at hand unto him: for he ceased not to make his
prayer unto that God, who had manifested himself in his law given, and who
would be worshipped at Jerusalem, and who would that the Arc of the
Covenant should be a testimony of his presence, that the Jews might call upon
him with a sure faith, and might not doubt that he was in the midst of them;
sith they had there a visible mansion place.

The Prayer.
Grant almighty God, seeing thou once have declared such a notable show of
thy immeasurable power in thy servant Jonas, that when he was sunk down almost
even unto the very hell, yet thou did erect him unto thee, and so with
fyrme constancy dydst sustain him, that he ceased not to pray and cry unto
thee: grant (I say) that in the temptations, wherein it is necessary for us
daily to be exercised, we may raise up aloft our minds unto thee, and again
that we cease not to think that thou art at hand unto us, even when there
appear manifest signs of thine anger toward us: And also grant that when
our sins do thrust in them selves in our sight, which may cast us into
desperation, that yet we may strive constantly and never depart from the
hope of thy mercy, until we having ended all our stryfes, may at the
length freely and with open mouth give thanks to thee, and celebrate thy
immensurable goodness, whereof we daily have experience, until we being
led along through daily experimentes, may come at the last into that
blessed rest, which is laid up in heaven for us through Christ our Lord.

Amen.

verse. 8

verse. 9 But I will sacrifice unto thee, in the voice of praise, I will pay
that which I have vowed: Salvation is of the Lord.

Jonas says, that men do miserably err, when they decline unto their
superstitions, because they deprive themselves of the chiefest felicity. What
the mercy of men is.
For he calls the Mercy of men, whatsoever aid or help to attain
salvation is to be wished. The sense therefore is, that as soon as men turn
back from the true God, they are immediately enstraunged also both from life
and salvation, neither remains there with them any hope, because of their own
accord they cast from them whatsoever good thing may be hoped or wished for.
Some gather here a contrary sense, that superstitious men, when they return
unto goodness, leave their shame behind them. Opprobrius.
For the Hebrew word sometime is taken for Reproach. These therefore think
that here is described the manner of true repentance, even that: when God
calls men back from their error into the way of salvation, and gives unto
them a sound mind, that then they throw from them all their vices. This
truly is true: but the sense is to much wrested. Others restrain it unto the
shypmen, which vowed Sacrifice unto God, as if Jonas should say: that they
fell back again by and by into their former doting toys, and let God go,
who with his mercy had delivered them from shypwracke, and so do these
expositors interpret their Mercy, to be taken for God: and this is also to
much restrained. I doubt not but Jonas here sets his pity against ye wicked
inuatio^s of me^, because a little after it follows: But I will sacrifice unto
thee, in the voice of praise. Therefore before Jonas professes that he shall be
acceptable to God, he triumphs over all feigned inventions, which men have
wickedlie devised for them selves, and with the which they are drawn away
from the true God and his sincere Religion. For, lying vanities, he calls all
the devises of men, wherewith men deceive them selves: for certain it is that
they be mere falacies and decepts, that men frame unto them selves without the
word of God: because there is one only and simple truth, which the Lord
has revealed unto us by his word. Whosoever therefore declyneth from it
hither or thither, Note.
yea but one jot, he upon purpose brings upon him a kind of deceypt, even
whereby he destroys him self. They, therefore, which follow such vanities,
says Jonas, they forsake their own mercy, that is, do cut of them selves
from al felicity. For there is no aid or help else where to be hoped for,
but from God alone: but this place is diligently to be noted. For from hence
we gather what accoumpt all superstitions, that is, al opinions or imaginations
of men are to be made of, when as they will at their pleasures institute a
Religion, for Jonas calls them lying, or deceyptfull vanities. Therefore
there is one only true Religion, which the Lord has delivered unto us in
his word.

Again, this is to be noted that in vain do men busy them selves while they
follow their own inventions. For look how much the more courageously they
run, so much the farther depart they back from the way: as says Augustine.
The principle of Jonas.
But Jonas here takes a more high principle, even ye God only conteyneth in
himself all fullness of good things. Whosoever therefore seeks after God,
godly and with a sincere Religion, he shall in God al whatsoever is to be
wished for unto salvation. But God is not truly sought, but in obedience and
faith: How God is sought.
whosoever therefore dare so lose the reyne unto them selves, that they do
follow this or that without the word of God, they, because they depart from
God, do also withal, deprive them selves of all good things.

But superstitious men do think that they profit much while they labor in
their inventions: but we see what the holy ghost by the mouth of Jonas here
pronounces: even as the Lord him self also said by Jeremy: They have
forsaken me the fountain of living water, Iere. 2.13
and have dug them selves pittes, yea broken pittes that can hold no water.
etc. God there complayneth of the elect people, which turned unto wicked
superstitions. When as therefore men wander out of the word of God, they do
after a sort drive away God him self from them, or bid him adieu. And so it
comes to pass, that they are deprived of all good things, because, beside
God, there is no hope or salvation found. Very notably therefore Jonas adds
immediately: But I in the voice of praise will sacrifice unto thee. As if he
should say: since that men do cast forth them selves into exyle, at what time
they addict them selves to their errors, therefore unto thee only O Lord
will I sacrifice. All this is dilygentlie to be marked of us: for as our wits
or dispositions are prone unto lies and vanities, easily at the first every
superstition will carry us away, unless we be kept in with this hand, even
that we be surely persuaded, that perfect salvation and whatsoever help or
aid is to be looked for, does rest in God alone. And when this is well and
thoroughly printed in our hearts, then shall not true Religion easily depart
from us: although Satan on every side lay his deceyptfull snares for us, yet
shall we continue in the true and right Religion of God. And so much the more
dilygentlie is this place to be marked, for that Jonas here would confirm him
self in the right course of piety. For he perceived that he was, as all
mortal men are, prone to like of lying vanities, unless he should animate him
self unto constancy. And he confirms him self, when he pronounces
whatsoever superstition men do inue^t to be the deprivation from chief
felicity, from life and salvation. And hereby it comes to pass that we do
abhor all error, if we be persuaded that we leave the true God and together
with him cast away from us our salvation and whatsoever good thing may be
wyshed, when we obey not his word. I will, therefore, sacrifice unto thee with
the voice of praise, says Jonas. And, here again is to be noted that the true
worship of God chiefly consists in praise and thankesgeuing, The true worship
of God chiefly consists in thanksgeuing and praise.
as is said in the 50. Psalm. For there God shows that he makes none
account of any sacrifices, except they tend to this end and skope, even that
his name may be celebrated and praised. He would have in the law, sacrifices
to be offered unto him indeed but unto another end. For God never stayed as
contented with ye sacrifice of Calves, Oxen Gtoes and Lambs, but he would
also be acknowledged to be the author of all good things, and therefore in that
Psame he says. Sacri^fice unto me the sacrifice of praise. So again Jonas
here when he might have said more simply: I O Lord will acknowledge that thou
have saved my life, he says yet: I will offer to thee the sacrifice of praise.
But if this was of force in the shadows of the Law, the same of us also much
more is to be marked, even that we go not a bout after a gross manner to
worship God, but spiritually, when we confess that our life depends upon him
and proceeds from him alone, that we are in his hand, that we are indebt unto
him for all good things, finally that he is the aucthor* and fountain of
salvation, and not of salvation only, but also of wisdom righteousness and
virtue. Then afterward he adds his Vows: I, says he, Will pay my Vows.
In what sort we ought to take the name of Vows, we have spoken in another
place. Vows.
For the holy Fathers did not make a bargain with God, as the Papists are
accustomed at this day. Which endeavor to please God with their toys, when as
one abstayneth certain days from the eating of flesh, another clotheth him
self with hair, one takes upon him a Pilgremage, and another obtrudeth some
one devise or other unto God. Nothing was there like this in the Vows of the
holy fathers: but their Vows were mere thanksgeuing, for a testimony of
gratitude or thankfulness. And therefore Jonas here adioygneth his Vows with
the Sacrifice of praise, whereby we gather that they be not things contrary
either to other, for he repeateth one thing twyse. Therefore Jonas not to any
other intent did nominate his Vows to God, but that he might make testimony of
his thankfulness, and therefore he adds: Salvation is of the Lord. That is:
it is proper to God alone to save. For here Iehoua the Lord, is put in the
dative case: because the letter ^ Lamed is put between Well, Salvation is of
the Lord, that is: not unto any other belongs the office of salvation, then
unto the most high God. Seeing it is so, how mad they be we see, which
transfer praise and thanksgeuing to any other, as it is when every man
frames him self an Idol. When as therefore there is one God who alone
saves, it is meet to refer all our praises unto him alone, that we defraude
him not of his right, this is the sum. Now it follows.

verse. 10 That is commanded. Calvin.
spoke unto the Fysh, and it cast Jonas out upon the dry Land.

HEre is the delyuerie of Jonas described unto us in few words, but very
necessary it is with diligence to weygh the matter. This was a wonderful
miracle: Jonas alive, and safe to ^ye in the bowelles of the Fyshe, by the
space of three days. How came it to pass, that he was not a thousand times
styfled or chooked with the waters? As we know daily the Fyshes do gulpe in
water. Certainly Jonas could not breathe there, and the life of man without
breath can scarce endure a moment of time: therefore contrary to nature was
Jonas there preserved. Again, how could it be that the Fysh should vomet up
Jonas upon the shore, but that God with a wonderful power had drawn the Fyshe
thither? and again, against nature had opened both his entrayles and mouth?
This coming out of the Fyshes belly, is full of admiration, yea of many
miracles. But Jonas whereby the more he might extol the immeasurable power of
God, uses the word, spoke: whereby we gather that there is not any thing
laborious unto God, because with his only beck he could bring to pass so
great a matter, as might far pass all our understanding. If Jonas had said
that he was delivered by the benefit and grace of God, it had been less
effectual, then now when he uses the word of Commanding, as, God spoke.

But seeing that this delyuerie of Jonas is an image of our resurrection, this
place is most worthy the noting, because the holy* ghost lyfteth up our
minds unto that commandment, whereby the world was created, and as yet at
this day is marueylouslie preserved. Therefore that without any let or
diffycultie, that restitution which God has promised, may flourish and be of
force with us, let us remember that by his word and beck, the world was
created of nothing, and still is sustained. But if that general doctrine
suffice not, let this History of Jonas also come into our mind, that God
commanded the Fysh that it should cast out Jonas. Whence then was it that
Jonas escaped safe and sound? even because so it pleased the Lord, because
the Lord commanded. And that word at this day retayneth the same efficacy,
therefore according to the power whereby it works all things, we in time to
come shall be raised up also from death. Now it follows.

The.3. Chap.
verse. 1

verse. 2 Arise and go to Nineueh into that great City, and preach unto it
the preaching which I command thee.

Jonas into his former degree and honor, for he was unworthy to live. But God
not only restored him to life, but again adorned and bewtified him with the
office and title of a Prophet. This as I have said Jonas got not, but by the
rare and singular grace of God. For when he first fled, and showed himself
disobedient, he deprived him self after a sort, of all favor of God: that he
therefore recovered the office of a Prophet, for certainty came not to pass
by his Desert. This is to be noted in the first place, when it is said, That
the word of God, came the second time. Note how God speaks to men.
And now the manner of speaking is to be marked, because, diverse ways is the
word of God directed unto men. For God speaks to every one of us: but he
speaks after a special manner unto the Prophets, whom he will have to be
Preachers and witnesses of his will. Therefore as often as God places any man
in any particular office, he is said to direct his word unto him: even as the
word of God is directed to the Magistrates, when as they are bidden to
exercise the authority committed unto them. So also the word of the Lord
always came unto the Prophets, because it was not lawful for them to intrude
them selves; unless they were called of God. Now follows the commandment.

Arise and go to Nineueh into that great City, and preach there the
preaching which I command thee. We see here that God repeateth again the
same thing which he did at the beginning: that Nineueh is a great City, to the
intent that Jonas might take to him an invincible courage, and may come
thither well advised. For hereby it comes to pass, that many men very
bouldly exercise their office for a time, but soon after, they faint, because
the difficulties were not sufficiently foreseen of them. And then when men
find more trouble then they thought at the beginning, they even faint almost,
or at the least are utterly discouraged. Therefore the Lord here in time, and
very prouidently foretells Jonas, how hard his office should he: as if he
had said, I send thee being a man unknown, and of base estate, and a
forrenner, that thou may denounce destruction, not unto a few men, but unto
a great multitude, and that thou may have a conflict with a most noble City,
and so populous that it may seem to be a certain Region.

Now therefore we know why the praise of the City was added, even to be a
great City, for that Jonas might prepare him self to undertake and pass
through this battle, least he afterward in the midst of his course should
faint. But mark, that the fear of this thing, even that the City was great
and populous, did in the beginning woonderfully dismaye him, insomuch that he
fled from the calling of God. But now he is nothing moved with the
greatness of that City, but constantly he follows the Lord, whether he
calls him: we see therefore how faith when it once has gotten the victory
in our hearts, does mount aloft over all impedimentes, and contempneth all the
greatness and glory of this world. Now by and by is there added.

verse. 3 the word of the Lord: Now Nineueh was a great City Hebrews. To
God: Meaning yt it was an excellent City, using the phrase of the Hebrews,
which call all excellent things Divine, or things of God. Calvin.
of God, of three days journey.

WHen Jonas me^tioneth that he took his journey to come to Nineueh, according
to the commandment of God: First of all here he shows (as I have said
already) how great the power and efficacy of faith is. For although Jonas
casts in him self the greatness and pride of the City Nineueh, yet of so
great courage is he, that he forgets that he is but one man, obscure and
unarmed: but by and by he takes to himself those weapons which might beat
down all the power of the world, because he knows that he is sent from God.
He set God on his side, whom he knows to be the author of his calling. And
hereby comes it to pass, that with an hye and vnfeareful mind he despises
all the glory of the City Nineueh. Whereby we see that John said truly,
that our victory consists in faith, 1. Ioh. 5.4
whereby we overcome the whole world. And with all Jonas declares how
greatly he profited under the correction of God. He was severely chastened,
and we know that many unbelievers wax the more obstinate and hard hearted, by
punishment, and do even spew out their madness and poison against God: But
Jonas here quite contrary shows that, How profitable the Lords chastisement
is to his children.
that chastisement was profitable to him, because he was reclaymed unto the
obedience of God. He went forward, therefore, according to the commandment
of God: that is, he respected nothing else, but that he might obey God, and
suffer him self wholly to be governed of him. And out of this place also we
gather, how well the Lord provides for us, and our salvation, when as he
corrects our contumacie or disobedience: although his chastisementes be very
sharp, yet bebecause so great profit ensues, we know that there can nothing
better come unto us (as David speaks in the Psa. 119) then to be humbled
under the hand of God. Psa. 116.


The Lord in punishing of us, respects always our profit.
This alteration of Jonas therefore is unto us a noble spectacle of our profit,
which the Lord always respects as often as he handles those that be his,
any thing sharply: For surely, otherwise cannot either the arrogancy or
rebellion, either the dullness or the slothfulness of this our flesh be tamed
and reclaymed. Well: now also we know how Jonas gathered to him self such
fortitude, even because he had by experience tried in the belly of the Fysh,
that even in the midst of a thousand deaths, there is yet in God help
sufficient to recover health and safegarde. And because he knew that the
extremities of death are in the government and hand of God, yea, though the
whole world should rise against him, he is not stricken with fear, that for
that, he should refuse the commandment of God. Therefore, how much the more
any man perceyueth that God is favorable and beneficial unto him, so much the
more courageously ought he to proceed in his office, and securely to commyt
his life and safegarde unto God, and constantly to overcome all the dangers
of this world. Afterward he says, That Nineueh was a great City, even, of
three days journey. Some men labor much here to dissolve a doubt, where no
cause is, and in loseng a knotte where none is: because this seems to be
absurd, that one City should contain in compass about, thyrtie of our
Leagues, or thereabout. When as they therefore conceive in their mind a kind
of absurdity, by and by they invent remedies, even that no man can so behold
all the City, that he may view all the Lanes, all the Streets, and all
public places, under three days: yea, they add also, that this should be
vnsterstoode, not that a man should run through the City, or swyftlie
should pass through it, but that slowly he should contemplate and behold
it, and might stay in the hye ways.

But these are childishe excuses, for if we will believe profane, writers,
Nineueh certainly was of that greatness, which is here spoken of by Jonas. For
they say that it was 400 Furlongs broad. A furlong contains 125. pases. 8.
Furlongs a Mile. 100. Furlongs. 12. Mile. 400. Furlongs, 48. Mile. About the
walls of Nine. 1500 Towers.
Now we know what space four hundred furlongs contain: when we know that a
Furlong contains a hundred twenty and five pases, therefore eight furlongs
make a mile. Now then if a man count he shall find in an hundred furlongs,
twelve miles, there are therefore in 400. Furlongs 48. miles. Very well therefore
agrees this with ye testimony of Jonas. Again also Diodor and Herodot do
say that there were in the compass of the city 1500. Towers. Seeing therefore
this was so, certainly the city could not be less, then here is by Jonas
declared. If these things seem to pass common credit, yet writers made not
this of nothing. For admit that many false things are found in Diodore and
Herodot: yet as touching those cities certainly they durst not lie. For
Babylon as then stood, in the sight of all men, the ruinouse places of
Nineueh, also stood, although long before it were overthrown: In Nine.
120000. children.
Again we shall see also about the end of the book, that the City was so
great and populouse that in it there were an hundred and twenty thousand
children. Who so therefore will not receive the testimonye of Jonas, let him
feed himself with the lies of the devil. For when as there were in it so many
children, what now rests but that we may say that very great was the circuit
of the city? But that which a little after follows seems to be contrary to
this. For Jonas says that when he entered into the city, he finished in one
day the course of the city, and preached: the answer is easy, that as soon
as he entered into the City, and began to publishe the commandment of God.
Immediately there followed some conversion: therefore Jonas signifies not that
in one day he passed through the whole city. But in the first day he
converted unto him part of the city: and then he ceased not to exhort all men
to repentance and so followed the conversion of the whole City, but not in the
second nor yet in the third day as we may sufficiently gather. Now let us go on
to the rest.

verse. 4

Jonas prosecuteth that which he had said before in one word, even that he
came to Nineueh according to the commandment of the Lord. Where he declares
how faithfully he executed the offices enjoined him, and so obayed the word of
God. Jonas therefore came and began to enter into the city and to preach
the first day. This celeritie shows more how easy Jonas was to be taught,
and how greatly he studied to perform his duty unto God. For if any fear had
as yet been in his mind, he might have looked upon the city as careful and
doubtful men do* which enquire: what is the condition of the place, what are
the dispositions of the men, and what easy access unto them there is, and what
order is most fit to take, and where is least danger. Jonas therefore if as
yet he had been hindered, by the cogitations of the flesh, he might have
stayed a three or four days, and then begin to execute the office of a
Prophet. Well: this does not he, but he enters the city and cries. Here we
see how prompte and ready he was unto obedience, who before would pass the
Seas to escape from the Lord: but now he takes to himself not a moment of
time to deliberate, but even at the gate he began to testify that for this
cause he came even that he might obey God. We see therefore how vehemently
these words are to be read, the discourse truly is very plain: Jonas here
sets not down any colors of Rhetoric, neither decketh he his entrance
into the city with any pompouse glory of speech. Jonas (says he) entered the
city: He which is not fully exercised in the scrptures will say that this is a
very could speech, but when we weigh these circumstaunces we see that this
simple speech has in it more vehemencye then all the po^pes of the
Rhetorici^ns, Well he entered the City, One days journey and cried, and
said. When he says, that he spoke, crying, he again describes the
confidence of his mind, even that he ^^ept not like a S^ayle, as men in
dangerous matters are woon^ ^^ go forewarde, ^edete^, very softly and
charity. He says, that he cried. This liberty that he used, declares that
he was void of all fear, and (...) endued with such a spirit of fortitude,
that it lyfted him above all the impediments of the world. And with all this is
to be called to mind, how (...) hateful his message was. For he assured not
the Nineuits unto God with fair speech, but threatens (...) them, and
seems (...) go^ unto them no hope of pardon.

Jonas might the (...) with him self that this was a saying, which might turn
to the destruction of the speaker* May I, might Jonas think with him self?
denounce (...) so populous and City destruction, and not by and by be slain*
Shall not the (...) which (...), stone me? Jonas might surely (...) up such
things with himself: but no fear might let him (...) on the performance of
the office (...) servant, for he had ben^ manifestly confirmed of the Lord.
But it shall be requisite to ioygne to th^s, the^ next ^er^e.

verse. 5

Jonas said that the City Nineueh was a great City unto God. This manner of
speaking is sufficiently used in the Scriptures. For the Hebrews call that
Divine, or of God, what soever excels: so the Ceders, are called the Ceders
of God, and Mountains of God, and Fields of God, if either in height or in
any other gift they do excel. This City therefore is said to be Divine,
for that in comparison of others, it was most famous. For this cause I would
briefly touch this, because certain men very subtly, but very chyldishly
almost, call it the City of God, because God took care for it, and in the
which he would show such an example of conversion. But this kind of speaking is
taken of the common manner: of speaking. But now I return to the text. Jonas
says yt the Citizens of Nineueh believed the Lord: and hereby we gather that
the Preaching of Jonas was not so short, but that first he foretold that he was
the true Prophet of God, and that he did not rashly utter those things
commanded: And then again we gather that Jonas so denounced destruction unto
them that with all he showed yt God was the revenger of al offenses, and
rebuked the Nineuit^, and as it were cyted them unto the judgment seat of
God, showing unto them their gyiltinesse. For if he had simply spoken of
punishment, this certainly could not prevail, but even to make ye Nineuits
(...) a rise up against God. But when as their (...) ^^ults and guiltiness is
set before the^, but his means they acknowledge ye worthelie they suffer
punishment and this is a preparation to humility and repentance ^^ch of these
things is easily gathered out of this word, when as Jonas says that ye
Nineuits beloved God* For unless the^ had been persuaded that this
commandment proceeded from heaven, what manner of faith had theirs been? Let
us know therefore that Jonas so much foretold of his calling, that the
Nineuits held for certainty that he was a celestial Preacher, and from hence
came their faith. Again the Nineuits had never so believed God, to put upon
them selves Sackcloath, but that they were admonished of their sins.
Therefore there is no doubt but that Jonas while he cried out against Nineueh,
laid open, and set also evidently before all men, how wickedlie those men
had lived, and how heinous and grievous their offenses were against God. And
hereby it came that they put on Sackcloth, and humbly fled for succor unto
the mercy of God, because they understand that they were worthelie called to
judgment for their life wickedly led.

But it may be demanded how the Nineuits believed God, The fatherly good will
of God is the cause of faith.
since to the^ no hope was given of salvation: for there can be no faith without
the taste of the fatherly benevolence of God. Who so conceyueth that God is
displeased and angry with him, it must needs be yt he must altogether
despair: When as therefore Jonas gave them no ^ast of the goodness of God, he
might rather an hundred times terrify the Nineuits, then once call the^ to the
faith: but the speech may be Synechdochiall, that is put part for the whole.
For it is not whole faith, when as men, being called to repentance, do
submissiuelie humble them selves before God: but yet it is a part of faith, as
the Apostle says, Heb. 11
in the 1^ to the Hebre. that Noah by faith feared. Where he bringing the
fear, which Noah conceived, by the Oracle of God, out of faith, he teaches
that it is a part of faith, and that it proceeds from thence. And yet, the
mind of the holy Patriarche must be by some other mean raised up then by the
threatninges, to build the Arc, to be for him a sanctuary of safegarde. So
also by Synechdoche may this place be expounded, that the Nineuits believed
the Lord: even because when they understand that God was to give them their
deserved punishment, they submytte themselves to him, and yet in the mean time
flee unto him to crave pardon. But there is no doubt but that the Nineuits
conceived more by the words of Jonas, then a naked terror and fear: because
if they had only apprehended that part, even that they were guilty before
God, and worthily were called to pain and punishment, they had been confused
and dismayed with terror, and never had aspired to ye desire of pardon. When as
therefore they do humbly prostrate them selves before God, certainly they
conceive some hope of grace and favor at Gods hand. Therefore they were not
so touched with repentance and the fear of God, but yt there was mingled with all soul ta^^ of grace* so they believed God, because although they understood
that they were most worthy of death, they yet dispayred not, but had recourse
unto prayers. When as therefore we see that the Nineuits sought that remedy,
we may certainly think, that they profited more by the preaching of Jonas,
then that they should only understand that they were culpable in the sight of
God. And this thing is certainly to be held. But we will speak more in the
next Lecture.

The Prayer.
Grant O almighty God, that seeing there is so much fearfulness in us, that
none of us are fytte to follow thee whether thou call us: that we being
instructed by the example of thy servant Jonas may prepare our selves unto
perfect obedience: and whatsoever terrors Satan and the world obiecteth
against us, that yet we being confyrmed with the confidence of thy power and
aid, which thou have promised unto us, may go forward in the course of our
vocation, and at no time decline therefro, but that we may so skyrmish against
al stumbling blocks and lettes of this world, till we may come to that heavenly
kingdom, where we may enjoy both thee and Christ shine only begotten son
which is our strength and salvation: and let thy spirit cherishe us, and
confirm all our senses unto thine obedience* so that at yt length thy name
may be glorified in us and we once may be made partakers of that glory, to
the which thou inuitest us by the same Christ our Lord. Amen.

verse. 6 Or, for word had come to. etc.
And The speech or the thing.
word came to the king of Nineueh, and he rose from his Throne, and cast away
his Robe from him, and put on sackcloath, and sat upon the duste, (or in the
ashes.)

verse. 7 And he proclaimed and said thorough Nineueh (by the Counsel of the
King and his Nobles) saying: Let neither man, nor cattle (or beast) bullock
nor sheep taste any thing, neither feed nor drink water.

verse. 8 And let man and beast put on Sackcloath, and cry mightily unto God:
and let every man return from his wicked ways, and from the rapine which is
in their hands.

Jonas certain days preached, before it was known to the King, this is
truly the more received opinion: For the Interpreters do so expound this
verse, where it is said that the speech was brought unto the King, as though
the King had understood that the whole City was on a rore, and moved with the
preaching of Jonas: but the words admit a contrary sense and exposition,
even that the speech of Jonas by and by came to the Kings ears, and I rather
incline to this exposition and judgment. For Jonas seems exegeticallie or
expositinally to show how the Nineuits put on Sackcloath. This he spoke
briefly, verse. 5. and now he utters the same more largely. And we know
that this order is much used among the Hebrews to t^^th the sum of things
in few words: and afterward to add the explication.

Therefore because in the fyft verse Jonas said that the Nineuits were covered
with sackcloth, and proclaimed a fast, and now in this verse he seems to
express more evidently how this was done even by the kings commandment. And
certainly it is credible that the fast was not commanded in the kings city,
By whom a fast is to be appointed.
only by the consent of the common people, when as the king was there and his
counsailers. Because therefore it is more agreeable that the edict concerning
the fast proceeded from the king, therefore I willingly do so ioygne these
two verses together, that the first may signifye the fruit that followed of
the preaching of Jonas: and the latter may be added expositiuely, because he
declares the same thing more fully. Now Jonas says that therefore was the fast
indicted of the Nineuits because the king with this counsel had so decreede.
(And so I do interpret the Hebrew word by the preterpluperfect tense thus,
for the speech had come unto the king,) for the order and manner Jonas now
sets down, how the Nineuits proclaimed afast: even because the king was
admonished of the sermons of Jonas and by and by called together his
counsailers. This therefore was a public Edict, and not some rash raised
motion, as sometime it comes to pass he says that the edict was published
by the aucthority of the king and of his counsel or nobles. Although some
take the hebrew word for order of allowaunce. The word signifies to taste, as
Jonas afterward uses the word: but here it is taken by a metaphor for
counsel: and I do think that this sense better agrees to this place: but
now I come to the matter it self. That the king of so Royal a city, Note that
this mighty king obayed the preaching of poor Jonas.
yea the chief Monarchy in those days yielded himself so obedient at the
preaching of Jonas, it is surely worthy the noting. We see that kings wax
proud oftentimes because they think that they are exemp^ed from the common
forte of men: and so lift they up themselves above laws, and hereby it
comes that they will make all things lawful unto them: and then while they
let the reyne lose to their own lust, they take it grievously to be admonished
or reprehended, yea though it be by their equals. But Jonas a poor man and a
forrainer. That he therefore so affected ye mind of the king, by it certainly
appears ye secret power of God, which he places in his word as often as so
it pleases him. God truly by the preaching of his word, works not equally,
that is, keeps not always one order or rule, but when it seems good unto
him, so effectually touches he the hearts of men, that the good success that
the word shall have, passethe al man's imagination* even as in this place a
worthy example of the same is set before us. For who would have said, that a
profane king who lived always as him listed, In whom no true and sincere
religion did reign, in one moment could so be tamed? And more, laying aside
al glory of his kingdom, would prostrate himself in the dust and put on
sackcloth? We see therefore that God not only speaks by the mouth of Jonas,
but also thereto adds efficacy unto his word. But this is to be called to
mind which Christ spoke, Mat. 12.4^
The Men of Nineueh shall rise up in the judgment against this people, for
they repented at the preaching of Jonas, and behold a greater then Jonas is
here? Daily Christ utters the voice of his Gospel: for although he be not
after a visible manner conuersaunt here among us, yet, he it is which by his
Ministers does speak. If we contemn this doctrine, how shall our obstinacy
and hardness of heart be excusable, when ye Nineuits which never tasted any
true doctrine of piety, which were endued with no knowledge in Religion, so
soon were converted at the preaching of Jonas. But that their repentance was
serious we gather by this, that the preaching of Jonas was very sharp. For he
denounced destruction to that most mighty City, and this might by and by have
brought the Kings mind unto madness and fury. That therefore so gently and
with so small adoo he was humbled, for certainty is a most rare alteration and
change. We have therefore a notable example of repentance, that the King
could so soon forgette himself and his dignity, and in such sort that
laying aside his precious Ro^be^, he put Sackcloath upon him. Now as touching
Fasting and Sackcloath, it is certain and true that Repentance consists not
in these outward things, as we may see in Joel. For God cares not for
Ceremonies. And whatsoever is glorious in the eyes of men, the same is
frivolous in his sight: for he requires the sincerity of the heart.

Fastings, and other exercises of piety ought to be referred to ye testimonies
of our guiltiness and of our desire of pardon and are but an outward
profession of our repentance.
Therefore look what Jonas here declares of Fasting and other exercises, ought
to be referred unto the lawful end why they were used, even that by this
means the Nineuits would evidently declare that they were culpable and
worthily called before the judgment seat of God: and next yt they humbly
desired the favor of the Judge. Fasting therefore and Sackcloath, are only but
an outward profession of repentance. For if a man all his life long fast and
put on Sackcloath, and wallow in the duste, and in the mean time ioygneth not
with all the sincere affection of the heart he does nothing else but jest with
God, and trifle in his sight. Therefore of them selves these outward exercises
shall be of smaller moment, except the inward affection of the heart goes before
them, and move men so to declare such testimonies of their inward minds.
Furthermore, as often as the Scripture makes any mention of Fasting of Ashes,
Good works accepted of God, not for themselves but for the end.
and Sackcloth, we must mark that these things are set forth unto us, as
external and outward signs of repentance, which if they be false, nothing
else do they but provoke ye ire of God: but if they be true, they are accepted
of God in respect of their end, and not that of them selves they are of force
to pacify Gods ire, or to put away our sins. Now if any man will demand
whether Repentance brings with it. Fasting, Sackcloath, and Ashes: the
answer is easy, that the faithful all their whole life ought to meditate
repentance, therefore except each of us exercise himself in this continual
study, even that he renounce both him self and his former life, he as yet
has not learned what it is so serve God, because we must always w^^re
against, and wage battle with the flesh. But seeing that ye meditation of
Repentance is daily, yet is not Fasting always reqired of us. It follows
then that Fasting is a public and solemn testimony of repentance, where
there appears any extraordinary token of the vengeance of God. So also we
seacute;e in Joel that the Jews were called unto Sackcloath and Ashes, because
God as it were prepared to the battle came forth amongst them: and all the
Prophets cried that destruction was at hands to the people, and therefore it
behooved the Jews to fly for succor unto God with such testimonies. So also
the Nineuits when they were stricken with that terrible threatening of God, they
put on Sackcloath, and commanded a fa^te, even because this ought to be done
in extremities. Now therefore we understand why the king after he himself
had put on sackcloth commanded also to the whole people both fasting and other
testimonies of repentance. But this seems to be absurd yea very
ridiculouse, that the king commands the beasts, as well as men to profess
repentance: For repentance is the change of a man while he restores
himself unto God, when as he was before from him enstraunged: and this can by
no means fall out in brute beasts. Rashly therefore and contrary to all
reason does the King of Nineueh mingle Beasts with men, when as he entreats
of repentance: But that is to be noted which first we spoke, even that
destruction was denounced not to men only, but also to the whole City, and
also to the very edifices and buyldings. For as God created the whole world
for man's sake: so also his ire, when it is once kindled against men, Inuolueth
with all both Cattle and Trees, and whatsoever is either in heaven or in earth.
But for all this, the question is not yet answered: for howsoever God takes
vengeance of the beasts for the offenses of men, yet an Ox or a Sheep can
not pacify the anger of God. I answer, that this was done for man's cause.
For it had been a notable feast, if the king had forbid the beasts all
suffenaunce, except he had had respect unto men them selves. But he would as it
were in a glass, or a picture set before the Nineuits what they had deserved:
as it was under the Law, as often as they slew any Sacrifices, they were
admonished of their sins. For this ought to have come in mind unto them, yt
the Lamb, or other creature, was slain being innocent, and for what cause he
which had offended stood at the Altar. For there he saw a lively image of
his own da^pnation in the Ox, La^be or Goat. So also the Nineuits, when they
constrained their Oxen and Asses, and the rest of the beasts to fast, they were
admonished of how grievous and severe punishment they were worthy, eue^
because yt very innocent beasts suffered punishment together with them. We see
therefore yt the king sought not to make any sacrifice, while he commanded a
fast and hunger to ye very brute beasts: but rather ye men were with such
pricks styred up, to acknowledge seriously ye anger of God, and to conceive
the more terror, whereby they might the more be humbled before God, and should
be displeased with themselves, and so might be the more ready and better
framed and prepared to crave forgiveness and pardon. Now therefore we see yt
this commandment of the fasting of the beasts, ought to be referred unto the
touching of men's consciences with fear, as they which had flattered them
selves too much, and therefore by such a remedy might amended and correct their
deadly drowsinesse. And to this end belonged the washings in the Law to
purify vestures and the rest of the vessels. Even that the people might know
that whatsoever they touched was defiled with their filthiness. And this is
dilygently to be noted: because the Papists, as they are given to Ceremonies,
snatche up whatsoever in any place of the Scriptures is read, of Fasting, of
Sackcloath and Ashes, and think yt all godliness is included in these outward
rites. And yet, bodily exercise profits not much, 1. Tim. 4.8
says Paul. Therefore this rule ought always to be of force with us, that
Fasting and such like of them selves are of naught: but only ought to be
considered of by their end. So therefore when as the brute beasts with the
Nineuits were constrained to hunger, men themselves being admonished of their
own guiltiness, learned what it was to fear the anger of God: and for this
cause that Fast pleased God.

Now if any man will object, that there is nothing to be gone about in the
worship of God, not mentioned in the word, or contrary to the word: easy
also is the answer, A notable Question, Answered.
that the King of Nineueh by this, invented not any kind of pacifying of God,
neither would he by this means worship God, but had respect unto the end
whereof I spoke. And that end very well agrees unto the word of God, and
the prescript rule thereof. Therefore the king of Nineueh tries here nothing
strange and unknown to the word of God, when he refers all things to ye
skope, even that he with the people might come forth hu^blie before the
judgment seat of God, and with earnest penitencie and repentance, may desire
pardon. This answer then is plain enough. When as therefore Jonas adds,
that the King commanded both the people, and the beasts to put on Sackcloath:
let us know, that if any man will snatche up this naked example to immitate
it, he should be nothing else but a Iester: because always this reason is to
be observed, that the King sought helps wherewith he might drive both himself
and his, unto true repentance. And good reason it is, that we take heed in
the immitation of this: for the nature of man is prone unto a foolish zeal.
And for the most part we are almost like Apes: but it is dilygentlie to be
looked unto, with what spirit they were led, whom we covet to immitate,
least that we being content with the outward appearaunces, do neglect yt which
is principal, or chief. Afterward Jonas adds, And they cry strongly, or
infortitude unto God. This must be restrained unto the men (and not unto the
beast) for it would not agree unto brute beasts. Well: the men and the
beasts abstain from meat and drink: and then the men cry unto God. This
cry could not spring, but of the fear of God, and the perceyueraunce and
knowledge of godliness. Therefore as I have said it ought not confusedly to
be drawn as well to brute beasts as men. But that the King of Nineueh
commanded the people, in fortitude, to cry unto God, it is worthy the noting:
for here hence we gather that he was in deed thoroughly terrified. For here is
no mention of the common crying, but he adds, in Fortitude, as if one should
say, with open throat, and in French we say, A force, or forte, or term,
with force strongly, or firmly. Jonas therefore expresses a thing rare and
singular, when as he recyteth that this was comprised in the Kings Edict, that
men should cry strongly unto God. And it is as much as if he should say: Let
al men now awake to ye shaking off their deadly sleep. For to much hitherto
has every one of us kotcheled himself in his sins: Now time it is that fear
begin to possess our hearts; and drive us forward to crave the favor and
love of God.

This King thought prayer to be the best remedy to get the favor of God.
And this also is worthy to be noted, that ye king inuenteth not any other
remedy, but that the people should fly unto prayer. And it may well be that
Jonas exhorted the Nineuits unto it: but we may easily gather: that this
perceiueraunce is ingrafted in us by nature, that when we are urged with
adversity, then do we implore and crave the favor and grace of God. Well
then: To pray unto God, is the only remedy in all afflictions, and miseries.
If we therefore being taught both in the law and the Gospel, do not use this
remedy, when God does admonish and exhort us to repentance: what show of
excuse shall we have, seeing that profane men, which held not one syllable of
true piety, yet in miserye besought the Lord God, and the King him self
commanded the same by ye consent of al his Nobility? More careful, modesty
therefore ought this Edict of ye king to strike into us, then if a man should
but even simply utter this doctrine out of the word of God. For although ye
kings authority be not equal unto the aucthority of God: yet when that
miserable and blind prince acknowledged by the instinct of nature that God was
to be pacified with prayer, what excusation (as I have said) remains for us?
But Jonas shows more plainly that, that the repentance of the people was not
counterfeit, when he declares that the Nineuits put on sackecloth: and kept
themselves from meat and drink. Well: it follows more in the edict of ye
king: And let every man turn from his wicked way, and from the Rapine which
is in their hands. This profane king now declares to what end and with what
determination, he gave commandment of fasting and the other exercises even
that by this means the Nineuits might stir up themselves the better unto the
fear of God. For here he exhorts that they should convert from their wicked
way. By the word, way, the scripture is accustomed to understand the whole
course or order of man's life. It is as much therefore as it he said. Let each
of you change his disposition and manners: let us al be new creaturs. For this
is true repentance. The conversion of a man unto God. And thus much understood
this profane king. Whereby it follows that their blockishnesse is the more
filthy, which endeavor to pacify and please God with their frivolous
inventions, as do the Papists which will needs thri^t upon God, I know not
what tryfles and toys, and think each of them a sacrifice good enough and
therefore obstinatly do they contend. They need not therefore any other
judge then this profane king, which declared that there was another manner of
true repentance, even that men should be changed in mind and soul, Rapine
taken for all kind of wickedness.
and turn the whole manner of their life into better. And therefore he says:
Let every man be converted from his wicked way, and from the rapine which is in
their hands. In this last clause is set down the kinds of wickedness, by
Synechdoche by part for the whole. For the Rapines were not only to be
amended in the Nineuits: for it is probable that they were infected with other
vices also: In that so populous a City, Drunkenness did also reign, and also
Royot, Pride and Ambition and Lechery. There is no doubt therefore but that
Nineueh was stuffed with innumerable sins: but the king by part notes here
the principal vice, well: Let every man convert from his wicked way, and from
his Rapine. It is as much as if he should show that the thief and principal
virtue consists in Equity and Justice: that is, when men live among them
selves mutuallie without any wrong or injury. And I would to God, that the
same doctrine were of force at this day amongst al those which usurp, and
falselie take upon them the name of a Christian. For the Papists while they
heap Sacrifice upon Sacrifice, they pass over Love and Charity, and in all
their perfection of life, almost Equity has no place. Let them learn
therefore at ye mouth of a profane King, what God chiefly requires of men,
and approves in their whole life, even that they abstain from Rapines, and
from every wicked act. Now therefore we know why, from Rapine, was added.
Now we know that this King being yet a Nouice, and scarce even lightly touched
with the rudimentes of piety, after the preaching of Jonas, according to the
small measure of his understanding and faith, gave yet commandment to his
subjects to repent of their old life, and to lead a new. But if in so small
a place, he so greatly profited, we, seeing that our ears have been beaten
with continual Sermons, this twenty or thyrtie years, what excuse may we (I
say) show for our selves, if we be far behind, even the small knowledge of
this king? These cyrcumstaunces therefore are dilygently of us to be noted.
Well: Now let us proceed.

verse. 9

this verse a ^yttle otherwise thus: He which knows will convert, and repent.
They read not this place interrogatiuelie: but that reading cannot stand. In
the mind of the Prophet, therefore there is nothing doubtful, that might make
the King doubt at all, Who knows whether God will be favorable to ^s? But
here we see that the King was not overwhelmed with desperation, but yt he yet
thought upon a remedy, for to that end tends this verse. Repentance and
Faith, inseparable either from other.
But this may seem contrary to the nature of Faith: and then if it be
contrary to faith, it is also far from repentance. For Repentance and
Faith, are things coupled together, as we have said in other places. For no
man can of his own accord submytte him self unto God: unless first he has
tasted of his goodness, and secondly, have conceived hope of salvation. For he
that is only stricken with terror, will flee the presence and sight of God, and
so on every side of him raygneth desperation: and then follows Can^^macie and
rebellion. Nineueh indeed and without counterfeit or, did repent, and yet
doubtingly entreats of the grace of God? I answer: there is a kind of
doubting, There may be a kind of doubting ioygned to faith.
which may be joined together with faith: even that doubting, which does not
directly reject the promise of God, but yet has many lettes. For example. If a
man be cast down with terror, and afterward, takes heart to him, having set
before him the hope of pardon and salvation, yet by and by he shall not be
void of al fear: because, as long as he beholds his sin, and is also
enwrapped in other thoughts and cogitations, he shall waver and be diuersely
tossed in mind. There is no doubt therefore, but that the king of Nineueh
conceived hope of salvation and safeguard: but in the mean time was perplexed
in mind, as well for the preaching of Jonas, as for ye guiltiness of his own
sins. Two lets therefore there were which might call back the mind of the
king from assurance and certainty of his safeguard, or at the least might stay
him, that suddenly he should not apprehend the mercy of God, and with a quiet
mind might think, that God would be propitiouse unto him. The first let, was
that terrible Sermon of Jonas, being this: After forty days, Nineueh shall
perish. For although Jonas might add some thing as we have said, yet so
precise was that threatening that it might dismaye the minds of all men. It
behooved the king therefore mightily to strive, that he might overcome so great
a let, and repel and drive from him that terrible preaching of Jonas, so far
forth as it was void of all comfort and consolation. Secondly, the king when
he pondered and weighed his sins, might some what waver. But we see how he
endeuoreth to escape, although he had these two impedimentes and hynderaunces
before his eyes. Because when he says: Who can tell whether God will turn
away from the fierceness of his wrath, and repent? When he says so (I say)
we see that he was in a strong conflict: because howsoever Jonas seemed to
shut up from him the gate of mercy, and to forbid and deny him all hope of
salvation and safegarde, howsoever also his own conscience kept him down and
oppressed him, he yet proceeds, and pricketh him self forward: and so
finally aspyreth unto hope of forgiveness. As if he should say: Repent, etc.
for you know not whether God will spare you any longer or no, because he has
forborne you a long time. Joel. 2.14
Again, it is to be noted that this manner of speaking, Who can tell etc.
notes rather difficulty, then diffidencie. For the king as it were,
doubtingly enquyreth, Who can tell whether God will turn him self? Because
it was a hard matter, that God, after so long sufferaunce, should yet spare
that so wicked a City. The king therefore expresses a difficulty. For this is
not a sign of diffidencie or distrust, when he so demands. And when in Joel
it is said, Who knows, etc. It is altogether the like saying: and therefore
said more, when he expounded that place. But let this briefly suffice us,
that the king does not bewraye his distrust, but rather expresses the
difficulty and hardness of the matter. And this is a sign of humility, that
he understands that he is as it were drowned in the deep gulf of hell with
the people, and yet cease not to hope the best. For this is a sign of Hope,
when as a matter seems to be contrary to nature, yea though it seem to be
contrary to all natural reason, yet we hope still well. Well: we see now what
is the understanding of these words.

Of the repentance of God, we will speak of it another time, either to morrow,
or the next day. It follows. That we perish not. We see how a King profane,
seeks to redeem him self from destruction, even by the pacifying of God.
Therefore as soon as any danger hangs over us, and is at hand, let this
come into our mind, that no escaping from the same may be found, unless the
Lord receives us into favor, even as the king of Nineueh on the contrary
part seems to reason after this sort: As soon as the Lord shall be propitious
and pacified, all things shall fall out well. We see therefore how much this
rude and new Nouice or youngling profited, when as he understands that men
can not escape out of myseries, until ye Lords wrath shall be appeased toward
them: And as soon as men come into favor with him, although an hundred times
before, they should have perished, yet shall they be safe and sound: even
because the grace and favor of God is the fountain of salvation, and of life,
and of all other good things. Afterward it follows.

verse. 10.

Jonas says, that the Nineuits obtained pardon by their repentance. And
truly this example is worthy to be noted: for by this we gather to what end
the Lord does solicit us to repentance: which is, even because he will be
reconciled unto us, and also reconciled us unto him. And this is the reason why
he sou^deth in our ears, Why the Lord threatens us by his Preachers.
so many chydings and threatenings, when we come to hear the word of God: Even
because he will call us back from destrucio^, therefore (I say) does he talk
angerlie with us. Finally, whatsoever ye Scripture conteyneth concerning
Repentance, and the judgment of God, ought wholly to be applied to this use,
even that we may come into favor with God: because he is easy to be appeased,
and is ready always to embrace those, which vnfaynedlie turn them selves unto
him.

Therefore in this example we understand that God respects nothing else, as
often as he deals hardly with us, but that he may be at one with us, and
appeased toward us, How we prevent the ire of God.
if we our selves will be judges of our selves, and so prevent his ire with a
wylling desire of heart: which is done, when as we crave pardon for our sin
and guiltiness, secondly, and are displeased with our selves, thirdly, and
also confess that we are worthy of destruction. But Jonas seems here to
place here the cause of salvation, in Repentance and Works: for he says that
the Nineuits obtained pardon, because God respected their works. Well: first
it is to be noted, what works he means, least any man should suddenly
snatche up this one word, as the Hipocrites are accustomed: and this is to
common in the Papacy, as we have said. Then: God respected their works: but
what Works? Not Sackcloath, not Ashes, not Fasting, for Jonas makes no
mention now of these things, but he respected these works, even that they
converted from their wicked ways. We see therefore that God was not pleased and
appeased with Ceremonies only, that is, with that outward profession of
repentance: but rather that he respected the true and serious alteration in
the Nineuits, even that they were new me^. These therefore were their works,
even the fruits of repentance. But such an alteration of life could never
have come unto them, unless they had been truly touched with the
perceyueraunce and feeling of the ire of God. Therefore the fear of God went
before Repentance and conversion And this fear could not be without faith:
The fear of God goes before Repentance and conversion, which fear is never
without faith.
We see therefore first, that here is no speaking of outward works, but of the
renewing or renouatio^ of men. But now if any man object, that this lets
not, but that good works may reconcyle us unto God, and so obtain salvation
for us: I answer, that here is no disputation about the cause of pardon. It
is certain that God was pleased with the Nineuits gratis, even as he restores
his favor unto us every day freely. Jonas therefore means not that these
satisfactions prevailed before God, as though the Nineuits had reco^pensed
their former sins: no such thing do the words importe: but only by a
consequent we must gather, how the Lord becomes again favorable unto us,
and how we obtain pardon with him. But whether this is done by our merits
and repentance, or whether gratis, the Lord offers him self unto us:
seeing the whole Scripture testifies that forgiveness of sins is given unto
us freely, and that by none other mean the Lord can be propitious unto us,
then by not imputing our sins unto us, as touching this present place, we
must not very carefully labor, why the Lord is said to have seen the works
of the Nineuits, least he should destroy them: for this is spoken by the
consequent. For Jonas here notes not the cause, but only shows that God was
pacified toward the Nineuits, as soon as they repented. But we will speak yet
more of this matter.

The Prayer.
Grant O almighty God, seeing that we are fraught with so many vices, and
also seeing yt daily, so many sins, yea heinous offenses do burst out of us:
Grant, I say, yt we harden not our selves at so many exhortations, wherewith
thou inuitest us unto thee, but that with broken and contrite hearts we may be
truly humbled, as often as thou denouncest thine ire unto us, and may so
setle our selves before thy throne, that we may prevent by thy sincere fear of
piety, and true confession, thy sincere judgment, which were otherwise
prepared for us. In the mean time also, grant that we using our mediator
Christ, may conceive that hope of pardon, that may bring us wholly unto thee,
and that we doubt not, but thou art always ready to embrace us, when as we
shall be touched with that true and sound affection of piety and repentance:
since that this also is a sign of thy grace and favor, that thou vouchsafest to
prevent us, and by thy spyrite have testified that thou wylt be a Father unto
us: Finallye, grant that so we may be cast down in our selves, that we may
raise up in our hope unto the heavens, through the same Christ our Lord. Amen.

Nineuits of the punishment which he threatened them by the mouth of Jonas, yea
they had free remission and release of the sin as of the punishment. As often
as God sets pardon before the eyes of sinners, this condition is added
withal: even that they do repent: but yet it follows not that repentance
is the cause of obtaining forgiveness. For Gratis, the Lord offers himself,
neither is he otherwise induced thereto then by his mere liberalitye. But
because he will not have men abuse his mercy and favor, he adds that law or
condition, even that men repent them of their former life, to change it into
better. So then he respects ye works of these, which confess, that they
detest their sins, and with a true and sincere desire do fly for succor
unto the mercy of God, for no man also from the heart will covet that God
should be merciful unto him, otherwise then he which is displeased with
himself for his sin. This is the reason also why Esaias says: Esai. 1.
that God will be merciful unto the remnaunte of his people, even for that every
man turned from his iniquitye. But God certainly in these words means not,
that repentance (as I said) is the cause of our salvation: but for this cause
he requires repentance and newness of life: because no man earnestly
desires grace and the favor of God, but he which is displeased with himself
in his sins. And now that Jonas adds that, God was touched with
repentance, this manner of speaking ought to be well known unto us.

Surely if we will speak properly, Properly, Repentance is not in God,
neither can it be referred to the secret will of God. How God is said to
repent.
Repentance is never found in God, and again Repentance is never referred to
the inward and secret counsel of God: for God always in himself remains
one, and in him self is constant and firm. But he is said to be moved with
Repentance, in respect of the understanding and capacity of man: For even as
we perceive God to be angrye, as often as he cyteth us unto his judgment
seat, and declares unto us our sins: so also do we perceive that he is
pacified and appeased, when as he offers us hope of pardon. And there is
according to our sense, some change in God, when as he forgets his anger,
as though he took to him a new mind or affection. Because therefore we can
not otherwise be terrifyed, so that we may humble our selves before God and
repent, unless he set before us his ire and wrath, therefore the Scripture
applies it self unto this grosenesse of our understanding.

Now on the other side, we cannot cheerefullie call upon God, unless we
think him to be at one with us, and appeased toward us, we see therefore that
a certain kind of Gods changing comes into our minds, as often as either
God threatens us, or gives us any hope of pardon and reconciliation, and so
this speech, (when Jonas says that God was moved with repentance) ought to
be referred to this end. God two ways, described unto us.
Further we se that God is two ways set out unto us, first In his word, and
again secondly in his secret counsel. As touching his secret counsel, I
have already said, that God is always one, neither does he use any of our
affections. But as touching the doctrine of the word which is applied unto our
senses, God is sometime angry with us, and sometime, as pacified offers unto
us forgiveness, and is favorable, and propitiouse unto us, and this is that
repentance of God. Let us remember therefore that this depends and is to be
referred to the word, when it is said, yt God was touched with repentance: even
because the Nineuits could perceive none other but that God had fully
determined that they should perish. And why so? even because so he had declared
by his word. But now when as they rise up unto the hope of their safegarde,
then do they perceive some change and alteration, even according to the
capacity of their faith. And sure, each affection as well of fear as of joy
does spring of the word: because when God by his word denounces his ire, it
must needs be that miserable men should be terrified. But when he inuiteth
them by his word unto salvation, in setting before them reconciliation, then
by and by they take unto them as it were a new affection, and so also do they
attribute an alteration of mind unto God, this is the Sum. Now let us
proceed.

Chap. 4.
verse. 1 Or, And Jonas was displeased with great sorrow.
And it displeased Jonas exceedingly, and he was very angry.

Jonas, Hierome does commend, and compares it unto the sacred zeal of Paul,
which wyshed that he might be accurssed for his brethren. Romans 9.3. He denies
that Jonas sorrowed, that God would have mercy upon so famous a City? But
because the Conversion of the Gentiles should be a certain foreshewe of the
destruction of the elected people. And therefore because Jonas as it were in a
glass beheld the destruction of Israel now near at hand, therefore he
sorrowed, if we will believe Hierom: but that is to to frivolous. For a little
after. God rebukes Jonas for it, what shall then the foolish and chyldish
defense of Hierom, ease the Prophet, seeing that God pronounces that he does
wickedlie, because he sorrowed. Nay, rather the blockishnesse of Hierom is
reprehended (for so may I speak of the man, who although he was learned and
painful, yet he deprived him self of that praise, which otherwise worthily
he might have gotten.) For his perverse nature every way bewrays it self,
even as he is openly reprehended by and by, in the very Text, where Jonas
evidently declares that there was another cause of his sorrow, even because
he would not seem, or be thought a false Prophet, or a liar: And for this
cause was his grief and bitterness such. But this sorrow (although God him
self had not given sentence upon it) yet we see it had been wicked and far
from all reason.

Let us therefore be certainly persuaded that Jonas was carried away with a
preposterous zeal, when as with quiet mind he could not bear that the City
of Nineueh should be delivered from destruction: yea, he himself also
increases ye greatness of his own sin. For he might have said in one word:
This displeased Jonas: but he not content with this simple manner of speaking,
adds moreover, exceedingly, or with great sorrow: yea says moreover, that he
was sore angered. Although ye beginning had not been evil, the excess yet was
very vicious. And he confesses this immodesty and excess in his sorrow, when
as with plain words he accuses himself. To what end therefore is it to cover
with cauyls and subtilties, that thing which we manifestly see cannot be
excused. But that it may better appear, why the sauegarde of the city of
Nineueh displeased Jonas, let us proceed in the text.

verse. 2 Or, full of grace and favor.
propitious God, and merciful, slow to anger and of great kindness, and
repents thee of the evil.

Jonas says here that he prayed, seems scarce to be agreeable: because
prayer to be quiet, and he confessed that he was so molified in his mind. When
as therefore the Prophet was so inflamed with wroth in his anger, how could he
come into the presence of God, Quiet prayer.
and conceive just prayers? again what is the end of prayer, but that we
confess that what so ever good thing is to be wished, remains with God, The
end of prayer.
and is humbly to be sought and asked of him? But Jonas does here rather debate
the matter with God and murmur against him. For he seems here after a sort to
skould and say, that he had a just cause to run away: and again that God
ought not to forgive the Nineuits. He therefore accuses God, that he might
clear and deliver himself from al blame, and this is strange altogether and
far from the rule of prayer. How then must we understand this place, where
he says that he prayed? I answer, that oftentimes the faithful even with a
troubled mind come unto God with a desire to pray: Note well.
and yet their prayers are not utterly refused, although they be not allowed,
nor yet please God in all points. And by this place it appears more
evidently how the works of the godly are acceptable unto God, although though
they be mingled with many impurities. Note.
The Papists as often as they read that any work did please God, they imagine
chief perfection and cleanness: and yet there is no work which is not
infected with some spotte, except it be purified by free pardon. How all works
are purified
And this is euidente unto us in this prayer, which was not so rejected of God,
but it obtained the name of a prayer. And yet certain it is that Jonas was not
so minded as he ought, when he prayed troublesomelie, as it were chyding and
brawling with God, and still retayning some part of his former contumacie:
because he began to like well of his running away from God. And we have said
that this was a manifest sign of rebellion, when as, shaking off the the yoke,
he contempned the calling of God. It is necessary therefore, that we
acknowledge in this prayer of Jonas some part of godliness, and also many
corruptions. This proceeded from piety, even that, all this notwithstanding,
he yet dyrected his complaints unto God. For the Hipocrits although they come
unto God, and name him, yet are they altogether contrary to him, and wyllingly
would they spew out their chollor against God. But Jonas here while he
complayneth, although he keeps not a mean, but be carried away with a blind
and corrupt violence and force, yet is he ready to submytte him self unto God,
as we shall see at length. And this is the reason why he says that he prayed.
For he had not been ashamed to have confessed any more grievous fault, if he
had been guilty thereof. For he would not extenuate or lessen his fault, by
the word of Praying, as the Hipocrites do always pretend some coulors or
cloakes, when as they would cover their filthiness.

But such was not the mind of Jonas: therefore when that Jonas says that he
prayed, generally he testifies that he was not so murmuring and disobedient
unto God, but that he retained some seed of godliness and obedience in his
mind. Well: Jonas prayed, and hereby it follows (as I have already said)
that many prayers of holy men are corrupt, which if they be stretched to ye
lawful reach, they shall be worthelie refused But the Lord for his mercy sake
forgeueth those sins, so that these unquiet and troublesome prayers, retain
and hold still their title and estimation.

Now he says: I beseech thee O Lord, was not this my speech. Here Jonas
declares evidently why he took it greeuouslie, that Nineueh should be
delivered from subversion: even because by this means he should be taken for
a false and lying Prophet. But this may seem absurd, that the Prophet set
more by, or made more accoumpt of his own fame, then of the glory of God. For
in this does the glory of God chiefly shine, that he is appeased, so soon as
men repent: and also in that he offers himself to be a father unto them.
Ought Jonas to have preferred his estimation before the glory of God? I
answer that the Prophet so was not addicted to him self, but that always the
study of the glory of God obtained the highest degree in his mind: this is
certain. But he ioygned his ministry with the glory of God, and worthily:
because it depended upon his authority. Jonas when he entered into Nineueh, he
cried not as a private man, but professed that he was sent from God.

Now if the preaching of Jonas be found false, the reproach redoundeth upon
the very author of his calling, that is upon God. There is no doubt therefore
but that Jonas took it greuousely that the name of God should be laid open
to the reproaches of the gentiles, as though he should make them afraid of
nothing and again, speaking dissemblingly, should by and by open hell and by
and by heaven. And there is nothing more against the glory of God, then such
dissimulation We see then why Jonas was carried away with so great sorrow: he
respected not himself, but because he saw an occasion given or a door laid
open to wicked blasphemies, if God should alter his determination, or if he
should not be constaunt in his word: here hence I say came that so great
sorrow. But although this be a very good reason, We must not do evil that
good may come of it. To. 3.
yet we gather of what force our good intents are with God. If any good intent
may be imagined, certainly this might deserve some praise, that Jonas had
rather an hundred times to dye then to here those wicked blasphemies, that the
word of God should be a mere laughing stock, that the threatenings of God were
fables, that God did but dissemble this or that as it he should transfigure
himself into diverse forms.

This was an excellent intent, if we may be Judges, or if the matter be
esteemed according to our senses, but by and by we shall see that it was
condemned by the mouth of God. Let us learn therefore not to arrogate unto our
selves judgment in those things which pass our capacitye, but to submit our
minds unto God, and to desire of him the spirit of discretion and judgment.
How came it to pass that Jonas so should frette against God, but that he was
inflamed with the studdy of his glory? but this was an inconsiderate zeal,
because he himself would be arbiter and judge: he ought rather to have
submitted himself unto God: and this same rule is to be kept of us all. If at
any time we see many things come to pass from above, that is by the secret
providence of God, which do even lay open the name of God to the blasphemies
of wicked and ungodly men, this truly is to be lamented: but in the mean time
let us desire of the Lord, that he will at the length convert those reproaches
unto his own glory, but let not us murmur and grudge: as many do, which by
and by begin to chide against God, as often as a thing is otherwise governed
and directed, then they themselves list, or do think convenient. Let us
learn by the example of Jonas not to measure the judgments of God by our own
capacity, but let us patiently weight till he convert the darkness into
light. In the mean time also let us learn to obey his commandments, to
follow his call without controversy: although heaven and earth should set
them selves against us, although many things do come in our way, which might
turn us away from the right course, yet let us continue in this sure
determination, that nothing can be better for us, then that we being obedient,
may go forward in the same way which he sets before us. But where as he
says, that, He made haste to come to Tharsis, he does not altogether excuse
his flight, but now he declares more evidently, that he had not refused any
trouble or labor, nor yet had refused any controversy or danger: but only
because he was careful for the glory of God, therefore he was drawn away from
his vocation. To this end therefore tend the words of Jonas, as though he
would appoint God to be a witness and a Judge, that not for fear of danger,
nor for slothfulness, nor for rebellion, nor for any other respect, he
withdrewe gim self from the obedience of God: but only for that he would not
have his sacred name violated and defiled, for that he would not willingly be
a Minister of that preaching, which might open ye mouth of ungodly and profane
men to laugh God him self to scorn. When as (says he) I hoped for none other
profit of my preaching, but even that the Gentyles might laugh God to scorn,
yea, might tear in pieces amongst them his holy name, as if he were
deceyptfull and vain, therefore had I rather fly unto Tharsis. Therefore here
Jonas does not altogether excuse him self: for then to no purpose had his
chastisement lyghted upon him, whereby he ought to have been thoroughly tamed.
He was called of late from the very hell: shall we say that he durst so lift
up his horns against God, that he would altogether be free from al fault? This
certainly is to to absurd: but as I have said, he obiecteth to God, that at
the beginning he fled not for any other cause, but for yt he hoped not for
any plausible fruit or success of his preaching, but rather he feared that
which he saw imminent, even that the name of God should be a laughing stock.
Immediately he adds: Because I knew that thou art a God full of favor, and
merciful, slow to anger, etc. This is surely marvelous that Jonas was called
away from his vocation, because he knew that God was merciful, seeing yt no
sharper goade ought to prick us forward, when as God will use our labor or
dilygence. For we know that no man can perform his obedience cheerefullye
unto God, but he which is eue^ allured with his fatherly goodness. So then no
man shall be a wylling Prophet or Teacher, but he which is persuaded that God is
merciful. Jonas therefore seems to to foolishly to reason, when he says, that
he was therefore withdrawn from his office, because he knew that God was
merciful. Again, how knew Jonas this? even out of the law of God. For this
place is taken out of the 33. of Exodus where that notable and memorial vision
is described unto us, Exodus 33
where God set out him self to be seen of Moses, there was exhibited unto the
holy Prophet a lyuelie Image of God. And this is no place in the law, which
better and more lively expresses the nature of God. For there God would
familiarly manifest him self unto his servant. For when as therefore Jonas was
so instructed and endued with this doctrine of the law, how could he exercise
the office of a Prophet amongst his own people and countrymen? why did not
this thought also vex his heart, when he was called to the office of a
Teacher? Certain it is therefore, that this ought to be restrained unto his
preaching, such as before was declared unto us. Jonas had never despised the
commandment of God, if he had been sent to the Nineuits, eue^ as before he
was commanded to teach the elect people the Jews. If therefore this office
had been enjoined to Jonas, yt he should have set forth God merciful and
gentle unto the Nineuits, he had not doubted to have offered his obedient
service. But seeing this precise threatening was enioygned him: Nineueh shall
perish: therefore is he drawn away, and coueteth rather to run away, then
to execute such a commandment. And why so? Forsooth he reasons thus with
himself: I denounce imminent destruction to the Nineuits: To what end does
God command, but even yt he might inuit and call these wretched men to
repentance? Now if they shall repent, will not God by and by be ready to
forgive them? for otherwise he should deny his own nature. God can not be
unlike him self, or contrary to him self, he can not put off that affection,
whereof he testified once unto Moses. When as therefore the Lord shall be
appeased and pacified, if the Nineuits repent, and flee to him for succor, he
will by and by embrace them: and so shall I befound false in my preaching. Now
therefore we know how this place of Jonas ought to be understood, when he
says that he fled over the sea, (or at the least, that was his
determination) because he knew that God was merciful. For he had never
dissobayed God, but that this contrariety did trouble him and fear his mind:
what? I shall goo thither as the messenger of God: shortly after I shall be found
a liar: shall not this reproach redounde to the name of God himself? it is
better therefore that I hold my peace, then that God, which is the author of my
vocation, be coumpted a jesting stock. We see therefore that Jonas had an eye
unto that manner of preaching which he should use in Nineueh, whereof we have
spoken before. And hereby it appears that Jonas gave more to the Nineuits
then he had. For he thought that he was sent from God, only that the Nineuits
might understand that they must perish: but he brought salvation unto them.
This he in some part either suspected in him self, or knew it. For be
retained that prnciple: that God could not put off from him his mercy, because
he remains always one. But he came abroad to execute the office inioygned
him, God uses our office to diverse ends unknown to our selves.
certainly he had nothing else before his eyes, but the utter destruction of
the City of Nineueh. But in the mean time, God used his labor and mynisterie
to a better end and success. But there is no doubt but that Jonas him self
exhorted the Nineuits to repentance: but his heart was as it were shut up that
it should not admyt them the mercy of God. We see that Jonas was in his
afflictions prevented, so that he could not offer salvation to the Nineuits,
and yet was it offered from God by his hand. Now then we understand how the
Lord oftentimes works by is servant: with his hand he leads them as
blind men, whether they little think. So when the Lord styrreth up any of us,
we shall be sometime of small faith, we shall think that either our labor shall be
unprofitable, and without fruit, or at the least, that small shall be our
success. But the Lord will declare that success which we could never look
for. And such was the example of Jonas, for when he came to Nineueh, he had
none other purpose, but to testify ye destruction of the City: but the Lord
would have him to be the Mynister of salvation, unknown to him self. Well
the Lord then adorned the doctrine of Jonas with this excellent success, when
as yet he was unworthy of so great honor, because after a sort he had shut
up the passage to the blessing of God, as we have already said.

Now therefore we know the meaning of this place, when Jonas said that he fled
from the calling of God, because he knew yt he was a God prove unto favor, and
again merciful. etc. Now I come to these speeches of God. The Hebrew word
Chanun, signifies properly, Benign, Gracious, and Debonaire: and God
ascribes this title unto him self Then he adds: Merciful, signifying that
he always is set before us, if at any time we come unto him, as unto the
fountain both of all goodness and mercy. But the words that follow, do
better express this mercy of God, or do define how God is merciful, even
because he is of much clemency, next again, slow unto anger. God therefore
is prove unto gentleness: again, although men be unworthy whom he should
respect, he is yet notwithstanding merciful: and this he expresses by the
Hebrew word, Pachum. To love entyrelie.
In ye mean time it is necessary to add these two words together, That, he
is of much mercy, and slow to anger. And why? For we seek always in our
selves the cause of the grace of God: when as we covet that God should favor
us, we enquire in our selves, why he should favor us.

Now when we find nothing, by and by all faith which we first conceived of the
grace of God, vanishes away. And here then the Lord himself reuoketh and
calls us back unto him, and testifyeth that he is therefore favorable and
merciful unto us, No cause in us of our salvation.
because he is of great mercy. As if he should say: I in my self have
sufficient cause why I am exorable unto you and why I also do embrace you and
take you into my favor. The only goodness of God is therefore to be
respected, when we desire to have him merciful unto us, or when we have any
need of pardon, as if he should say that he is not induced or moved with any
respect of our worthynesse, nor yet does seek any of our merits, that
therefore he should be prove unto mercy, when we have offended, or should take
us into his favor: but that therefore he does yet, because his goodness is
immensurable and infinite. Now there is also added, Slow to anger. This
flownesse to anger declares that God provides for the saueguard of mankind,
yea even when they are oppressed with sin, although therefore every day,
miserable men do provoke upon themselves the wrath of God, yet cease he not
to provide for their safegarde: therefore is he slow to anger, that is, the
Lord does not strayt way, lay upon men such punishment as they deserve which
so provoke him. Well: now we see what is the sum of the words. Now let us
return to that saying, that Jonas was withdrawn from his office because he
knew that God was slow to anger and merciful, and full of favor: For he
brought in this reason, either God will change his nature, or else he will
spare the Nineuits if they repent: but it may be that they will repent, and
then it follows that my preaching shall be vain. And surely God will not be
contrary to himself, but will show forth an example of his goodness and mercy
when he shall forgive this people. Again, let us note that we do wickedly,
when as without Judgment we follow our zeal. For there is some blind fury,
which then carries us away. Therefore although a thousand absurdities do come
in our head, when God commands any thing, yet are our eyes to be closed, as
it were, and always we ought to follow on in the course of our vocation:
because he will so moderate all euentes, that they all shall tend to his
glory. It is not our part here to be to curious: but this is our best mean,
that we let the event of things alone unto God. It is our part indeed to
fear and to be careful, but with all, this our care ought to submyt it self
unto God, so that it ought to suffice us, even to pray. This is the sum.

Now that he says again, that, God does repent him of evil. We have expounded
it a little before: even that although he has stretched out his hand, yet he
plucketh it in again as soon as he finds any repentance in men. For,
evil, here is taken for punishments: God therefore although he might, and that
worthily lay upon men extreme pains and punishment, he yet suspendeth his
Judgment, and if they run unto him with true repentance, by and by he is
pacified and appeased. And this is the repentance of God, even that: what ever
punishment and evil, men have deserved, he does of his own accord remitte so
soon as men are displeased with themselves and repent. Now it follows.

verse. 3

Jonas chafed and waxed whotte in his zele. For certainly this prayer cannot
be attributed to faith: as certain men think, that Jonas mounted up even into
heaven in the mind, when so he prayed, as if he feared not death, but having
put of all fear, free and at liberty, might offer him self unto God. But I
do not think that the affection of Jonas was not so lofty. There is no Jonas
had burst out into the voice of a desperate man, this surely had been no
prayer. When as therefore he prayed, notwithstanding he so spoke, it follows
that this was not the voice of desperation, but of to much anger or indignation
wherein Jonas does not moderate himself* Finally, this prayer proceeded of a
godly and holy zeal: but Jonas in the manner it self, or in going forward
does offend: for he was even paste himself* when he preferred death before
life, saying: Thou Lord take me away. First, it can not be without fault,
that he is so headlong carried to the desire of death. We ought not hastily to
desire death.
For it is not in us to pass out of this world, but as long as God retayneth,
and keeps us in this stay, wherein he has placed us, with quiet minds we
ought to abide. Who so therefore he be that with so great ardoncie makes haste
to death, Phi. 1.25
without do able he offends God. Paul saw that death were to be wished to
him self: but again, when he perceived that his labor was profitable to the
Church, he was ^ntent with his lotte, and preferred ye good pleasure of God
before his desire: and so was he ready both to live and dye unto God. 2. Faults
in Jonas.
But Jonas cantrarie, Now (says he) take away my soul: this is one fault:
another is, when as he desired to dye, because God would spare the Nineuits.
Although he was touched with some sorrow, yet ought he not to ^a^e gone, or
rather to have burst out thus far, that in the lothing of his life, he should
wish after death. But here hence we learn, when once men let lose the rain to
unadvised zeal, whether they are carried. Jonas ye holy Prophet, which of late
was tamed and subdued with so hard chastisement, yet is carried away headlong
even unto the desire of death, and why because he thought yt it fell out ill,
that he had denounced destuction unto the Nineuits, and yet the City
continues safe. This example ought to restrain us, least we give sentence
rashly of the judgments of God, but rather may hold all our senses
captives, least at any time such temeritie and rashness should burst out of
us: because there is none of us, who condempneth not Jonas, even as he
condempneth him self, for he reuealeth not here his own praises, but he would
here declare that he rashly had judged of that work of God. Well: Jonas here
confesses his foolishness: let therefore his experience be a lesson unto us,
that there is nothing more preposterous, then according to our judgments to
determine this or that: because this is, when all is done the true wisdom, to
submytte our selves wholye to the judgment of God.

Now if any man here will move a direction, whether it be lawful to wish for
death.
whether it be lawful to wysh for death: I answer briefly, that death is
not to be wished for, in the lothing of life. That is one thing, I mean that
to be lothing of life, when either poverty, or hunger, or ignominy, or any
such thing does make life hateful, or odious unto us. But if any man in the
irksomeness, and in the dyslyking of his shines, be grieved to remain on the
earth, according as Paul says. O miserable man that I am, who shall deliver me
from this body of death? He for certainetie shall conceive a holy and godly
desire, so that, that obedience, whereof I spoke, he added, even that his
affection burst not out as it were in despyte of God. But who so is so
affected, let him suffer him self to be stayed by the hand of God, as long as
it pleases him. Again, if any man wysh for death, because he scapeth him
self in time to come, or dreadeth to undertake any office or charge, he
verelie stryueth with God. And such was the fault of Jonas: he says that
death was more welcome then life: but why? because the Lord spared the
Nineuits. We see then how blind he is, and is carried away with a mad motion
and violence to wysh for death. Let us therefore learn so to love this life,
that we be ready to leave the fame, as often as it shall seem good unto the
Lord. Let us learn also to wysh for death, but so that we may live unto the
Lord, and may proceed in our course, until he himself bring us unto our
end. Now here follows the rebuke of God.

verse. 4

Jonas, condempneth his fault and corrupt zeal. For seeing that God only is
a fytte Judge of man's life, there is no cause why we should bost that we are
carried away with a good intent, because there is nothing more deceyptful then
is our judgment. When as therefore we weygh the deeds, sayings, or thoughts
of our selves, in our own judgment, we deceive our selves. If any man will
Rhetoricallie defend the fact of Jonas, certainly he may find at hand many
notable shows. If a man would for his mind sake, bring forth the excuses of
Jonas, Jonas might seem unto us altogether, innocent. But although all the
whole world should acquytte him, what should that avail him, seeing that he
is condemned by the mouth of God himself, who only is Judge? as I have already
said. Let us therefore hold for certainty that Jonas dealt preposterouslie,
although no reason thereof appears unto us, because enough and more then
enough might the authority of the chief Judge God suffice us.

Now plainly the Lord reprehendeth his anger. If Jonas had modestly debated
the mattar, and had only cast from himself his sorrows into the bosom of
God, this had been excusable: The effects of anger.
although this zeal had not been without fault, yet had it been tollorable.
But now when he is angry, this is not to be borne: because Ira per se est furor
breuis, anger it self is a short madness or furye: as one said: then
afterward it blinds the senses of men, it perturbeth all the parts of the
mind. God therefore not in one manner here accuses Jonas, but he declares
also how grieuouselye he fell, because he suffered himself after this sort
to be angry. In the mean time this is to be marked, that Jonas did not
therefore only offend because he was angry, for he had sinned also without
anger as we have said: but God exaggerateth the crime by this circumstance,
even that he so Murmured. And certainly this was a wicked example, when as a
wretched man ryseth up against God, and with a troublesome spirit brawleth
with him: This is a monsterouse thing, yet was Jonas brought unto this. We see
therefore why there is here any express mention made of the Anger of Jonas,
even because God will by this mean houlde Jonas convicted, least he should
slide back any more. If he had said simply: what? why do thou not permit
me, al sovereign judgment? why do thou not willingly confess that it is
well done what so I do, if it please me? is it thy part to take upon thee such
wisdom, that thou will prescribe me a law, or wilt correct my Judgments? if
the Lord had spoken after this sort, there might have rested some excuse, as
thus: Lord, I cannot moderate my self from sorrow, when I see thy name so
torn in pieces with heinous reproaches, may I behold this with a quiet mind?
Jonas might then I say have yet found out some clokes or excuse: But when the
Lord lays open and touches evidently the anger of Jonas, he must needs of
necessitye keep silence. For what thing shall be found that will excuse Jonas,
when as he so rebelliousely ryseth up against God being his judge and maker, as
I have already said. Well: now then we know why the Lord plainly expresses,
that Jonas did evil, in that he was thus angrye. And truly I marvel what
came in Hieroms mind, to say that Jonas here is not reprehended of the Lord,
but that there was set down a certain mean. Surely the man was both a
Cauiler, and again he playde the fool notably in corrupting the scriptures:
he had no fear to wrest the places of scripture every way: even as when he
disputes about Matrimony, he says, Note.
that they which do marry, do not evil, but yet they do not well: what
manner of Cauil is this, and how filthy: And even so in this place he says:
God does not accuse Jonas, neither yet reprehend his sin, for Jonas here
rather sets out unto us the person of Christ, who desired death, that the
whole world might be saved: Because being a live he could not win his own
Nation, neither could hold his own people: therefore had he rather bestow and
give himself and his life for the redemption of the world. These are
altogether trifling toys, and do utterly deprave the whole sense of this
place. For this interrogation of God is of more vehemence, then if he had said
simply Thou have offended in being so angry. This affirmative kind of speech
had not had so great vehemency, as this interrogation: For God not only in
the power of a Judge, pronounced that Jonas does evil: but also wresteth from
him his own confession, as if he should say: Although thou thy self be Judge
in thine own cause, yet can thou find no excuse for thine intemperancie:
for thou art angry without any mean. For when he says, Lecha apud te, In thy
self, he calls Jonas back to the examination of his own soul, as if he
should say: Look into thy self as in a glass: thou shall see, even what a
troublesome sea; thy mind is, now thou art carried away with such a raging
fury. Well, now we know not only the natural sense, but also the
vehemency which lies hydden in this interrogation, although Hierom leans to
the contrary part altogether. But I will proceed at this time no farther,
because that which remains shall suffice for a Lecture to morrow.

The Prayer against intemprance.
Grant O almighty God, when as thou see us to be enwrapped in so many
errors, that we sside and fall many times by the means of inconsideration: and
again, when as thou see the immoderate violence of our flesh, to blind
whatsoever reason or judgment is in us: Grant I say, that we may deliver
over our selves wholly to obey thee, and to give so much honor and reverence
unto thy wisdom, that we brawle not at any time, although al things fall out
contrary to our desires, but that we may patiently wait what end thou wylt
give unto us: and again, may so proceed in the race of our office, that we
may always hope for a happy issue and end: and that we may not be troubled
with whatsoever lets Satan shall object, but that always we may send and
lean to that scope which thou set out unto us, and not at any time deflect
or decline from the same, until we having finished al dangers, and al
impediments being overcome, at the length may come unto that blessed rest,
which is purchased unto us by the blood of thy Son. Amen.

verse. 5

Jonas waited till the fortye days were expired, or whether he prevented the
^^uie. For if we say that he went out of the City before the fortith day,
there will spring another question: how could he know what should come
afterward unto the City? For as yet we see that he was not instructed thereof
by an Oracle: yea rather the words that we see here, do sound otherwise: even
that by the event and falling out of the matter, it was manifested unto him,
that God had delivered the City from destruction. For he said in the last
Lecture that God repented of the word which he had spoken, and did it not. It
appears therefore that Jonas went out of the City, until the forty days
were full paste. But now there aryseth a contrary question, what needed he to
sytte near the City, seeing it was evident that either the determination of
God was changed, or at the least the sentence which he had uttered was
altered. He ought not therefore as yet, as though he doubted still, to sytte by
the City.

But I do willingly admytte this conjecture, that Jonas after the fortyth day
departed, and went out of the City. And the words do seem to bring us
thereto. As touching that question, why he doubted what would be the event of
the City, seeing he saw the time already expyred and past, the answer is
easy. For although the forty days were past, Jonas notwithstanding stood
hard lased, because he could not fullye persuade him self, that the same
saying which he uttered at the commandment of God, should want effect and
take no place. I do not therefore doubt, but that this thought made him
perplexed, when he thought thus of him self.

Thou have pronounced nothing rashly. Now how can it be that, the thing which
God would have to be published in his name and commandment, should now be
to no purpose or frustrate, and that the event should not be according? When
as Jonas therefore respected the commandment of God, if he could not by and
by rydde himself of al perplexity. This therefore was the cause why as yet he
stayed, even for that although the vengeance of God was not as yet suspended,
he notwithstanding thought that his preaching had not been in vain, and
therefore that the destruction of Nineueh was at hand. Well: this was the
reason why he still waited after the time prefixed, as though the matter had
still been doubtful.

But now that the thing may be more plain, we must note, that the counsel
of God was more secret, then that Jonas might understand, yea even in the
very parts of his calling. For God when he threatened destruction to the
Nineuits, would speak condicionally. For what were the fruit of the word,
unless that condition were adjoined thereto, even that if the Nineuits
repented, they should be safe? There needed no Prophet: but that God would
thereby provide for their safegarde, for God could without him, have executed
that condempnation, which the Nineuits had deserved. If any man will reply,
that a Preacher was sent unto them, that they might be ye more inexcusable,
this were a very could reason. For God had exercised al his other
punishments, without any such dampnation: I mean against profane Nations.
For this was the peculiar gift of the Church, that the Prophets denounced the
punishments that were at hand. But as concerning other people, God by the
thing it self declared him self to be their Judge: but sent them no Prophets
that might warn them.

Therefore as touching the counsel of God, when he commanded the Nineuits to
be terrified by that so precise Preaching, a condition sure was included. But
Jonas was to lyterall a Doctor, that I may so speak: because he comprehended
not that which he ought, even that as yet there was place of Repentance, and
that the City should be safe, if the Nineuits repented from their
wickedness. Then when as Jonas snatched up but the half part, it is no
maruayle though as yet he be of a doubtful mind, and dare not yet determine
what should come to pass: God had not revealed unto him what he would do,
for Jonas had nothing before his eyes, but the end or event of his preaching.
Now let us proceed.

verse. 6 Or an * Iuye.
Gourd, and made it come up over Jonas, that it might be a shadow over his
head and deliver him from his grief, and Jonas was exceeding glad of the
Gourde.

verse. 7 But God prepared a worm when the morning rose the next day, and it
smote the Or Gourd
Iuie that it wythered.

verse. 8 And it came to pass when the Sune did arise, that God prepared a
vehement (or seruent) wind, and the Sun beat upon the head of Jonas, that he
faynted, and wyshed in his heart that he might dye: and said, it is better for
me to dye, then to live, or my death is better then my life.

Kikijon. For there was in time past not a ^ytle controversy about this word*
Some read it A Gourde, where had rather to read it, A C^cummet: (...) as
gessings and conjectures are free in matters obscure and unknown. But yet the
first Translation was received. Augustine says, that there arose a tumult in a
certain Church, when the Bishop read that hew interpretation of Hierom, where
he turned the word, An Iuie. But certain it is that those men were rash and
foolish, which for so light a matter were so offended, for they ought more
dilygentlie to have searched which interpretation had been the better, and the
truer. Augustine also behaved him self not very wyselie in this thing, for
such a superstition took hold upon him, that he would not have the common
translation of the old Testament to be changed. He took it well, that Hierom
had translated the new Testament out of the Greek, but he would not have
that old Testament to be meddled withal: because there was a suspicion of the
Jews, that, as they were always deadly enemies to the faith, they had gone
adout to corrupt the whole Law and the Prophets: when as therefore there was a
secret suspicion of the false packing of the Jews, Augustine had rat^er for
that cause keep still the common translation. Hierom also declares that he
him self was brought to Rome, because he had turned. An Iuie* for A Gourde.
But too sharply and almost enemylike, answered be Augustine. And very
^^olorike he ^^ueyghed, he against one Cornelius, I know not whom, and
another Asinius polio, who had at Rome accursed him of sacrilege as it were,
because he had changed this place, but here I do not excuse them, if they way
wardlie refused, the thing which was probable. But as touching the matter it
self. I had rather in this place to leave it either a Gourd, or a Cucummer,
then to move any trouble about a thing of nothing. Hierom says, that it is not
an Iuie, he says it is a kind of small Tree: and says that it grows
every where in Syria. He says that this small Tree is held up by his stalk,
and this cannot agree to an Iuie. For the Iuie, unless it cleave to a wall or
a tree, it creeps only on the ground: it could not therefore be an Iuie.
Wherefore he ought not to translate it an Iuie.

He excuses the matter thus, that if he had put down the Hebrewe name, many
would have imagined it either to he a Beast or a Serpent. He would therefore
set down some known name. But he might also have cast many doubts, as thus:
what? An Iuie is said to have ascended over the head of Jonas, and to have
given shadow unto him: how could this be? Now I maruayle why Hierom in one
place says that, that kind of Tree was called in his time Cicijon, in the
Syrian tongue: and in another place, even in his Commentaries, he says that it
is called in the same tongue Elkeroa, and we see that the same word is quyte
contrary to the word Cicijon. But now when he answers Augustine, I doubt
not but that he mocked him. For he knew that Augustine knew not the Hebrewe
tongue. And therefore iesteth he with him as with a child, because of his
ignorance in the Hebrewe tongue. He seems ex tempore for his own commodity
to have imagined some new word, and I doubt not but that he feigned it upon
a sudden. That there might be some affinity between the word Kikijon and
Cicijon. But how so ever the matter is, whether it were a Gourde, or else some
small Tree, it is not convenient greatly to contend how it might so soon
grow up to that bygnesse. Hierom says that it is of large leaves, and that it
increases to the greatness of a Vine branch. Be it so: but that is not
sprung up, neither in one day nor in two, no nor yet in three. Therefore it
must needs be some extraordinary thing For neither an Iuye, nor a Gourde, nor
yet any small sprought or any other ^ree could so soon grow up, that it could
cover the head of Jonas: neither did this only herb shadow the head of
Jonas: but it is rather credible that this was added to the Booth which he had
mad for himself. Jonas then, shrouded not himself only under that herb, but
when he could not sufficiently defend himself from the heat of the sun,
then had he this help. God therefore unto the shadow of the Boothe adds also
this small free: that by this means Jonas might be refeshed. For we know that
in those regions the sun is burning whot And again it was an extraordinary
heat, as we shall see. This is that which I was minded to speak of the word,
Iuye and I have been longer, then I thought to be: but because in time paste
they brabled about that word, I thought to run over those things which might
satisfy even the curyouse readers.

Now I come to the matter it self. Jonas declares that a Gourde or Cucumer or
an Iuye was prepared of the Lord. There is no doubt but contrary to the
accustomed manner this herb suddenly sprung up, that it might cover the
Boothe of Jonas. And this is my Judgment. But we know that as often as God
deals contrary to the order of Nature, yet he comes unto Nature it self.
This is not perpetual: but we shall find for the most part, that God so
works that he both exceeds the course of Nature, and yet goes not quyte
from nature. Even as when he in the deserte would gather together quayles on a
heap, and give flesh to his people, he raised up the East wind. How often
have the winds blowed, and yet never brought together such a multitude of
birds? This was therefore a miracle, Number. 11.31.
but yet God would not reiecte altogether the helps of Nature. For then he
used the wind, but yet that wind could not naturally bring those byrds with
it. So in this place I doubt not but that God chose an herb which quickly
might mount to such an height and yet he went beyond the acustomed course of
nature. In this fence therefore it is said that God prepared Kikijon, and made
it to come up over the head of Jonas, whereby it might be a shadow for his
head and might deliver him from his grief. But that afterward there is said,
that A worm was prepared, Note well.
here also we see even that those things which seem to happen by fortune or
chance, are not withstanding governed by the secret providence of God. If any
man say that here is showed not what commonly comes to pass, but what was
once done: I answer that although God at that time would set out an example
notable and worthy to be remembered, yet is this perpetually true, that even
the very bytinges of worms are governed by the will and determination of God.
So that neither herb nor tree without his will can wyther, even as Christ
says. That two Sparowes light not on the ground without the decree of the
Father. And thus much as touching the worm.

Now where as there is afterward added, that: When the Sun arose the next
day, a wind was prepared: hereby also we gather that the winds do not arise
of their own accord, or by chance, but are raised up by God. There are in
deed causes in Nature found out, why sometime the air is calm and sometime
is troubled with winds: but all these middle causes does the counsel and
wisdom of God govern, so that, that is always true, that Nature is not some
certain blind motion and yet there is always a law prefixed thereto by the
will of God. God therefore governs by his wisdom and hand whatsoever
comes to pass. This only is the difference: Note.
that those his works that keep their common course have the name of Nature:
but his miracles, when as God changes the accustomed course, do not keep
still the name of nature: but yet do come from God himself being the author
thereof. Therefore as concerning this wind this is to be noted that this was not
an usual or common wind: and yet the common winds are no less raised daily
by the providence of God, then this wind now blowed whereof Jonas here
speaks: but God as the^ wrought otherwise then by the accustomed course of
nature as they say: and yet daily he commonly keeps a continual tenor or
rule in the order of nature. Now must we see why all this discourse is set
down. Jonas confesses that be greatly reiyoced, when he was covered from the
extreme heat of the sun. And when the herb was dead and withered, he was
stricken with so great dolor, that he desired to dye. Here is nothing
superfluouse, for Jonas both in his joy and in his sorrow shows how tender
and prone he is to either part, he confesses his delicacie and tenderness,
when he says that he was exceedingly glad: and again, when he says that he
took such great sorrow for the dead herb, that in the lothing of his life
he desired death. There is secretly here included a free confession of his
infirmity: because Jonas might more simply have set down and noted his joy
then his sorrow. But he plainly expressed his vehemency and excess in
either affection, that we might know that he was carried away with his
passions, so that in the smallest matters he was to angrye, or else being putt
up with joy, he kept in that also no measure and thus much both of his joy
and sorrow.

Now in that he says, that he prayed, as he said a little-before, he only
uses that Hebrew word, which signifies to wish. He wished (says he) in his
heart that he might die. It is therefore credyble that Jonas was so overwhelmed
with sorrow, that he lyfted not up his mind any more unto God: and that we see
that he was not forsaken and vncared for of God. Now by and by it follows.

verse. 9

Jonas. For as we have said, dolor had so choked the mind of the holy
Prophet, that he could not any more be lift up unto God. Now therefore with
himself he desired to dye: and yet God forsakes him not. This is a rare
example and show of the inestimable mercy of God, which he vouchsafes unto
his people, although they yet do cast themselves down hedlong: even as Jonas
here rushed into desperation and was not carfull for any remedy. But God
waited not till he was sought unto, but he prevented that miserable Jonas, yea
and the destruction which he began to bring upon himself: saying: Do thou
well to be so angry for the Gourde? As if he should say, that Jonas was to
vehementlye troubled and disquieted for so small a matter.

And this manner of speaking is always to be noted, whereof we entreated at
large yesterdaye: because God does not simplye chide Jonas, or that he took it
grieuousely that the Gourd was wythered. For what then? forsooth even because
he was angrye. For in anger there is always excess, when as therefore Jonas
without any measure or moderation s^ raged, God worthily in him chastises this
great vice. Well: I will not now repete that which I spoke yesterdaye, how that
the fault was made the greater, because that Jonas not only murmured for the
perishing of the herb, but also because he gives over himself, and boyleth
in anger without measure. Which thing the answer of Jonas approves, when he
said: I do well to be angry, even to the death. Where we see how impudentlie
the holy Prophet repelleth that admonition of God, wherewith he ought yet to
have been revoked to a better mind. He is not ignorant that it is God that
speaks. Why is he not immediately stricken with fear? why is he not moved
with the authority of him that speaks? by and by to lay down that cruelty
of mind?

But certainly, even thus is it wont to be, when the minds of men are once
blinded with some preposterous affection: although the Lord thunder or lyghten
from heaven, they will not hear: at least, they will not cease violently to
run on, even as here Jonas does. When as we see therefore an example of such
contumacie in so holy a man, how much more ought each of us to fear? let us
therefore betymes learn to keep in and quench our affections, and at the
very beginning to bridle them, least if it shall come to pass, that they
burst out any long while, we be also at the length, even to the last hour
obstinate and vnreformeable. I do well (says Jonas) to be angry even to the
death, God objected only unto his servant Jonas, the vice of anger: Now
Jonas so far kotchelleth him self in his madness, that he says, that
desperation is without sin: I (says he) do not offend, although I despair,
yea although with a rageing fury, I give over my self unto death, yet I do
not offend.

Who would have said that this could have come to pass, or fallen out in that
holy Prophet? But by this so notable an example we are admonished, what
furious brute beasts the affections of our flesh be. Nothing therefore is
better then to restrain them, before they gather any more strength, then they
ought. For always, when any man has cheryshed his sins, this contumacie and
obstinacy will follow. But to be wroth or angry even to the death, is so to
loathe life, that of our own accord we give over our selves unto death. Yet it
was not the purpose of Jonas to kill him self, but although he abstayned from
such violence, he yet with settled mind wrought his own death, because he
submitted not himself unto God, but with a blind motion or affection was
carried away. Now it follows.

verse. 10

verse. 11 And should not I spare Nineueh that great City, in the which are
six score thousand persons, which cannot discern between their right hand
and their left, and also much Cattle?

HEre God reuealeth for what purpose he suddenly brought up the Gourde, and
then would have it to perish and wyther away by the biting of the Worm, even
that Jonas might learn, that he dealt to unnaturally toward the Nineuits. And
although we see that the holy Prophet fell into horrible affection, yet after
a sort God having scorned him, admonished of his folly. For under the figure
of the Gourd, be declared how vngentlie he desired the destruction of so
populous a City, as was Nineueh.

But this simylitude seems not in all points to agree to the matter. For
Jonas sorrowed not for the Gourde, but only had respect to him self, and
therefore he took it greeuouslie that the comfort wherewith he was delyghted,
was taken away from him: Therefore when it was discommoditie that so compelled
Jonas unto anger, the similitude seems not well to be applied, when as God
thus reasons: Thou would have the Gourde to be pitied, and should not I
spare this great City. Nay, he was not careful for the Gourd. For if all the
Gourdes in the world had there wythered, he had never been touched with any
sorrow: but because he felt extreme danger, being parched with the
exceeding heat of the Sun, therefore is he angry. I answer, that although
Jonas, privately had regard to himself, yet very well does this similytude
agree. For God keeps men unto the use whereto he has appointed them. Jonas
sorrowed for the loss of the Gourde, even because he was deprived of his
shadow.

But God creates not men in vain, and therefore it is no maruayle, though he
would have them safe. We see therefore that Jonas was properly taught by this
figure, how unkindly he dealt toward the Nineuits. For certainly he was
but one only man, therefore when as he would have so great consideration of
him self and the Gourde only: how cast he of all care of so great and so
populous a City? Ought not this to have come into his mind, that it is no
maruayle if God have a care for so many thousand men, being the Father and
maker of them? For although the Nineuits were enstraunged from God, yet in as
much as they were men, God, as he wholly is the father of all mankind,
acknowledged them for his, thus far at the least* that they might live and
enjoy other commodities of this earthly life. Now therefore we know the
reason of this similitude or figure: Thou says God, wilt pity the Gourde,
and should not I pity this great City? By this appears, how frivolous that
devise of Hierom, is, when he says, that Jonas was not angry for the
delyuerie of the City, but for that he perceived his own nation (by the
conversion of the Nineuits) to perish.

For the Lord here again repeateth that the mind of Jonas was otherwise:
even that he took it greeuouslie that the City should be delivered from
destruction. And it is the less tolerable, that this Hierom excuses Jonas,
for that Jonas flatly and boldly makes answer unto GOD, that he does not
offend, in being angry even unto the death, That fellow surely dare without
any shame, notwithstanding all this, cast a color, that he may excuse such a
shameful contumacie. But let it suffice us to hold and know the natural and
true sense or meaning of the Prophet. For here under the person of God, he
declares that his cruelty worthily is condemned, in that so desyrouslie he
wyshed the the destruction of that populous City. The parts of the similitude
are also to be marked, when as he says: Thou have pitied, there is in the
pronoune Tu, Thou, an Emphata, or vehemency. For God compares him self with
Jonas, as thus: Who art thou? Certainly a mortal man shall not be so prone
to mercy and pity, as I am. Thou permittest to thy self this law, that
thou wylt needs pity the Gourde, even thou which art framed of claye wylt do
this. Now this Gourde (says he) is not thy workmanshippe, Thou have not
labored for it, that is, it came not forth by thy tyllage or labor: again,
Thou made it not to grow, or, thou broughtest it not out of the earth:
Thirdly: It was the daughter of one night, and in one night it perished. It
was but a small wythered plant or herb. Therefore if thou respect the nature of
the Gourde, or if thou respect thy self, and addest together all other
circumstaunces, there is no cause for thee to be angry. And now I which am
God, in whose hand are al things, should not I pity says he? I whose
continual property it is, mercifully to bear with men, and to suffer them,
though they be worthy of destruction, should not I pity? again this is a
great City. For here is now no dealing about a plant, but about a wonderful
great people.

Lastly, In which there are (says he) 120000 persons which cannot discern
betwixt their right hand, and their left hand. Well: now we see how
Emphaticall every of the parts of this comparison be. But although the
purpose of God was to reprehende the foolish and perverse sorrow of Jonas, yet
here may we gather a general doctrine, if we reason thus: we are sorry one for
another and yet we are wicked persons and cruel: if therefore by a certain
secret instincte mortal men be thus prone unto pittye, what is not to be hoped
for from the incomprehensible goodness of God, who both is our Father, and the
maker of the whole world, and who is the fountain of goodness and mercy,
should not he pity us? Now as touching the number. Here Jonas sets down
twelve times ten thousand persons which are a hundred and twenty thousand, as
we have alredye said. Here God shows how fatherly he takes care for
mankind. Every one of us is nourished up of him with a singular care: but yet
here he sets before us that great number, that it may more evidently
appear, that he has so great consideration of mankind, that rashelye he
thundereth not out his vengaunce against any one people. And where he adds,
that they could not discern between the right hand and the left, I doubt not
but that it is referred to the small age of the persons, which opinion is also
almost received by the consent of all men. Notwithstanding one man was afraid
least he should make the City to great if he should make all that number to
be Infants: and therefore he comprehends in that number, one with another, as
well oulde men, as men of myddle age and Infants. He says that they could not
discern between the right hand and their left, because they were not
instructed in the school of God, neither perceived they the difference
between good and badde: as we know that unbelievers do wander in their own
errors. But this sense is to much racked, again there is no reason for this
devise: because we know that City not only to be like other great Cities, as
are many at this day in Europe, but also to have surpassed even those which
at this day are most principal. We know that in Paris are more then 400.
thousand souls, the like is in other Cities. Therefore that Invention, that
Jonas here speaks of all the Nineuits, I do refuse. For rather would God
declare that although most just cause were there, why he should utterly
destroy that City, yet were there other causes, which might mittigate so
horrible punishment, because there were as then there many Infants, which had
not yet by their own offenses deserved such destruction.

God therefore here declares unto Jonas, how cruelly he was carried away
with his zeal: although that zeal, as was said, rose upon a good beginning,
yet was Jonas carried away with to violent a motion. This God declares, when as
yet he spared so many innocent Infauntes. He also adds to the Infants, brute
beasts: Certaynely Oxen excelled and were better then plants. If Jonas
therefore worthily sorrowed for one small plant being withered: certainly it
were far more hard and cruel, for so many innocente creatures to perish.
Therefore we see how fitly al things agree to the similitude, that Jonas may be
ashamed and grieved at his foolyshnesse, that he would seem so to run
before the secret determination of God, and govern him self after a sort by
his own will, not to spare the Nineuits, when as notwithstanding they endeavored
to prevent Gods vengeance and judgment, by true repentance. Let h^ therefore
pray against this sin.

The Prayer.
Grant O Almighty God, seeing thou so many ways have testified and declared,
and daily do evidently manifest to us how dear and precious mankind is unto
thee, and seeing that daily we do enjoy so many and so notable experiments,
documents and both of thy goodness and mercy: Grant I say that we may learn
wholly to repose our selves upon that thy goodness whereof thou declarest unto
us so many shows and examples, and which thou vouchsafest continually to be
thoroughly known unto us, so that we may not only pass through this terrene
and earthly course, but also with fear may aspire unto the hope of that
blessed and Celestial life which is reposed and said up for us in heaven,
through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

FINJS.
A CATHOLIC and Ecclesiastical Exposition upon the two last Epistles of
John. Collected out of the works of the best writers, by Augustine Marlorat,
that most excellent Divine.

To the right worshipful and godly Lady, the Lady Vrsula Walsingham, Wife to
the right honorable Sir Fraunces Walsingham Knight, chief Secretary to the
Queens excellent Majesty, and of her Graces most honorable privy Counsel,
N. B. Minister of Christ's Gospel in the Town of Ridborne, wysheth blessed
life, with increase of true Godliness in Christ Jesus.
Having finished these collections of Augustine Marlorat, that reverend Divine
upon the two last Epistles of S. John, I have attempted right Venerable Lady,
(according to my purpose, when I first took them in hand, though not greatly
known unto you) to publish them in your name: being persuaded that they will
so much the sooner of the godly be read and well liked, as they shall be accepted
of you, whose virtuous life deserves no less commendations in this your
country, then did that Ladies life to whom the Apostle directed these
Epistles. The volume I confess is not great, but the matter therein contained
is delectable, Eras. lib. 4 Aroth. Aelian lib var. Hist.
and not disagreeable to your Ladishippes state and profession. Lisander king
of Sparta took in good part the selie wrytings of the poor Poet Antilochus,
having no better present to give: Augustus Caesar gratfullie received the
Greek verses which a poor scholar of Greece gave him. Artaxerxes
thankfully, and with great courtesy took a handful of water which a poor
subject of his, Sinaetes by name, gave unto him having none ability to give
any greater gift. Alfonsus king of Arragon, lovingly embraced as a great
iuell, a small book of the Decades of Liuie, given to him by Cosmus the
Physician. Ludouicus the Emperor joyfully embraced the books of Dionisius the
Areopagit, which he wrote de Hierarchia: May it please you therefore right
virtuous Lady to accept also, these two Epistles of S. John, being expounded
by Calvin and others, and brought into one book by Marlorat: Sigeber.
and given unto you by me, not being such a gift as I would, but as presently I
could present unto your Ladyship: and to defend the same from the venomous
darts of scla^derous tongues which are more ready to carpe then to correct,
more prone to find fault with other men's works, then either to amend them, or
to publish any thing of theirs. Wherein (Madam) you shall immitate the best
sort of men in humanity, and nothing degenerate from Gentilitie. And as it
seeks to be shrouded under your name, so vouchsafe to harbor, and shield it.
Consider that, a simple Sparowe sometime, to avoid the griping talents of a
tirannous Sparhauke, pursuing her, fled for succor unto the bosom of
Artaxerxes king of Persea, being in camp, where she lay panting for fear of
death, and weariness of flight, unto whom the King said: As I will defend
thee, thou little sparrowe from death, because thou flyest to me for succor, so
will I do to those that repose them selves upon me. The like favor, good
Lady, if this my book may find at your hands, I have the thing in this
case that I desire: And I assure your Ladishippe that, Cum meliores
nanciscantur Aues: When more precious byrds be hatched, as said Zenod: I will
not (God wylling) forgette that you disdayned not to grace so small a Pamphlet
as this. God the fountain of all goodness, grant unto your Ladishippe
continual love to the Gospel, with perfect faith in Christ Jesus. From
Ridborne this.26. of March. 1578.

Your Ladyships in the Lord Christ. Nath. Baxterus.

A Catholic and Ecclesiastical exposition upon the two last Epistles of John.
Collected out of the works of the best Writers by Augustine Marlorat, that
excellent Divine.
The Argument.
ALthough this second Epistle be called the Epistle of John, Marlorat,
although of the Author thereof, Imlerus
there were no doubt (for that it does immediately follow that Epistle which no
man doubts to be the Epistle of John the Evangelist.) Many of the
Interpreters notwithstanding make a doubt thereof, some also flatly deny that
they came both from one, and the self same author: but say that this Epistle
is a sacred monument of some one godly man, a faithful dispensor of the word,
which would not that the Talet committed unto him from Christ that chief King,
being wrapped in a cloute, should be committed to the earth or hidden in the
ground, but rather transferred to the money chaungers: which opinion truly
seems probable enough. Marlorat.


Others would have one John a certain Elder to be the author of this Epistle,
because in the title or inscription of the Epistle, he calls him self not an
Apostle, but a senior or elder. Othersome again have affirmed not this alone,
but also that following, which is entitled the third Epistle of John, to be
written by John the Evangelist, that beloved disciple of Christ and Apostle,
and not without probable conjecture. For they seem like to the first, Pelicanus
which is the Epistle of John the Evangelist, both in words, and assertion of
faith and charity against the heretics, Marlorat. Imlerus.
although we dare not avouch any certainty of this matter. Truly the words
of the Epistle plentifully declare, that to this man, who so he was, not one
talent, but rather ten talentes by God almighty were committed. For after
such a sort sets he forth faith unto us, and commends charity, as with
greater study and profit he could not have done.

He wrote unto a certain Lady, who by her proper name, as many think,
Oecumenius.
was called Electa. Oecu. For when he saw her sons rightly walk in the
faith, and also many deceyuers to wander about, and deny Christ to be come in
the flesh, he would write this Epistle: wherein first he commends her
sons, because they walk in the truth of the Gospel: Pelicanus Oecumi.
Secondly (teaching that the mystery which we have, is not new) he
exhorts unto love, Pel. affirming perfect faith not to be without Charity.
Oecu. And that they may continue in the doctrine delivered unto them, he
consequently affirms, him to be Antichriste which denies Christ to become
in the flesh, Vitus Theod.
V. and with a very notable sentence also, he admonishes them that sin is
to be flied, least a man be deprived of the offered reward. Lastly he
exhorts them to beware of the false Prophets, Oe. and commands that no man
take such to house, Bullingerus. Vitus Th. Marlorat. Oecum.
neither bid them, God speed, but rather shun them as the most pernicious
enemies of Christ. In the end he rendereth a reason, why in this Epistle he
studied to be brief, even because he hops shortly to speak the rest, face
to face, Oe. and so with a Christian salutation enterlaced, he concludes or
finisheth his Epistle.


Imlerus.
THe Elder to the Elect Lady. This is the inscription or title of the Epistle
which shows first, the office of the writer, and secondly, conteyneth the
name or dignity of her, to whom the Epistle was written. The word Elder in
this place is not referred to age, but rather, first to integrity of mind,
secondly, honesty of manners, and thirdly, excellency of erudition. Bull.
Peli. The Pope disdeyneth to be a Bishop or a minister, but he will be a
monarche a Pope, a God in earth. etc. Luke 22.25.
For all these things that Name Presbyteros, Senior, Elder, does comprehend.
Of the which read more, Acts. 20.17. and.1. Tim. 5.17. They which think this
Epistle to be written by the Apostle John, affirm that he used this name for
modesty sake, against the hartinesse of our Elders, in expressing their
tytles, whom the name of a Minister and Bishop does so displease, that they
must be called Popes high Priests, and chief Monarchs of Christian piety.
When as yet Christ the Lord of all said to his Disciples. The kings of the
Gentiles reign over them, and they that bear rule over them, are called
bountiful. But ye shall not be so: but let the greatest among you be as the
least, and he which is chief, as he which ministers.

John also might be called Elder by a figure called Antonomasia, among the
Apostles. Of women (as some think) none remained alive, beside this Elect and
beloved disciple of Christ. And then also the Seniors or Elders governed the
Congregation, being famous men of an approved faith, and honorable perfection,
full of the holy ghost, which by word and examples ruled the Church. But this
is the opinion of those men, Marlorat.
which affirm John the Evangelist to be the writer of this present Epistle.
They which think otherwise, refer the name Elder to the office of teaching,
as it is already fayde. He calls her also to whom he writes Elect. Oec.
Imlerus. Oecum.
Either by reason of her name, or of her great emulation, or study about
virtue. To this also he seems to add the title of Lady, that he might show
the profit of this Woman, Note the study of some Ladies in those days, not to
overcome modesty, but to follow virtue and the word of God. 1 Cor. 15.17
Marlorat
in the word of God, who now through the victory of our Lord Jesus Christ,
began to be a Lady over death, sin, the Devil and hell, and might say
with Saint Paul: Death is swalowed up in the victory. O death where is thy
styng? O hell where is thy victory? The stinge of death is sin, the strength
of sin is ye law: but thanks be to God, which has given us victory, through
our Lord Jesus Christ. 1. Cor. 15. and.57. The beginning of this victory does
that word, which he uses, even ye Elect Lady, also declared unto us, if the
word Elect be taken in the proper signification thereof, to the intent to
admonish us of that eternal election of the sons of God: Imlerus
as if the writers of the Epistle should say: God almighty would have thee
received into the number of his predestined and Elected children. Of the
which thing, Paul very notably preaches, saying: But we ought to give
thanks to God always for you brethren beloved of the Lord, 2. These. 2 13.
because that God has chosen you to salvation from the beginning, through the
sanctification of the spirit, and the faith of truth, whereunto he called you
by our Gospel, to obtain the glory of our Lord Jesus Christ.

Marlorat. The family of love will have all the scriptures interpreted by
Allegories.
And her children. There be some which by this Lady will have the Church
understood, and by her Sons or Children, the little ones, or those which are
weak, and which are in the Church begotten by the faith of Jesus Christ: but
this exposition is racked. For to what end should the Author of the Epistle
say, that he would shortly speak in the presence of the Lady, to whom he
writes, vnleast he meant some certain person? Now he adds: Verse. 12 Which
is true Christian love? that which is void of Hyppo. Oecumenius. 1. Ioh. 3.18
Marlorat Romans 12.9
Whom I love in the truth, By which words he signifies, what manner of
thing true and Christian love is; even that truly which is most void of all
hypocrisy. For to love with mouth faynedlie, oftentimes comes to pass: even
as it is noted in ye fiirst Epistle of John: where he said, Little children let
us not love in word, neither in tongue only, but in deed and truth. And
Paul said: Let love be without dissimulation. Peter also speaks of it thus:
You which have purified your souls in obeying the truth through the spirit,
to love brotherly without fayning: Love one another with a pure heart
fervently: being borne anew, not of mortal seed, but of immortal, by the word
of God, who lives and remains for ever. It follows. And not I alone. 1.
Pet. 1.22.
Great is the concord and friendship among the sons of God. For seeing
they all are dyrected by one spirit, even of Christ, it is not possible but
that they hold mutual amity between them selves, and embrace all those
which according to the measure of the grace given unto them, do study to
further the glory of Christ alone. The distaunce therefore of place, or
diversity of tongues, or their diverse estates nothing at all let, but that
this most excellent love, among them may flourish: Christian profession and
fame of name alone has most surely joined them together, in such sort, that
oftentimes one of them rejoice of another, whom yet they never saw. So Paul
hearing of the faith of the Romans, desired ardentlie to see them. Romans
1.10.11,
Unto whom also he commends Prisca and Aquila after this sort: Greet
Priscila and Aquila, my fellow helpers in Christ Jesus, which for my life have
laid down their own neck: unto whom not I only give thanks, but also all
the Churches of the Gentiles. It follows. But also all that have known the
truth. Romans 16, 3
It is a Periphrasis, or Circumlocution of the Christians. For properly they
are said to know the truth, unto whom Christ which is the truth is revealed
moreover this knowledge in the faithful is not ydell, but lively and occupied.
John. 14.9
For they do not only hold that which is true, but they both love it and
follow it. And for certainty, sithe the knowledge of God and the knowledge of
the truth is one: it cannot be, that they which are endued with the knowledge
of the truth do not conform themselves to the true prescript or ordinance
thereof. For they know that saying of John: Hereby are we sure that we have
known him, if we keep his commandments. He that says I know him, 1 Ioh.
2.3.
and keeps not his commandments, is a liar and the truth is not in him.
Paul also speaks thus of the knowledge of Christ: you have not so learned
Christ: if so be you have heard him, and have been taught by him, as the truth
is in Jesus, that is: that ye cast of, Ephe. 4.21
concerning the conversation in time paste, that oulde man, which is corrupt
through the deceyuable lusts and be renewed in the spirit of your mind etc.
Out of the which words we learn, that in vain do all they bost of the
knowledge of the truth, which endeavor not themselves to newness of life.


Pelicanus.
FOr the truths sake) He means the truth of the Gospel, which they by the
preaching of the word had learned as if he should say. Not for any other
cause do the godly and faithful which are with us love thy sons, but
because they understand, that the sinceritye of the profession of the gospel,
pell, which we follow, does dwell in you. In this place may we observe the
difference between worldly love and Christian love. Marlorat. The difference
between Christian and worldly love. Imlerus. Who has the truth.
Many, love other men for their riches substance honor and goods which they
hope to receive at their hands. Such love is not true love, but (...), self
love, But Christian love, even as it is founded in Gods verity, respects
first, the only glory of God, and secondly, the profit of his neighbor Therefore
is this truth always ioygned with the fear of God, so that no man can truly
boste of this truth, but he which has given over himself obedient to the will
of of God. Bullinger. Morlorat.
It follows: Which dwells in us. That is which is firm and true among us,
of the which none of us can doubt. If so be that we most stedfastlye hold
Christ speaking to the Father, with his own mouth uttered: Thy word is
truth. Ioh. 17.17 Oecum. Marlorat.
It follows, And shall be with us for ever. These words pertayne not so much,
to the confirmation of the doctrine, as unto the certainty of their
perseueraunce. Here the Elder affirms, both himself and the rest of the
faithful amongst whom he was conversant, to persevere in the truth. Which
thing ought not to bring a little comfort to all godly men. For little were it,
that we are placed in the way of truth, except we had hope of perseuering to
the end. Who may say, they shall persevere to the end.
But they which are endowed with the celestial spirit, and being taught of
Christ, have learned the truth, do know for certainty that they are not
called in vain into the flock of Christ, that is, not for this cause only,
that they may hear the voice of the Pastor Christ, but that they may follow
him unto the end: as he said: My sheep hear my voice, Ioh. 10.27
and I know them, and they follow me. And in another place: Imlerus. John.
14.23 Morlorat.
If a man love me, he will keep my word, and my father will love him, and we
will come unto him, and dwell with him. And when he speaks of the holy
ghost, who him self teaches this truth, I (says he) will pray the father,
and he shall give you another comforter, that he may abide with you for ever,
eue^ the spirit of truth, John. 14.16.17
whom the world cannot receive, because in sees him not, neither knows
him: but ye know him, for he dwells in you, and shall be in you. Whereunto
also pertayneth that most excellent promise of Christ. Behold I am with you
always, Mat. 28.20 Obiectio. John. 6.66 1 Timothy 14.1 2. Tim. 4.10
even to the end of the world. Behold how the truth dwells always with
the faithful. If a man object, that there be many which depart from the flock
of Christ, even as we may gather out of many places of scripture, we have a
ready answer, that they never truly believed, nor acknowledged the truth.
Wherefore the spirit of God thinks them not of the number of the faithful,
but rather when it seems him good, he abiecteth them out of ye sacred flock
of God, as unprofitable outcastes, and mere hypocrites: Whereupon John speaking
of Antichrists, says: They went out from us, 1. John. 219
but they were not of us. For if they had been of us, they had remained
together with us: but this comes to pass, that they might appear that they
are not all of us. For the holy Apostle knew right well, what Christ had
said of the Elect sheep: I give unto them life eternal, neither shall they
perish for ever, neither shall any man take them out of my hand. John. 10.28
My Father which gave them unto me, is greater then all: and no man can take
them out of my Fathers hand. They therefore which truly belong unto the flock
of Christ, shall in him persevere unto the end: according to that saying of
Paul the Apostle, I am persuaded of this same thing, that he which has begune
this good work in you, Philip. 1.6
will perform it until the day of Jesus Christ.

Some read: Grace. etc. be with you.
the son of the Father shall be with us in truth and love.
GRace, etc. He wishes to the faithful, Grace, which is given to us by
Christ: wherein also he declares himself to be the faithful dispensor of the
mysteries of God. Imlerus. Grace.
And he comfort us when he says, that Grace shall continue with us, whereby
we are saved through faith. For by the word, Grace, he signifies the favor
of God, which he shows toward us for his sons sake: Marlorat
in that he imputes not our sins unto us, but remitteth them for our
mediator Jesus. Mercy. This is the cause of that Grace into the which God
receives us: Mercy
concerning the which Peter writes. Blessed be God, even the Father of our
Lord Jesus Christ, which according to his abundaunt mercy, 1. Pet. 1.3
has begotten us again into a lively hope, by the resurrection of Jesus
Christ from the dead. Tit. 3.5
And Paul: Not of the works of righteousness which we had done, but
according to his mercy he saved us. Peace. Peace Imlerus. Esai. 46 10. Numb.
23 16. Ioh 14.27 Psalm. 119 165. From God the Father.
This also springs of the grace of God. That Peace, says he, wherewith God
the Father reconciled us unto him self, shall continue for ever: for the
counsel of God is firm and steadfast, and is not changed as a man. This
Peace, Christ wishes and leaves with his Disciples. They therefore that love
the Law of the Lord, shall have great peace, and shall have no hurt. And
blessed shall they be, because they confess Christ the true Peace, and
retain him for the author of their faith. But from whom are all these things
to be looked for, From God the Father. For he is the fountain and original of
all goodness, as James testifies, saying: Marlorat. James. 1.7 Oecumenius.
Imlerus Marlorat. Imlerus Mat. 16.^6 Bullinger.
Every good giving, and every perfect gift is from above, descending from
the Father of lyghtes, with whom is no variableness, neither shadow of
turning. And only he also properly is a Father, as you may read, Math.
23.9. and Heb. 12.9. It follows: And from the Lord Jesus Christ. Here have
you a manifest testimony of ye divinity of Christ. For even by this place it is
evident, that the Son is of like power with the father, because he is ye
author of those things which only God has power to perform. He adds
moreover, The Son of the Father, That he might agree with that confession of
Peter. Thou art Christ the Son of the living God. It follows: In truth and
love. He adioyneth thereto, Truth and love, and wysheth that in these they
might walk and persevere, He opens Truth, against hypocrisy, error, and
lies, that nothing else might be, but the very true faith. Love comprehends
all the offices of piety.


Bullinger
I Rejoiced greatly. He takes his beginning now from a gratulation, rejoicing
that there were found some among them, which leaving Errors, Imlerus.
and forsaking the deceyuers have embraced the truth. Truly this holy man is
unto us alyuely example of that precept which S. Paul prescribes, saying:
Rejoice with them that rejoice, Romans 12.15
and weep with them that weep. The same almost he teaches. 1. Cor. 12 verse.
26. But now is that thing turned quite contrary for many weep with those
which rejoice: and rejoice when others weep: if any man be praised they inure
him: if a man fall, they rejoice. Bull. Marlorat
But if they were of the body they would be sorry that any member should be
cut of from the body. Christ our savior sorrowed for the destruction of
men, when they knew not the day of their visitation, and the things which
belonged to the eternal peace, Luke 19.41
after the same manner Paul declares what great care he took in profiting ye
Church of Christ. 2. Cor. 11 28. Phillip. 1 18.
For he says. The daily care for all congregations lies upon me. And when
he perceived the Church to profit, he rejoices and gives thanks to God.
Romans 16.19. Also the Virgin Marie, the mother of our savior Christ, knowing
by the Angel that her cosyn Elyzabeth had found favor with God, to be in her
age the mother of an excellent son, she greatly was stricken with joy,
setteh little by the distaunce of that place, went unto her, greatly rejoiced
over her, Luke. 1.39
saluted her, and remained certain months there to confer with her of holy
things. These are the offices of true love. For love is patient, gentle, it
inuyeth not, it boasts not it self it is not puffed up, it rejoices not
iniquitye. But rejoices in the truth. Cor. 13 4. Marlorat Phil. 4.4 Imlerus.
This is the true and found joy, wherein the Apostle bids the faithful to
rejoice, saying: Rejoice in the Lord always, again I say Rejoice. So this
true minister of Christ shows an example unto us, rejoicing for their good
and happy course in the truth, that having put their hand to the plough, they
determined not to run back, Luke. ^.62 Oecumenius.
in the exercise of the law are not neither hot nor could. It follows:
That I have found of thy sons. It is cercertaine a cause of exceeding great
Joy to find any man that without offense walks with a strayte course in
the faith of Christ. There is also here described unto us in this Elect Lady,
the office of a dilligent and godly mother of an househould which is to bring
up her sons first in the fear of God and secondly honesty of conversation.
Which good instruction of children in this place is a testimony that this true
faith had love adjoined with it. For who so is incredulouse, the same also
unfaithfully does all things. Therefore well agrees unto this woman the praise
wherein Solomon sets forth the office of a dilygent housewife. It follows:
Pro. 31.10 Marlorat.
Even as we have received a Commandment. Because many imagine that they
houlde the manifest truth, when they are altogether deceived, he signifies
that truth to be allowed, which agrees with the commandments of God, it
follows: of the father. This he adds whereby he might the more stir them
to Reverence and obedience. For if God be our Father his commandments ought
we of duty to receive. For so by his Prophet he says: A son honoreth his
Father, and a servant his master: if I therefore be a Father, where is the
honor which ye yield unto me? But if I be your Lord, where is my fear says
the Lord of hosts. Furthermore, by the precept of the Lord, Mala. 1.6
he means either the commandment of love whereof lately he spoke in the
last verse: or else that which we have in ye first Epistle, wherein this sort
he spoke. This is his commandment, 1. John. 3.23
that we believe in the name of his son Jesus Christ, and love one another,
as he has given commandment. Except any rather think that he had respect
unto that commandment, which the father gave concerning his son, Mat. 17.5
saying: Hear him. For under this precept all the rest are comprehended, and
to knit up all: we are taught in this place the will of God to be the most
just rule of all our actions, and no truth, as much as concerns salvation,
is approved of God, but that which agrees with his word.


ANd now I beseech the Lady. Pelicanus Marlorat.
The modesty of the servants of Christ is wonderful, who, when executing
their offices, they might (using the authority of God) command the faithful
many things, yet had rather gently to desire, then severely and sharply to
command.

This godly servant of Christ, vrgeing mutual love, beseeches this Woman to
persevere in Christian Charytie. So Paul exhorts the Romans: To. 12.1
I beseech you Brethren by the mercifulness of God, that you yield your
bodies a lyuelie Sacrifice, holy and acceptable unto God, which is your
reasonable worship of God. 1, Pet. 2.11
And Peter says: I beseech you beloved as strangers and pylgrimes, abstain
from carnal concupiscenses, which fight against the soul. Yea, and Christ
him self most modestly sometime and with great meekness invited men unto
heavenly things.

This modesty would God they would immitate at this day which brag, them
selves to be the Vicars of Christ and successors of the Apostles. It is new
because it must be renewed every day and we must not content our selves to
love as we did when we were children, but we have a commandment given us of
new, to love more and more or it is called new because it is given as it were a
new, as if it were gone from us by our corruption, and had need to be given
us a new by grace.
It follows: Not as writing a new commandment unto thee. In what sort, the
commandment of Charity is called a new commandment we have declared. 1.
John. 28. Look also the.13. of John, verse. 34. It follows: That we love one
another. When he requires mutual love, he excludes not that love which is
due unto foes and enemies. Even as when Christ said unto his Disciples: In
this shall all men know that ye are my Disciples, if you love one another.
John. 13.35. He did not abolish that commandment, which he had set forth of
the love of all men, and so consequently of our enemies, Math. 5.44. Luke.
6.27: But he shows, this to be the first degree of Charity, if the faithful
do love one another.

Charity therefore is extended even unto forrainers also: because we are all
of one flesh, and all created unto the Image of God. But because in those that
be regenerated, more bryghtlie does shine the Image of God, meet it is that
the band of love among the Christians, be much more sure and inseparable. The
first degree therefore of Charity is, that we love one another: but again,
we must know: Even as the goodness of God spreads and extends it self
unto all the world: so of us are all men to be loved, yea, even they which
hate us.


AND this is that love: This is added for interpretation. Bullinger.
This is says he, the ground of Love, even that a man keep the
commandments. For the Lord in the Gospel (whence these things seem to be
fetched) said, he that has my commandments, and keeps them, the same is
he which loves me. And again, Continue in my love. Ioh. 14 21
If ye shall keep my commandments, ye shall abide in my love.

This holy Elder therefore aduoucheth, Ioh 15.9
that by this is declared whether we truly love God: even if we walk in his
commandments, Imlerus.
and show obedience unto his fatherly will. And he has commaundet that we
love our neighbor. If therefore we receive his commandments, we shall in
confession be found true: if we imagine mischief against our neighbor, who
at our hands suspecteth no such matter, we are found liars, as it is largely
spoken of.1. Ioh. 4.20. It follows: This commandment is, that as you have
heard. He dubleth and repeateth Charity as yet, Marlorat.
and not without cause. For truly no better agrees the love of our selves
and the love of our neighbor together, then water and fire: and the love of
our selves so captiuateth all our senses, that Charity altogether is banished.
Wherefore we have need of daily goods; to the end that true Charity may
florishe amongst us. It follows, From the beginning you should walk in it.
Marlorat
This place many do defer to the next exhortation, which he adhibyteth
against the false Prophets: as if he should say, that it was foretold them
from the beginning, that they should beware of those deceyuers.

Notwithstanding, it is better restrained to the commandment of Charity,
which he confyrmeth not to be judged new, seeing that immediately even in the
beginning of Christian Religion, it is commanded of the Lord. For this
commandment have we from him, that he which loves God, 1. Ioh. 4.21 Romans 13
8 Galat. 5, 14
loves also his brother. And Paul said: who so loves his neighbor, has
fulfilled the law. For all the law is fulfilled in one word: Thou shall love
thine neighbor as thy self.

Which things seeing they be most true, it follows that they weary them
selves in vain, which, forsaking Charity, take upon them new and faygned
worship of God: which manner of vanity rayneth at this day in the Popedom
and Sinagogue of Antichrist.


FOR many deceivers. Now he adds the cause, why so greatly he urges
mutual love: which cause truly styrreth up the Church to vigilancie, Imlerus
and earnest study of godliness. Therefore says he, do I so greatly urge
love: therefore also ought you to be dillygent, because many deceyuers are come
into the world, which endeavor to lead you from the way of truth into error.
Of these shall you beware, and go forward in true Religion, Verity and Love.
Neither shall they easily have access unto you, Marlorat
if you continue in the received truth, and make much of mutual love. When he
says, that many sedusers be come into the world, the more vehemently
exhorts he the godly to vigilancie, and taking heed. Even as Paul when he
wrote in this manner unto Timothy: Preach the word: be instaunt in season,
and out of season improve, rebuke, exhort with all long suffering and doctrine.
For the time will come when they will not suffer wholesome doctrine, but as
having ytching ears shall after their own lusts get them an heap of
teachers, and shall turn their ears from the truth, and shall be given unto
fables: but watch thou. etc.

To the same end also tend the words of Christ, 2. Tim. 4.2 Math. 7 15.24.24
Bullinger. 1 Ioh. 2.10 and. 4.3
wherein he fore shows the coming of the false Prophets and deceyuers it
follows: which confess not Jesus Christ. Now with certain marks he
painteth out those deceyuers: and teaches the same things which he did in his
former Epistle even that this is a special note whereby you may discern the
spirits, of men and fase Prophets from true. For every spirit which confesses
not that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh, (that is, is become man, of our
substance and in all things like unto us, sin excepted) is not of God, but
for certainty the same is the spirit of Antechrist. Now it follows: He that
is such a one, is a deceiuer and Antechrist. Oecumenius.
With these we must understand for the more perfect exposition, they which
confess not Jesus Christ to be come in the flesh, then add this: the same is
a deceyuer and Antechrist. etc. The sense is therefore: many false deceyuers
are in the world which deny Jesus to be that Christ which was to come in to
the world according to the Oracles of the Prophets, Pelicanus
who so teaches this is a deceyuer, and that Antechrist the aduersarye of
Christ. Of which sort in those days were many of the Jews, which of the
coming and estate or condition of Messiah whom they looked for many years,
feigned many things and taught lies, and were superstitiousely careful about the
observation of things contained in the law.


Oecumenius.
Look to your selves, that we lose not. He commands that they take heed of
deceyuers: least by any means they might be removed from the way of truth.
When he adds: That we lose not the things which we have done: He draws his
argument from the damage or loss which they should sustain. Bullinger.
As if he should say: Let every man take heed to him self, Pelica.
least if he leave that he has well begun, he lose all the profit of those
things which hitherto he has done well, or which he has suffered for
Christ's sake and the truth. Bullinger.
But these sayings seem to be brought out of those words which are readde in
the Prophet.

If the just turn away from his righteousness, Eze. 18.24
and shall work iniquity, shall he live? All his righteousness which he has
done, shall not be remembered. Or else this may be referred to the Ministers of
the word, Marlorat
which had preached the Gospel unto the faithful, to whom he writes, as if
he should say: Mark dillygentlie our labor, whereby we reveal Christ unto
you: If you shall this do, I hope we shall not lose our labor. We trust that
you shall be our joy, and crown of rejoicing in the presence of our Lord
Jesus Christ at his coming. It follows: But that we may receive a full
reward. This may very aptly be referred generally to all faithful, 1. The.
2.19
in this sense: Let us do our dilygence, that, the teachers of Antechrist,
being made none accoumpt of, we may receive that most ample reward, Mat.
10.22 and. 24.13
which Christ has promised to none but to these which persevere to the end.


Whosoever transgresses. etc. Now he adds greater things: For of all this is
ye greatest detrime^t, to be void of God. And so to have neither the Father
nor the Son. But he which goes not forward in truth and love, he neither
has the Father nor the Son. Hereby we learn, Marlorat.
that carefully it is to be looked unto, that no man start back from the
known truth: because that after no other sort do we know God to be our God,
then while we persist steadfast and immovable in the doctrine delivered unto us
by ye Apostles. Which thing would God they would mark, Humayne Constitutions
must not make us to despise the doctrine of the Gospel.
which despising the doctrine of the Gospel, do follow humane constitutions:
as it is accustomed in the Popedom, not without great loss of souls. It
follows: He that continues. He continues in the doctrine of Christ, or of
the Gospel, which means and does according to the same, and lives in
contemplating and doing together: but he that from this conueigheth him self,
is Atheos, a Miscreaunt, or without God. For even as he which applies him
self to integrity, makes him self familiar unto God: even as Abraham,
according to that he heard of God him self: Gene. 17.1
I am thy God: walk before me, and be upright.

So he which lives without the Law of the Gospel, is an Infidel, in drawing
himself back that he might not have God. But when as he is an Athist, even
who enstrangeth himself from divine discipline, truly whosoever remains in the
same, He has both the Father and the Son. Imlerus. Ioh. 14.23 Marlorat.
Oecum.
For as concerning such, ye son said: If any man love me, he will keep my
word, and my father will love him, and we will come unto him, and dwell with
him. And here by the way is to be noted that God may be two ways had, that is
to say, universally: in the same sort as al creaturs are said to have God,
according to ye saying of Paul: Act. 17 28. Iere. 23.24 Oecum. Marlorat. 1.
Cor. 3.16 and. 6.19 2. Cor. 6.16
In him we live and move, and have our being. And ye Lord himself by his
Prophet: Do not I fill heaven and earth? says the Lord. But this is said
according to ye manner of the being of God.

After another manner is God had and possessed, even by faith and sanctity:
after which sort are the faithful called the Temples of God, because in them
God dwells. This doctrine therefore agrees with that of John. Let therefore
abide in you that same which you have heard from the beginning. If that which
ye have heard from the beginning shall remain in you, 1. Ioh. 2.24
ye also shall continue in the son, and in the Father. But although in this
place there be mention made but of the Father, and of the Son only, and not
of the holy ghost, no man therefore ought to be offended. For of this only
even of the Father and the Son: the intent of his speech constrained him and
required him to speak. Marlorat. To. 8, 9.11 1. Cor. 3.16 2. Tim. 1.14 James.
4.5
But the Father and the Son are not said to dwell in the hearts of the
faithful, but by the holy ghost: as teaches the Scripture. Wherefore when
the persons of the Father and the Son are named, the holy ghost is not
excluded.


Bullinger
IF there come any unto you. He commands in more plain words, to fly the
company of Heretics and false teachers, and constantly to cleave to the
doctrine of Christ. Heretics and false teachers be they which first bring in
their own doctrine, and not the doctrine of Christ, or else secondly which
deliver or follow a contrary preaching to ye doctrine of Christ. But the
doctrine of Christ is contained in the writings of the Prophets and Apostles:
who so ever therefore shall not bring the scriptures, or shall teach any thing
against the scriptures, is not to be received into the company, nor unto ye
speech of ye faithful, for evil speeches corrupt good manners. It follows. 1.
Cor. 15.33 Marlorat. Mat. 10.50. Ioh. 13, 20. Mat. 7, 15 Mat, 24.4 24
Receive him not to house. Even as Christ commands his to be received,
because they bring unto men the pure doctrine of the Gospel: so admonishes he
that we must take heed of false Prophets and deceyuers, because they can
bring nothing with them but a curse. And this saying is dilygentlie to be
noted, for many there be now a days, which easily give ear to those that
preach what so they list, and receive them unto their houses: whereby it
comes to pass, that they carry from them a just reward, even corruption of
mind, for the most part.

The Apostle feared least the same should come to pass unto the Corinthians,
as he him self writes: I fear least as the serpent beguiled Eua, through his
subtilty, 2 Cor. 11.3
so your minds should be corrupt from the simplicity that is in Christ. It
follows. Neither bid him God speed. Even as by, House, Bullinger
he means a common dwelling together, so by, God speed, he means familiar
talk. As it he should say. Pelicanus
This is that true doctrine which from true witnesses, from the saints of our
Lord Jesus Christ, from the Apostles and my self ye have received from the
beginning. But if any man come unto you which brings a doctrine contrary to
this, that he may bring you from the truth of the Gospel, so little ought you
to give ear unto him, yt neither is he to be admitted to house, if he seek
harborough, nor to be saluted with the word, God speed, if parraduenture he be
met in the way. For haszard it is least he infect the familye with his
familiar living together with them, and for the benefit of the house
communicated to him, he repay an Iniurye, and least of salutation there may
grow further talk.


FOr he that bids him God speed. That is he that saluteth and keeps
company with such deceyuers seems partaker of their evil deeds. Bullinger
For first he gives courage to a wicked man (while he sees himself to be in
some estimation with those whom he endeuoreth to subvert) and secondlye
shows an evil example to other as if he seemed to favor the wickedness of
him, Imlerus
whose familiarity he does not abhor. But these words seem not to agree with
the doctrine of Paul some may say. For he thus writes: If any man obey not
this our saying in this letter, note him and have no company with him that he
may be ashamed: 2. The. 3, 14 Marlorat.
yet count him not as an enemy, but admonish him as a brother, the answer:
Paul speaks of those whereof as yet there is some hope, for it becomes us
to admonish and exhort these oftentimes that they may amend their life. But
mention is made in this place of those, who either openly opugne ye doctrine of
Christ, or else who study every way to alienate the faithful from the same.
Such when as being blind and rebellious, they do resyst the truth, are to be
shunned as the ministers of Satan, and the plagues of Christian Religion. This
thing desired Paul, Tit. 3.10
when he thus writ unto Titus: Reject him which is an heretic, after once or
twice admonition, knowing that he that is such is perverted, and sins being
dampened of his own self. And in another place: Alexander the Coppersmith has
done me much evil, 2. Tim. 4 14.
the Lord reward him according to his deeds, of whom be thou ware also, for
he has sore resisted our preachinges. The old Interpreters added: Behold I
have told you before, that in the day of the Lord you should not be
confounded. But because in the Greek copies it is not found, we will proceed
to the next verse.


In some copies this is joined to the eleventh verse. Imlerus
ALthough I had many things. Now being about to make an end of writing, he
teaches this to be the cause of the breuitye of the Epistle, even because he
trusted to come unto them to whom he writ, and with his presence and fight
to supply the things that wanted. It follows. That our joy may be full.
Bullinger
He promises that he will come to declare more copiously these and the like
things, and that to this end not to the intent to catch them by deceytes,
deceive them by subtiltyes, exercise tyranny over them, or to milk away their
money from them: Marlorat
but that Christian joy may be fulfilled. He said in the beginning that he
greatly rejoiced that he found the Children walking in the truth, according
to the commandment received of the Fathers, ver. 4. But now he affirms
that, that his joy should be full, if he might behold in deed the profyt in
piety. Bullinger.
For both the joy of godly men is fulfilled, when we rightly understand
what belongs unto faith, and we exercise the same by love. Whereupon Paul
said: Marlorat. Philip. 2.2 1. Ioh. 1.4 Bullinger
Fulfill my joy that ye may be like minded, having the same love, being of
one accord and of one judgment. And John says: These things write I unto
you, that your joy may be full. This saying also is full of favor, for yt he
had rather commit ye doctrine of verity unto their minds then unto papers. And
certainly nothing does it profit us yt we have seen, heard, and read the
doctrine of the Apostles written in papers with ynke, except also we write them
in our mind, and transfer them (as guides) to our lives and conuersations.
Marlorat.
And this is done when we suffer our selves to be governed wholly by the spirit
of God.


THe sons of thine Elect, etc. Marlorat Pelicanus
He adds after the manner of writers, a salutation in the end. The Nephews,
says he, the sons of thine Elect Sister, bydde God save thee. A doubtful
kind of speech truly: but it troubles us nothing at all. Some suspect that
those sons of her Sister were with the writers of this Epistle. Oecume.
Some other will build upon it, that this Epistle was not written to a Woman,
but to the Church, Bullinger
whose Sisters here (they say) he makes other Churches, which begot Sons
unto Christ, of which thing read the Argument set before this Epistle.
Marlorat.


FINIS.
A Catholic exposition upon the third Epistle of S. John.
Marlorat Imlerus
EVen as many men have doubted of the author of the former Epistle: So also of
the writers of this Epist, they are not thoroughly agreed, which have written
Commentaries upon the same. For there are, which ascribe it al wholly to John
the Evangelist, other to John a certain divine, others to John an elder. But
howsoever the matter is, it must needs be some godly man; and faithful
minister of Christ in the dispensation of the word, which writes of matters
very necessary unto a certain servant of God: unto whom not without great
ardencie of mind he commends certain brethren. Oecume.
And first he praises Gaius unto whom he writes, of whose hospitality many
gave testimony: and exhorts that he continue in the same purpose, both in
accompanying or bringing the brethren on their way, and in gently entertaining
them: and (that the exhortation may be of the more effycacie) he affirms him
which works well, to be of God. Again, secondly, he sharply touches
Diotrephes, and accuses him, Bullin. Oecum.
for that neither he himself gave any thing to the poor, and forbids
others so to do, and also bableth forth many evil speeches. And by this he
stirs up Gaius to persevere in well doing. Marlorat. Oecum. Marlorat. Oecum.
Lastly he commends Demetrius, and gives a faithful testimony of him, and
so finally with a happy and Christian prayer, ioygned with friendly
salutations, he concludes his Epistle, which he testifies to be brief for
this cause, for that he trusted to come shortly, and to add those things which
remained unwritten.


THe Elder to the beloved Gaius. Pelicanus
We think this Gaius to be some chief man, most Christian, and also very
rych, who not only harbored, the Apostles and preachers of ye gospel of that
time: but also provided them of all other necessaries for their way. Some
think this man to be the host of Paul, of whom Paul him self writ unto the
Romans: To. 16.23
Gaius mine host, and the host of the whole Church saluteth you. Not therefore
unworthily does this holy man call him, beloved: because that he was both
endued with true faith toward God, Oecumnius.
and also wholly was inflamed with love toward the servants of Christ. It
follows. Whom I love in the truth. He loves in the truth, which according
to God loves with a hearty and unfeigned love: as we have also often said in
our former writings.


Beloved, I wish chiefly. This salutation truly is very plain but yet
something different from the common salutations of the Apostles. As if he
should say. Bullinger Pelica.
This wish I chieflye that even as thou prosperest, and from the heart are
devout toward God, perseuering by all means in furthering the doctrine of the
Gospel: so also in all other things thou may prosper, Christ blessing thee.
Bull.
For a sound soul in a sound body, is chief felicity. It may also be
referred to the household of Gaius: that the sense may be: I desire and wish
that even as thy soul prospers in all things, being happy and blessed, and
adorned with celestial gifts: so also thy household, or thy familiars, may
prosper and farewell.


Bullinger
FOr I greatly rejoiced. He rejoices first that he received the truth, and
next that he walks therein with the great praise of the brethren. As if he
should say: No small pleasure have I taken by the voice of the brethren,
which came unto us, and gave testimony of thine integrity, or were even as
true witnesses of thine integrity, as thou truly do follow the
Evangelical verity, not in profession only, but also in deed, in study,
and in all thy whole life. It follows: Even as thou walk (or how thou
walk) in the truth. To walk in the truth, is to lead a godly life
according to the rule of verity without all counterfaicy and symulation. For
by Walk in this place, Oecume.
he means not a moueing of the legs (seeing that such kind of going,
passing from place to place, is common to all living creatures that have
feet:) but he means an ordered and temperate going forewarde according to
the earnest affect of the mind, which few men, yea even of those which are not
void of understanding, do attain unto. Bullinger
For it is not enough to have known the truth, except we walk in the same,
that is, fashion our lives, words and deeds, according unto it. This Paul
calls to walk in the spirit: Marlorat. Ga. 5.16
I say unto you walk in the spirit, and ye shall not fulfill the lusts of
the flesh.


Pelicanus
I Have noe greater joy then these. That is: Nothing can touch my mind with
greater joy, then if it come to pass, that I may hear my sons, whom I
have begotten unto Christ through the Gospel, to follow the verity by us
delivered. And this truly is the joy of all Saints, Marlorat Mat. 13.8
Imlerus. 1. cor. 14.15 Gal. 4.19 1. These. 2, 7 Oecum. Luke 15.10
but chiefly of the Ministers of the word, when they understand that the
seed fell into good ground. But he calls those here his sons, unto whom
he has preached the Gospel of Christ: which manner of speaking Paul often
times uses.

Note therefore that the chiefest joy of holy men is, when they understand
their sons to walk in the truth: Even as the Angels are said, to rejoice
over sinners turned to repentance, which ought not a little to encorage us,
that with all diligence we may publish the truth.


Beloved, thou do faithfully. Imlerus Bullinger
Now declares he the fruit of faith, which is love toward our neighbor.
For the first thing is, that we receive the truth, and be perfect in faith:
and the next is, that we be charytable. This Elder therefore signifies his
joy unto Gaius for his hospitality and benificence, which he showed toward
the brethren, after he had made mention of the receyte of the truth: Pelica.
as if he should say. That thou art officious toward the Christians, which
live there, or which come thither as strangers, thou do a thing worthy of
him which truly beleeleeueth the gospel, and loves Christ, and immitateth
the examples of hospitality in the Patriarchs and Prophets. Esai. 58.6 Ma.
10.40
This hospitality every where the Scripture commends. Romans 12.13. And the
Author of the Epistle to the Hebrews says: Be mindful of hospitality, for
thereby some have received Angels into their houses unawares. Imlerus Ma.
25.35 Heb. 13.2 1. Pet. 4.9
But this office ought to be performed with a joyful mind, and cheerful
heart: according to that exhortation of Peter. Be ye harborus one to another
without grudging.

1. Pet. 4.9.
But as we owe beneficence unto all men, so chiefly unto the Ministers of the
Lords word: as the scripture every where commends them.


Pelica.
WHich have given testimony. That is: the brethren whom thou gently have
entreated, have testified of thy sincerity before all the congregation of the
Christians. This place teaches thankfulness, Bullinger
and that no man is to be defrauded of his due praise. So Paul prayseth the
Philippians, saying: I rejoice in the Lord greatly, that now at the last
your care for me springs a fresh, Phil. 4.20
wherein notwithstanding ye were careful, but you lacked opportunity: And a
little after: I have received, says he, all things, and abound, I was even
filled after that I had received of Epaphroditus that which came from you, an
Odor that smells sweet, a Sacrifice acceptable and pleasant unto God. And in
another place: Phil. 4.18
As touching the ministering to the Saints, it is superfluous for me to write
unto you. For I know ye promptness of your mind, 2. Cor. 9.1
whereof I boast my self of you to the^ of Macedonia, that Achaia was prepared
a year ago, and your example has provoked many. And the author of the
Epistle to the Hebrews: God is not unrighteous, says he, that he should
forgette your work and labor of love, which ye showed toward his name, Heb.
6. 10
in that ye have ministered unto his Saints, and yet do minister.

Marlorat.
It follows: Whom if thou bringect, etc. He exhorts to perceueraunce,
least Gaius should be weary of well doing. As if he should say: But thou
shall do well, if those, whom thou have courteously entertained, Pelica.
coming unto thee, thou bring with like humanity on their way, whether
they will go. See therefore that by thee they be furnished of things necessary
to their journey, Bullinger Marlorat
that nothing let them in their way.


BEcause that for his name sake. Marlorat.
He rendereth a reason why such men should not only be gently received, but
also courteously brought on their way. They do, says he, Pelicanus
the business of God, and not their own. For they go not to trafficque,
whereby they might increase their own goods, but to preach the name of our
Lord Jesus Christ. It follows. And took nothing of the Gentiles. That is:
Bullin.
Therefore take they no stipende of ye Gentiles to whom they preached, that by
so much may they bring the more fruit unto Christ, by how much the Gentiles
are void of suspicion, that they preach for lucre. Marlorat.
For this cause Paul of his own accord would spare the Corinthians unto
whom he preached, taking nothing of them, least he should be offensive unto
any of them, as he plainly testifies, but chiefly to the Corinthes. 1. Cor
9.19



We therefore ought to receive such. As if he should say: Bullinger
we therefore which know, the labourer to be worthy of his reward ought to
receive such good men, Mat. 10 10.
and to help them with our riches, and to take care that nothing be wanting
to the sustentation of their lives. The word, 1. Cor. 9.14 Oecum.
(...) receive, is taken for, (...), Suscipere, to take in charge. And by this
he teaches us, that we should not wait for the poor till they come to us,
Ge. 18.2. and 19.1
but that we should meet them and follow them, as did Abraham and Lotte.

Marlorat.
It follows: That we might be helpers to the truth. Whereby he might the more
encourage him, he teaches that they lose not their labor, which be helpful
to such. As if he said: we ought not to fail them, but to our power help
them: that in some part we mayebe partakers of those things which they do to
the glory of God.

Bullinger
Seeing that therefore the charge of Preaching is not enjoined to all men: other
men ought to supply it with their riches, even by helping those which are
called, and furnished with the charges of teaching. For the Lord in the
Gospel said: Who so recyueth a Prophece in the name of a Prophet, shall
receive the reward of a Prophet: and he which receives a righteouse man, Ma.
10.41
in the name of a righteouse man, shall receive a righteouse man's reward. And
he that shall give to one of these little ones a cup of could water to
drink only in the name of a disciple verily I say unto you, he shall not
loose his reward. Whereunto also te^deth that which we brought lately out of the
Hebrews. But it appears out of this place, Heb. 6.10
that at that time, there were many good men, which immitating the example of
Paul, preached the gospel unto the Gentiles freely. And of ye Conuertes they
which were rytch, stryuing who should be first, Pelicanus
mayntained the Evangelists, and made their rytches to be servants to
piety, and the glory of Christ, and also to the safegarde of many of the
faithful: least any man should think, that rytches should hinder Christian
salvation and perfection. For every of us can not do all things.

Bull.
So men of the Primitive Church, desired that the glory of Christ the Lord,
might be promoted, in such sort, that for this cause they would do and
suffer any thing: and men of the mydle age, lyberallie did help the study of
godliness: And we alone upon whom the ends of the worlds are come, have
stood slothful. And they unto whom from God is given the grace to teach,
1. Co. 10, 11
will not put them selves and their substance in hazard, or else will not
undertake the charge of teachinge, Neither give they unto the minister any of
their substance to maintain him, nor yet suffer him to keep still that
maintenance which was given him long ago by others, for they care not how
miserably he lives whereby they show that they neither regard the doctrine
of the word nor the glory of Christ's name. Bullinger.
unless they be brought thereto with fat and kingly stypendes. But to very
few or else to none at all are such stypendes given.

For those rytche men unto whom the care of the Mynisters of the word is
committed, do suffer them myserablie to want, and so little do they give
unto them of their own goods, that they envy and take from them those
things which by others long ago were given unto them. But so is the doctrine
of piety endaungered, and also the glory of the name of Christ. But the Lord
grant unto us that spyrite which here we see to have dwelt in the hearts of
those which in this place are commended.

9. I wrote unto the Church, but Diotrephes which loves to have the
pre-eminence among them, receives us not.
I VVrote to the Church. It does not sufficiently appear of what kind of
writing mention is here made. Yet is it evident that this Senior wrote an
Epistle to that congregation wherein Gaius lived, wherein he exhorted the Church
to go forward to do that thing, which it saw Gaius to do. Marlorat.
But not this Epistle alone by the ingratitude of men, and malignitie of times
is perished and lost. It follows. Bullin. Marlorat. Mat. 11.29.
But he which loves. etc. Diotrephes a certain man withstoode these holy
admonitions, whom here, this servant of Christ touches very narowlie,
accusing in him the mallaparte wickedness of his tongue, and his study of
sclaundering, and also his ambition, which thing in the Church is wont to be
the greatest plague, and almost the mother of all discention. Mat. 18.3.23.11
Luke 22.26
Whesefore Christ would have his Disciples to be void from all ambition and
pride.


Bullinger.
WHerefore, if I come. He threatens that he him self will take away from
this knave, his hypocritical shadow. But if it be commanded not to render
evil for evil, how is it then that this man here threatens those things?
Oecum. Pro. 20.22 1. These. 5.15 Marlorat.
The answer. This sacred prohibition tends to this end, that we should not
render evil for evil unto him which has offended against our selves. For
every revenge which a man takes to himself, being stirred up with hatred
against his neighbor, Oecum. Marlorat.
is abominable unto God. But when there is any detriment unto faith, and the
glory of Christ be oppugned of wicked men: the enemies of Christian Religion
are to be handeled more severely. Oecum. Act. 13.10
For it is known how Paul behaved him self toward Elimas the sorcerer,
when he ceased not to pervert the ways of the Lord* It follows: Prattling
against us with malicious words. That is, sclaundering and speaking evil
against us. Marlorat. That is with a maliciouse and detractiue tongue.
So are proud men, and men covetous of vain glory accustomed, to note the
good name of other men, with a black coal, as they say commonly, whereby
they may berieue them of their credit and authority, with those men which
coueted to persevere in the doctrine of the gospel. So the false Apostles
endeavored to make the name of Paul obscure among the Corinthes, to the intent
they alone might be magnified and had in great estimation. His Epistles truly
(said they) are grave, 2. Cor. 10 10.
and preuailable, but his bodily presence weak, and his speech contemptible.

But the holy Apostle in another place terrifyeth them: Therefore (says he)
some of them are puffed up, as though I would not come to you: But I will come
to you shortly: if the Lord will, and will know, not the words of them which
are puffed up, but the power: for the kingdom of God is not in word, but in
power. 1. Co. 4.18
So in this place the faithful minister of Christ promises that he will come
and depresse the arrogancy of this ambicious Diotrephes. And this is the part
of faithful Pastors to spare or forgive nothing unto such seducers. It
follows: And not content therewith. Bullinger
By these words we understand that there were in the Apostles time most
grievous persecutours of the gospel, Pelica.
which were chiefly of the Jews, which had become half Gentyles and Greeks.
Wherefore also they chose to them selves a Greek name, as was the custom of
such: and neither received they the old Testament nor the New. But commended
them selves, having brought persecution upon the other faithful Jews, whereby
the gospel might the less be spread among the dispersed Jews, and in the
Cities of the Gentiles. Marlorat
Of this number, Diotrephes was one, a man very impious, and a most great
hypocrite, Pelica.
who not only received not the brethren, but let those which were desirous
to receive them. For this is the evil nature of wicked men, that not they them
selves only will wax cruel against the servant of Christ, Marlorat.
but to their powers will stir up others thereunto. It follows. And casts
them out of the Church. That is, excommunicateth them: Mat. 5 12 Ioh. 16.2
Bullinger.
even as our Lord foretold should come to pass unto his disciples. This
Diotrephes therefore is an example of all Heretics and wicked men, who also
resist the gospel. But he writes nothing now more sharply against him, but
reserueth it till his coming.

But now what think you this godly man would say, Bullinger* grieuousely
complains and most truly of the Popes ambition and cruelty.
if he should return at this day into those Churches which would seem
Apostolical, and should find, not some, one Diotrephes, greedily to covet
the pre-eminence, but infinite, Cardinals, Patriarchs, Bishops, Abbots, and
Ecclesiastical noble men? And that we may now omit to speak of this, that
many of these babble against the doctrine of verity, we know not what: that
they receive not the pure doctrine of the Apostles, and that they contemn
those that would receive it, and give them to Satan, having strocken them with
the cruel thunderboltes of excommunication. So perilous truly are our times.
God deliver our souls from the mouth of the Lion.


Bullinger.
Beloved, follow not, etc. He adds these words that he might preserve Gaius
from offense, as if he should say. Thou know what Diotrephes goes about
and does, but I would not have thee to follow the manners of men. Imlerus.
Always do thy diligence to join thy self to good men, but flee the
corrupt manners and pernicious company of evil men.

Marlorat Imlerus. Psalm. 101.2
This David decreed with him self: I walked (says he) in the innocence of my
heart, in the myddest of the house of my God. I set not before mine eyes, an
unrighteous thing: I hate those that work wickedness. It follows: But that
which is good. Bullinger
This is a general sentence of the Scripture, that, that which is good is to
be followed, and not that which is evil. Which sentence truly may be
opponed unto those which for them selves allege long times, manners and
customs of the Fathers. For always evil is to baflye^, Marlorat Bullinger.
at whatsoever time, and by what manner soever it be admytted. It follows. He
that does well. He also adds another sentence, that he might exhort him the
more forciblie to do well. Pelica.
As if he said: They are not all the sons of God, which have received
Baptism.

He which by godly deeds declares his faith, he is borne of God, and seems
to be of God, for he declares the disposition, and doctrine of his Father. It
follows. Marlorat
But he that does evil has not seen God. There be some which think this
word, Seen, is to be taken for, Known. Others make the preterperfect tense,
by the present tense, as if he said: He that deals ungodly, although in his
words he profess God, yet in deed he sees not God. For he is seen with the
most purifyed, or clear eyes of faith, which eyes for certayntie, the
darkness of sin does blind, Imlerus John. 8.47
that they can not see God.

This place agrees with the words of Christ, speaking in the Gospel thus:
He that is of God, hears the words of God. But he does well, which
contineweth in the doctrine of Christ: for he obtayneth the salvation of his
Soul. He does evil that declyneth from the truth: for he gets to him
self, evil, and the perdition of his Soul. For not to see God is miserable,
but to see God is wholesome. We see God the Father in Christ the Son. And
Christ we see in his word, that is, John. 14.9.
thereby know we him to be the Son of the living God, and the savior of the
whole world.

Therefore seeing there is none agreement between light and darkness, Oecum.
neither has Christ any concord with Belyall, let every man look whether
he be of God, or else of Satan the Prince of darkness. For even as he
which works good things is of God, and by the light of the knowledge of him
frames the eye of his mind, and when as by these things, he is altogether
light, and seethe God which is the true light, and is seen of others as a
light in the world sustayning the word of life: Even so he that works
evil things, walks in darkness, and cannot see GOD, that is, do those
things which are of God, neither is he seen of others if he rebuke or
correct any man, but all men hate and abhor him. Psa. 119 163.
According to that wise Oracle, I have hated and abhorred iniquity.


Demetrius has good report of all men. First, he sets the godliness of
Demetrius against the malice wherewith Diotrephes was endued, Imlerus
and against his wicked example, secondly, he opponeth and joins that most
godly example of that most excellent man Demetrius, Bullinger.
that nothing might be wanting, which might confirm the mind of Gaius. For
the minds of good men are vehemently shaken by the evil examples of wicked
men: whereby we see the Scriptures cure this disease very often. Ps. 37.1 and.
73.2 Imlerus. Pelicanus
It follows. And of the truth it self. He affirms the praise to be true
which was published of Demetrius. As if he said: thou shall eschew the example
of Diotrephes, and shall set before thee the example of Demetrius, for his
piety has good report of all men, who although they would say nothing, yet
the thing it self testifies the virtue of the man. It follows. And we our
selves bear record. That is: But even we also having experience of his virtue
and sincerity, do bear witness of him, unto whom I know you do firmly
give credit: because to all men I speak things that are tried, and
certainly known, and I speak nothing for the favor of man, or of hatred, but
as I have learned of truth and certainty. Deu. 17.6 Ioh. 8.17
Furthermore in the mouth of two or three witnesses consists every word. It
must needs be truly that Demetrius was a man of a wonderful integrity, unto
whom all good men gave good report: and finally the truth it self,
together with this faithful Senior and minister of Christ, who had not learned
to flatter. Pelica.
Of far other disposition and faith was he, then that Demetrius the
Syluersmyth of Diana in Ephesus, which yielded not a little gain to the
Craftsmen: but to Paul and the Saints there, most grievous sedition, and most
perilous trouble. Act. 19.24


That parcel (of all men) may also be understood of the Infidelles, that we
may know this man to be endued with such great honesty, that he lived even
amongst the Infidels without offense. For Paul wylleth that the Christians
should study to be without offense, both to the Jews, and to the Greeks,
and also to the Church, 1. Co. 10.32 Marlorat
even as I (says he) please all men in all things. And Peter says: have your
conversation honest a mong the Gentiles that they that speak evil of you, as of
evil doers, may by your good works which they shall see gloryfie God in the
day of visitation. 1. Pet. 2.12
Letting pass therefore Diotrephes, let us rather immitate Gaius and Demetrius.


I Have many things to write* Even as he shut up the former Epistle, eue^ so
now also concludes he this Epistel: Bullinger.
that no man should require any notable copy or exquisite study of eloquence
in the Disciples of Christ, which follow a more diligent order of verity then
of words. It follows. But I will not with ynke and pen write unto thee.
Imlerus.
Out of this place and such like, some there be which endeavor to establishe
many men's constitutions in the Church, being not founded in the sound
Scriptures, saying that: though there be nothing written concerning them in the
word, yet are they to be accoumpted holy, seeing that there rested many
things with the Apostles, Evangelists, and godly men of that age, unwritten.

But if you behold faith in Christ, and the chief ground of our salvation,
there may nothing be added, nor any other Gospel preached: Against the Gospel
of the family of Love. Gala. 1. 8
that although an Angel from Heaven preached any other Gospel, then that
which the Apostles preached, and committed to memory, he must be accursed. But
if you have respect unto the outward ordinances of the Church, or the works
of Charity, the universal Church upon occasion of matters and times, may add
and change some things. Marlorat. John. 20.30 and. 21.15 and. 2. These. 2.15
Act. 20.27.
Of which thing the Reader may see more.

Certainly Paul says, that he has declared all the counsel of God, to
those unto whom he preached the Gospel. And Christ also thus speaks unto
his Apostles: I call you not servants from henceforth, for the servant
knows not what his Lord does, but you have I called friends: for all things
that I have heard of my Father, I have made known to you.


Marlorat. Pelica.
FOr I trust I shall shortly see thee. This saying contains the cause of the
breuity of the Epistle. As if he should say: There were also many other things
beside these, which I desired to write unto thee: but I had rather declare them
being present, then commit them unto writing. For I trust shortly to see thee,
and speak face to face: if so it seem good to him, by whose beck all things
are governed. It follows: Peace be unto thee. This peace which he wishes
unto Gaius that beloved, contains not only health of the body, but also of
the soul as it has been often said. It follows. Marlorat.
The friends salute thee. Now with a mutual and Christian salutation is the
Epistle shut up: Bullinger
which although it be short yet contains it a notable argument rather to be
immitated then disputed of. For breuitye has also his mysteries.

FINIS.
Faults escaped
IN folio. 1. line. 20. for etc. read Et. In folio. 3. line. 35. for Betus
read. Belus, In folio. 6, line. 31. for when read then. In folio. 7. line.
24. for, is one, read, is one thing. In eodem. 20. for but there, read,
then. In fol. 8. line. 31. for, augmenteth haynousnesse, read, augmenteth the
haynousnesse. In fol. 9. line. 12. for requires, read, executes. In fol. 10.
line. 24. for gladness, read godliness. In fol. 13. line, 17. for,
apprehension: but yet remain, read, apprehension of God: but yet every man.
In eodem. line. 25. for, this, read, his. In fol. 14 line. 5. for, Constant,
read, Inconstant. In eodem line. 23. for thus, read, that. In fol. 17. line.
28. for name, read mean. In. folio. 18. line. 22, for Offense, read, Office.
In fol. 23. line. 22, for, of, read, or In fol. 25. line. 26. for, the mercy,
read, the mercy of God. In fol. 26. line. 26. for, councelled read, compelled.
In fol. 27. line. 7. for, them for the, read, thence forth. In fol. 29. line.
4. for, vanished, read, vanquished. In eodem. line 21. for prosperously,
read, preposterously. In fol. 32. line. 22. for, Jonas by, read Jonas prayed
not by. In fol. 34 line. 26, for, yet I, read, yet will I. In fol 35, in the
notes, for, To the roots signifies, read, To the roots the Hebrew word
signifies. In folio. 39. line. 30. for, shall in, read shall find in. In
fol. 47. line, 24. for expositinally, read, expositiuely. In fol. 49. line.
35. for, feast, read Jest. In fol. 51. line. 5. for, thief read chief. In
fol. 64. line, 7. for, went out, read, went not out. In fol. 56. line. 13. for
prayer to be. read prayer ought to be. In fol. 65. line. 16. for dampnation,
read denunciation. In foll. 70. line. 24. for Emphate, read, Emphasis.


