THE CATECHISM OR MANNER to teach children the Christian religion, wherein the
Minister demands the question, and the child makes answer. Made by the
excellent Doctor and Pastor in Christ's Church, John Calvin.

Ephe. II. The doctrine of the Apostells and Prophets is the fondation of
Christ's Church.

BY JOHN CRESPIN. M.D.LVI.

Of the Articles of faith.
The M nister. WHAT is the principal and chief end of man's life? The first
Sunday.



The Child. To know God. whereunto man was createde and made.



The minister. What moves the to say so?


The child. Because he has created us, and placed us in this world, to set
forth his glory in us. And it is good reason that we employ our whole life to
the anauncement of his glory, seeing he is the original, beginning, and
fountain thereof.


The minister. What is then the principal and chief felicity of man?


The child. Even the self same, I mean to know God, The greatest felicity
that man ca^ attain to.
and to have his glory showed forth in us.


The minister. Why do thou call this, man's chief felicity?


The child. Because that without it, our condicyon or state, were more
miserable then the state of brute beasts.


The minister. Hereby then we may evidently see, that there can no such
miserye happen unto man, as not to live in the knowledge of God.


The child. That is most certain.


The minister. But tell me, what is the true and right knowledge of God?


The child. When a man so knows God, that he is in full mind to honor him.


The Minister. Which is the way for a man to honor God a right?


The child. It is to put our whole trust and confidence in him: to study to
serve him, in obeying unto his will and commandments: The right manner to
worship god, stands in four points.
to seek and call upon him for help in our necessities, looking for salvation
and al good things at his hand. And finally to acknowlage both with heart and
mouth, that he is the lively fountain of all goodness, from whom only al
benefits and good things do come.


The minister. Well than to the end that these things may be discussed in
order, 2. Sunday.
and declared more at large, which is the first point?


The child. The first is, to put our whole confidence in God alone.


The minister. How may that thing be done?


The child. We must first have an assured knowledge, that as he is almighty,
so he is all bountiful and parfitlie good.


The minister. And is that sufficient? The first point of honoring God.



The child. No.


The minister. Show the reason.


The child. For there is no worthiness in us, why God should either show his
power to help us: or use his merciful goodness to save us.


The minister. What is than further required?


The child. This is requisite more, that every one of us be fully assured in
his conscience, that he is beloved of God, and that he will be both his father
and savior.


The minister. How shall we be assured hereof?


The child. By his own word, wherein he utters most plainly unto us, his
plentiful mercy in our savior Christ, and gives us undoubted assurance of
his loving mind toward us.


The minister. Well, The foundation of our faith.
then I perceive that the very ground to come by a sure confydence in God, is,
to know him in our savior Christ.


The child. Yea truly.


The minister. Then briefelye, what is the effect and substance of this
knowledge of God in Christ?


The child. It is contained in the confession of the faith, used of all
Christen men, which is commonly called the Creed of the Apostles: both because
it is a compendyous and a brief gatherynge of the articles of that faith,
which has been always continued in Christ's Church: and also because it
was taken out of the pure doctrine of the Apostles.


The minister. Rehearse the same.


The child. I believe in God the father almighty, The Creed of the apostles.
maker of heaven and earth: And in Jesus Christ his only son our Lord: Who
was conceived by the holy Ghost, borne of the vyrgyn Marye: Suffered passion
under Ponce Pylate, was crucified, dead, buried, and descended into hell: He
rose again the third day from death: He ascended into heaven, and sytteth
on the right hand of God the father almyghtye: From thense he will come to
judge the quick and the dead.

I believe in the holy ghost: The holy Church universal, the communion of
Gods elect: the forgiveness of sins: the rising again of the bodies: and
life everlasting.


The minister. To the intent that this confession may be more particularely
and plainly declared, 3. Sunday.
in to how many parts shall we deuyde it?


The child. In to four principal parts. The Christian faith stands in
four points



The minister. What be they?


The child. The first concerns God the father. The second part is of the
son of God, our savior Christ: wherein briefly also the whole story of our
redemption is rehearsed. The third is touching the holy ghost. The fourth
concerns the holy Church, and Gods free gifts unto the same.


The minister. Seeing there is but one God, what moves thee to make rehearsal
of God the father, God the son, and God the holy ghost, as if there were three
gods?


The child. Because that in the substance or nature of God we have to
consider the Father, As concerning the Trinity.
as the fountain, beginning, and original cause of al things: then
secondarely, his son, who is his everlasting wisdom: and thyrdly the holy
ghost, who is his inco^prehensible virtue and puissaunte might, which is
exte^ded and spread upon all creatures: and yet nevertheless remains always
wholly in himself.


The minister. This is then the meaning: that there is no inconvenience at al,
to understand severally and apart, these three persons in the substance of God,
who notwythstandyng is one, and not thereby divided.


The child. It is even so.


The minister. Make rehearsal now of the first part of the Creed.


The child. I believe in God the father almighty, The first part of the belief.
maker of heaven and earth.


The minister. Wherefore do thou call him Father?


The child. I call him so, having respect to Jesus Christ, who is the
everlasting word begotten of God before all worlds, The sathe
without beginning: who being afterward openly showed unto the world, was
euidentlye approuued and declared to be his son. Now seeing God is our
Savior Christ's father, it follows necessarilye that he is also our father.


The minister. What meanest thou by that, thou call him Almightye?


The child. In that I say he is Almightye, what is meant by this word almights.
I mean not that he has a power which he does not exercise: but contrariwise,
that al creatures be in his hand and under his gouerna^ce: that he orders and
dysposeth all things by his unsearchable wisdom and providence: that he
rules the world as it pleases him: and that continually he guydeth al
things therein after his own good pleasure.


The minister. So then by thy saying, The power of god is not idle.
the power of God is not idle nor unoccupied, but continually exercised: so
that nothing is done, but by him, or by his leave and ordinance.


The child. It is even as you say.


The minister. Wherefore is that clause added thereunto, 4. So^daye
Maker of heaven and earth?


The child. Because he has made himself known unto us by his works, it is
necessary for us to seek him out in the^. Psalm. 14. Roma. 1.
For our capacytye, and the reach of our understanding is not sufficie^te
nor able to co^prehende his divine substance, but he has made the world as a
myrroure or glass, A glass wherein we may see God.
wherein we may behold his divine majesty, in such sort as it is expediente
for us to know him.


The minister. Do thou not comprehend all creatures in these two words,
heaven and earth?


The child. Yes verily: and they may right well be understood in these two
words, seeing that all things be either heavenly, or earthlye.


The minister. And why call thou God only by the name of creator or maker?
seeing that to order things, and to conserve them always in their state, is a
thing of much more importance, then to have for one time created them.


The child. By this word Creator, it is not only meante that he did once
create them, having no farther regard to them afterward: But we ought to
understand, that as the world was made of him in the beginning, even so now
he does co^serue the same, and vpholdeth the state of things, so that heaven
and earth, Concerning the providence of God.
with the rest of the creatures, could not continue in their estate, if his
power did not preserve them. Moreover, saying in this manner he does maintain
all things, holding them (as it were) in his hand: it must needs follow, that
he has the rule and governance of all. Wherefore in that that he is creator of
heaven and earth, it is he that by his bountyfull goodness, mighty power, and
high wisdom, does conducte and guide the whole order of nature. It is he
that sends rain and drought, hail, tempests, and fair wether: he se^deth
fertilite and barennes, dearth and plenty, health and sycknes: and to be
short, he has all things at commandment, to do him service at his own
good pleasure.


The minister. What say thou as touching the deuels and wicked persons, be
they also subject to him, and at his commandment?


The child. Albeit that God does not guide them with his holy spirit,
Concerning deuylles.
yet he does brydell them in such sort that they be not able to stir or move
without his permission and appointment: yea and moreover, he does compel them
to execute his will and pleasure, although it be clean against their intent
and purpose.


The minister. To what purpose does it serve thee to know this?


The child. The knowledge hereof does wonderfully comfort us, for we might
think our selves in a miserable case, if the deuylles and the wicked had power
to do any thing contrary to Gods will or appointment. And moreover we could
never be quiet in our consciences, if we should think our selves to be in their
danger. The devil has no power but of God.
But forsomuche as we know that God brydeleth them fast, and chayneth them, as
it were in a prison, in such wise that they can do nothing, but as he
permits: we have just occasion, not only to be quiet in mind, but also
to receive most confortable joy, since God has promised to be our protector
and defender.


The minister. Go to then, 5. Sunday. The second part of the belief.
let us come to the second part of our belief.


The child. And in Jesus Christ his only son, our Lord.


The minister. What is bryeflye the effect and substance of this part?


The child. It is to acknowledge the son of God to be our savior: and to
understand the mean whereby he has redeemed us from death, and purchased life
unto us.


The minister. What sygnifyeth this word Jesus, by which thou namest him?


The child It is as much to say, as Savior: This word Jesus. Matt. 1.
and this name was given unto him by the angel at Gods commandment.


The minister. What? is that of more estimacion, than if that name had been
given unto him by men?


The child. Yea a great deal: for since Gods pleasure was that he should
be so named, it gives us certain knowledge that he is our very savior in
deed.


The minister. What sygnifyeth then this word Christ, which follows after?
This word Christ.



The child. This word, Christ, does express more effectually his office: and
does us to were that he was anointed of our heavenly father, to sygnifye that
he was ordained to be a king, Priest, and Prophet.


The minister. How have thou the knowledge hereof?


The child. By the scripture, which does suffyciently teach us that
anointynge did serve for these three offices, or dignities, the which be also
attributed unto him in many places of the scriptures.


The minister. But, what manner of oil was it wherewith he was anointed?


The child. It was no such material oil, as we use, and as did serve in old
time, to the ordeininge or institution of kings, Priests, and Prophets: but
a far more excellent oil, even the grace of Gods holy spirit, whereof the
aunciente anointing in the old testamente was a figure.


The minister. What manner of kingdom is that whereof thou speak?


The child. This kingdom of Christ is not earthly, The kingdom of Christ.
but spiritual, the substance whereof does consist in Gods word, and in his
holy spirit, wherein is contained both righteousness and life everlasting.


The minister. And what is his Priesthood?


The child. It is an office and auctorytie to present himself before God,
The pristhoode of Christ. Heb. 7.8.9 10.13.
to obtain grace and favor for us: and to pacifye his fathers wrath, by
offering up the most acceptable sacryfyce of him self unto him.


The minister. Why call thou him a Prophet?


The child. Because that he came down into the world, to bring unto us the
most worthy and joyful embassy or message of God his father: to declare at
large most evidently to the world his fathers will, and to finishe all
revelations and Prophecyes.


wherein Christwar a Prophet Esa. 7. Hebr. 1.
The minister. Comes there any profit unto thee by those names and dignities
of Christ?


The child. Yea they altogether belong to our comfort, and proffit. For
Christ did receive all these of his father, to make us partakers thereof, whereby
we might every one receive of his fullness.


The minister. Declare this thing unto me more at large.


The child. He received the holy ghost in most full perfection, with all the
gifts and graces of the same: to bestow them on us, and to distribute them
unto every one of us in the measure and quantytye that God knows to be most
mete and expediente for us: Christ is the fontayne of all goodness.
and so by this means we draw out of him, as if it were out of a
fountain, all the spiritual gifts that we have.


The minister. To what use does the kingdom of Christ serve us?


The child. To set us in liberty of conscience, To what use the kyngdo^e of
Christ serves us.
to live godly and holily, that we being enriched with his spiritual
treasures, and armed with his power, may be able to overcome the devil, sin,
flesh, and the world, which be every one pernycyous enemies unto our souls.


The minister. What profit have we of his priesthood?


The child. First by this means he is our mediator to bring us into the
favor of God his father: The profit of Christ's priest hoode. Hebru. vii.
viii. ix. x. xiii.
and again hereby we have a fre entrye to come in and show our selves
boldly before God: and to offer up our selves with all that belongs unto us,
for a sacrifice, and in this point we are fellows after a sort of his
priesthood.


The minister. The vtilitye of his office in that he is a Prophet is yet
behind.


The child. Since our lord Jesus has received this office to become the
master and teacher of his flock: the end of this dignity is, wherefore Christ
was a prophet.
to bring us to the right knowledge of god, and of his truth, so that we
might become Gods household scholars and of his familye.


The minister. This is then it that a man may briefly gather of thy words:
that these three titles or names of Christ, do include three sundry offices, the
which God has given unto his son, to the intent to bestow the fruit, and
profit of the same upon his elect.


The child. Ye say truly.


The minister. By what reason call thou Christ the only son of God, 7.
Sunday.
since God does name us also his children?


The child. As touching that, that we are Gods children, we be not so borne,
neither does it come of our nature: but only by his fatherly adoption, and by
grace, in that that God does vouchesafe to accept us and take us for his
children: now our Lord Jesus being begotten of one very substance with his
father, and being of the self same nature and god head, may even of good
right be called Gods only son: for that there is none other that can claim
that title by natural right, but he alone.


The minister. This is then the meaning, that this honor pertayneth
peculiarelye unto him alone, as unto whom it belongs by course natural, the
which notwithstanding he has by free gift of his goodness communicated unto
us, making us partakers thereof, in that we are becomen his own members.


The child. It is even so: and therefore in respect of that his communicatyng
and alyaunce with us, the scripture calls Christ in an other place the
first borne among many brethren.


The minister. What is the meaning of that that follows?


The child. It does us to wete after what sort the son of God was anointed
of his father, to becume our savior: that is to say, he took upon him our
fresh, and therein fulfilled al things necessary for our redemption, according
as they be here rehearsed,


The minister. What meanest thou by these two clauses: Conceived by the holy
Ghost, Borne of the virgin Mary?


The child. The meaning thereof is: Christ became very manne. Psalm. 32 Mat. 1.
Luke. 1.
that he was fashioned in the blessed virgins womb, taking very substance and
manhod of her own body, that he might thereby become the seed of David, as the
Prophets had a long time before sygnyfyed: and yet notwithstanding all this
was wroughte by the secret and merueilous power of the holy ghost, with out
the company of man.


The minister. Was it then needful that he should take upon him our very
flesh?


The child. Yea verily: Roma. 3
for it was convenient that man's transgression, and his disobedience against
God, should be purged like wise by the nature of man. 1. Timo. 2 Hebr. 4.
And moreover if Christ had not been partaker of our very nature, he had not
been a meet mediatoure to make us at one, and to join us together with God
his father.


The minister. Than this is thy saying: that it behooved that Christ should
become very man, to the end he might execute the office of a savior in our
shape and person.


The child. Yea verily: Christ has performed that which lacked in us.
For we must borowe of him, all that which is lacking in our selves, for this
our defaut cold not otherwise be recovered.


The minister. But for what cause was this thing wrought by gods holy spirit,
and not rather by the company of man, according to the order of nature.


The child. Because the seed of man is of it self all to gether corrupted
with sin: it behooued that this conception of Christ should be wroughte by
the power of the holy ghost, Christ was conceived by the spirit of God.
whereby our savior might be preserved from all corrupcyon of sin, and
replenysshed with all manner of holiness.


The minister. So then by these sayings it is euidenly declared unto us: that
he (which should purifye and cleanse other from fylthe of sin) must be
himself free and clear from all spots thereof, and even from his mothers
womb dedicated, and kept holy unto God in pureness of nature, so that he may
not be guilty of that corrupcyon where with the whole stock of man is
generally infected.


The child That is the very meaning of my words.


The minister. How cummeth it to pass that he is our Lord? 8. Sunday.



The child Even by the ordinance of God himself: Christ is our lord.
who also made him our governor, to the end that he might execute his fathers
kingdom both in heaven, and in earth, and that he might be head and ruler
both of Aungelles and of gods faithful people.


The minister. Wherefore speak thou of his death, immediatlye after his
birth? and leaueste out the whole story of his life?


The child. For because there is nothing mentioned or spoken of in our Cred:
but that which peculiarelye belongs to the pyth and substance of our
redemption.


The minister. Why is it not said plainly in one word, that he dyed:
without any speaking of Ponce Pilate, by whose judgment he suffered?


The child. The mention that is made of Ponce Pilate, was not only for this
consideracion to make the storye of Christ's Passion to have more evident
assurance: but also to declare unto us, that his death has taken a way our
condemnacion.


The minister. How so?


The child. First he suffered death, to the end to take a way the pain
that was due unto us, that we might be thereby clearly delivered from the same:
Now for so much as we were in fault and gyltie before gods judgment as
wicked mysdoers: Christ was condemned to clear us.
Christ myndyng to take upon him our person, and to bail us, by susteyning
all our misery: vouchsaued to show himself before yearthly judges, and to be
condemned by the sentence or judgment of the same, that thereby we might be
giltlesse and clear before the judgment seat of our heavenly judge his
father.


The minister. Notwithstanding, Pilate does pronounce him innocent, and so by
that he does not condemn him as woorthye of death.


Mat. 27. Luke. 23.
The child. Pilate did both the one and the other: Christ was condemned for
us
first he was pronounced innocente and just, by the judges own mouth, to
sygnifye that he suffered not for his own deserte, but for our trespaces. And
yet withal, the same judge did did give solemnelye the sentence of death
against him, to testifye and express that he is our true pledge and ransom:
Christ was our raunsonne
as he who also has taken unto him our condemnation to make us quite and to
deliver us from the same.


The minister. That is well said: for if he had been a sinner in deed, he had
not been meet to have suffered death for the offenses of other: and
nevertheless to the end that we might be clearly quitte and delivered by his
condemnacyon: Esai. 53.
it was necessary that he should be taken and counted as a malefactoure or
misdoer.


The child. I mean no other thing.


The minister. Where thou say Christ suffered on the cross: was that kind of
death more auaylable and of more importance, than if he had been otherwise
put to death?


9. Sunday.
Christ took upon himself the curse due unto us, that we might be free.
The child. Yea verily: and touching that matter, Saint Paul says that he
was hanged on a tree, to the intent that he might take upon him our curse,
Deu. 21. Gal. 3.
and so dyscharge us. for that kind of death was accursed of God.


The minister. What? is it not a great reproach and dyshonoure unto our Lord
Jesus, to say that he was accursed, and that before God?


The child. No not a whit: for he through his almyghtye power, by taking the
curse from us unto himself, did in such sort make it void and of none
effect, that he himself nevertheless continued still so blessed, that he was
able to fulfill us also with his blessings.


The minister. Make an exposicio^ of that that follows.


The child. In so much as death was a curse or punyshement appointed unto
man for sin: Christ even in sufferinge death vainqueshed death
therefore our savior Christ did suffer death and by suffering overcame it. And
to the intent also to make it the more certainly known unto us, that his death
was not a colored or counterfaited thing: it pleased him also to be buried
after the common manner of other men.


The minister But it appears not that any profit cummeth to us by this that
Christ has won the victory of death: seeing that we (it not withstanding)
cease not to dye,


The child. That does not hinder, The death of the faithful. is a right
passage to life everlasting.
for the death of the faithful is now nothing else, but a ready passage to
a better life.


The minister. It follows then necessarily hereof: that we ought in no wise
to be afraid of death, as though it were a dredefull thing: but rather it
behooves us willingly to walk the trace of our head and captain Jesus
Christ, who has walked and trodden the same way before us, not to the entente
to lead us to our destruction, but to procure us an everlasting sauegarde.


The child. It is even so.


The minister. What is the sense of that clause which is put to afterward,
10. Sunday.
as touching his descendyng into hell?


The child The right meaning thereof is, The understanding of this: Christ
went down into hell.
that Christ did not only suffer a natural death, which is a departing and
going asunder of the body and soul: but also that his soul was in woo^derfull
dystresse, being woefully pressed, and enduring grievous torments, and as it
were hellyke pains, Acts 2.
which Saint Peter calls the sorrows or pangues of death,


The minister. For what consideration sustained he those pains, and in what
sort?


The child Becawse he presented himself before God to be a sacryfice
satisfactory, and to make ame^des in the behalf of sinners, it was mete that
as he did bear the wayght and burden of our sins: so likewise he should
feel this horrible anguyshe, and grievous tormente of conscience which sin
brings, being in case as if God had utterly forsaken him and ben haynoussy
displeased against him. And in very deed, he was brought to such extremytye
of anguyshe, Matt. 27. Mark. 15.
that he was dryeuen to cry: my God my God, why haste thou forsaken me?


The minister Why? was God then angry with him?


The child Nay, how beit it was co^ueniente that God should punyshe him in
such sort, Esa. 53. 1. Peter. 2.
to veryfie and perform the words of Esaias the Prophet, who says that he was
beaten with the hand of his father for our sins and that he did suffer the
punishmente due to our trangressyons.


The minister But how could it be that he was in such dreadefull anguyshe,
as though God had utterly forsaken him, seeing he was God himself?


The child We must understand, that he was in such destresse only as
touchi^ge his humanitye. And to the intent that he might feel these panges
in his manhood, his Godhead did in the mean time for a little space keep it
self close, as if it had been hydd, that is to say, it did not show nor
utter the mygh thereof.


The minister. But how could this be that Christ, who is the health of the
world, could be under such condemnacion?


The child. He was not so under it, that he should co^tynewe in the same. For
he has in such wise felt these terrors which we have spoken of: that he
was not overcome of the same, but has rather thereby made battayll against the
power of hell: to break and destroy it.


The minister. Hereby then we see the difference between that anguish or
vexacion of mind which Christ did suffer: The difference between the
anguishe of Christ's spirit and the conscience of the wicked.
and that which the impenytente sinners do abide, whom God does punyshe in
his terryble wrath: for that very pain which Christ sustained for a time,
the wicked must endure continually: and that which was unto Christ but a goade
as it were, to prycke him: is unto the wicked in stead of a glaiue to wound
them to death,


The child Truth it is: for our sauyoure Christ, notwithstanding these
vexations, eue^ in the mids of his torments, did not cease to put a full
trust evermore in God: but the damned sinners do despair without al
confydence in Gods goodness: yea they stomach against God, in so much that
they blaspheme his majesty.


The minister. May we now gather suffyciently of this that is said, 11
Sunday.
what fruit or profit comes to us by the death of Jesus Christ?


The child Yea very well: The profit and virtue of Christ's death stands
in. iii. points.
and first of all we see that it is a sacryfice wherewith he has fully
aunswared and satysfyed his fathers judgment in our behalf: and thereby also
he has appaised Gods wrath, which worthily hanged over us, and has
brought us into his favor again. Seco^dlye that he shed his blood to
purify and cleanse our souls from al manner of spots: and finally that he
has so clean wyped away our sins through his precious death, that God will
never hereafter have remembrance of them to call us to any reckoninge: yea
euenso, that the obligation or hand writing which was to be showed forth
against us to our condemnation, is now clean cancelled, and utterly made
void


The minister Have we no other profit, besides this of his death?


The child. Yes verily: that is if we be true members of Christ, our old man
is crucyfyed, and our flesh is mortyfied, to the end that no evil lusts or
affections do herafter bear rule in us.


The minister. Expound the article following.


The child. He rose the third day from death to life, 1. Peter. 3.
wheri^ he showed that he had vaynquished and gotten the victory of death and
sin. For through his resurrection, he swalowed up death, he broke aso^dre the
chains wherewith the devil did hold us in captyuitie: and finally he
destroyed all his power and kingdom.


The minister. Tell me how many ways this resurrection of Christ does
profit us?


The child. Three manner of ways: the first, The benefyte and virtue of
Christ's death stands in. a^ points.
that we have fully obtained to be ryghteous there by. Secondly, that his
risinge from death is a sure gage and certain assurance unto us that we shall
o^ce rise again into a life without end, and most glorious. Thyrdely, Romans
4.6. 1. Cor. 15.
that if we be in deed truly partakers of his resurrection, we rise now in
this present world in to a new kind of life, addicted wholly to serve God, and
to lead an holy conversation agreeable to his will and pleasure.


The minister Let us go forward to the rest. 12. Sunday.



The child He ascended up into heaven.


The minister Went Christ up into heaven in such sort, that he was no longer
abydinge in the earth?


The child. Yea, Christ ascended into heaven
for when he had performed whollye all things that were enjoined him by the
commandment of his father, and had accomplished all that was necessary for
our health, it was not nedefulle that he should remain any longer in the
world.


The minister. What profit have we by his ascension?


The child. We receive double profit thereby: The Profytte of Christ's
ascension sta^dyth in two points.
for since that our sauyoure Christ is entered into heaven in our name: even
inlyke manner as he came down from thence for our sakes only: he has thereby
made an open entrye into the same place for us, geuynge us withal an assured
knowledge, that the gate of heaven is now wide open to receive us, which was
before fast shut, through our sins. The second profit is, that he
sytteth there present alwais in the sight of God the father to make
intercessyon for us, Romans 6. Hebr. 7.
and to be our advocate to make answer for us.


The minister But is our savior Christ so gone out of the world, that he is
no more here with us?


The child No dowteles: Matt. 28.
for he himself says the contrary: that is, that he will be here present
with us unto the worlds end.


The minister. Is it meant of his bodily presence, that he makes promise so to
co^tynue with us?


The child. No verelye: Luke. 24. Acts 1.
for it is a another matter to speak of his body which was lift up out of this
world into heaven: and to speak of his godly power which is spread abroad
throughout the whole world.


The minister. Declare the meani^g of this sentence: He sytteth on the right
hand of God the Father.


The child. The understanding of that is, Matt. 28.
to signifye that he has received into his hands the governance of heaven and
earth, whereby he is king and ruler over al things.


The minister. What signifies this word, ryghthande, and the syttyng on the
ryghthande, whereof mention is here made?


The child. It is a similitude, To sit on the rith hand of God.
or a manner of speech borrowed of earthly Princes, which are wont to place on
their right side, such as they substitute next under them to see to the
execution of laws and to supplye their room and office in their stead.


The minister Then thou meanest nothing else thereby, Ephe. 1.
but that which S. Paul speaks to the Ephesians: that he was constitute and
appointed head of the Church, set in authority above all powers, Philip. 2.
and that he has received a name or dignity passing all other.


The child. My meaning is none other.


The minister. Go forward to the residue. 13. Sunday.



The child. From thence he will come to judge the quycke and the dead: that is
to say, he will come down from heaven, and show himself visibly once again
in judgment, Acts 1.
even in that shape, wherein he was seen to ascend.


The minister. Seeing the judgment of God shall be in the end of the world,
how may that be which thou say, some shall be a live, and other some shall be
dead: namely since also it is a thing most certainly oppointed unto all men,
Hebr. 9.
to dye once?


The child. S. Paul makes answer to this question himself, saying, that
they which at that time shall be left on live, 1. Cor. 15. 1. These. 4.
shall be suddenly changed in a moment of time: to the end that their corruptible
nature may be altered and that they may receive a new body which shall be no
more subject to corruption.


The minister. Thy meaning is then that this alteration or change shall be unto
them in stead of a death, in somuche as it shall do a way and abolyshe their
former nature, and make them rise again in a new and more glorious state


The child It is even so.


The minister. Do we receive any comfort by this that our savior Christ will
come once to judge the world?


The child Yea verily, and that a synguler great comfort: forwe are taught
certeynly, that his coming at that time shall be only for our salvation.


The minister. Well then there is no cause why we should be afraid of the day
of judgment, or wherefore we should loathe the cummyng thereof.


The child. No truly: Christ shall both Judge us and answer for us.
for so much as we shall appear before no other judge but him, who is our
advocate and has taken upon him to defend our cawse.


The minister. Let us now come to the third part. 14. Sunday.



The child That part concerns our faith and confidence in the holy ghost.
The third part of the creed.



The minister. And to what purpose does it serve us?


The child. It does us to understand, Of the holy ghost and his gifts.
that even as God has first redeemed us, and given everlasting health unto us
in Jesus Christ, eue^ so it pleased him to make us partakers of these his graces
and benefits through his holy spirit.


The minister. How so?


The child. In like manner as the blood of Christ is the only thing that
pourgeth our souls: 1. Peter. 1.
eue^ so the holy ghost must sprinkle and moysten our consciences with the same
to make them pure and clean.


The minister. Yet this needs a more evident declaration.


The child. It is no more to say, but that the holy spirit of God dwelling
in our hearts, does make us feel the virtue, and goodness of our Lord Jesus:
Romans 5.
for it is he that does open the eyes of our heart to behold gods benefits
toward us: he does seal and imprint his aboundante graces in our souls:
and this spirit does also regenerate us, and make us new creatures, in such
sort, Ephe. 1.
that by his means we receive to our most comfort, al those gifts and
benefits which be offered unto us so plentifully in Christ our savior.


The minister What follows now next? 15. Sunday.



The child. The fourth part of our belief, The fowerth part which is of the
church.
where it is said: I believe that there is a Catholic or uniuersal church.


The minister What is this Church?


The child It is the fellowship or congregation of them that believe, what the
church is.
whom God has ordained and chosen unto life everlasting.


The minister. Is it necessary that we believe this artiticle?


The child Yea it is a thing very necessary, unless we mind to make Christ's
death utterly void and of none effect, and to make all those things
superfluous and to no purpose, which we have rehearsed already: for the
church is the very fruit that proceadeth of all Christ's dooinges.


The minister, This is tha^ thy sayi^g that all which hither to has been
declared, For what purpose Christ suffered death
does touch the cause, and grownde of our salvation, insomuche as God has
received us into his favor, by the means of our savior Jesus Christ: and
has stablished this grace in us through his holy spirit. But now the effect
that cu^meth of all this, is declared unto us, to give the more evident
assurance thereof.


The child. It is even so as you say.


The minister. What meanest thou by saying The holy church?


The child. I call the Church holy in this sense, because that those who^ God
has chosen, he justifies and renueth unto holiness and innocency of life, to
make his glory to shine in the^. Ephe, 5.
And also our savior Christ has sanctified his church, which he redemede,
to the end it might be glorious and without spot.


The minister What means this word, Catholic or universal?


The child It serves to put us in remembrance, The meaning of this word
catholic. Ephe. 4. 1. Cor. 12.
that as there is but one head of the right beleuers, eue^ so it behooves the^
to be knit together in one body: i^ such sort that there be not diverse
churches, but one church alonely dispsed thorowout the whole world.


The minister. Declare as touchi^g the communion of saints.


The child. That clause is put to, The communion of the faithful
for a more plain declaration or setting forth of the unity and coupling
together of the members of Christ's church. Moreover it does us to understand,
that all the benefits that Christ has given, and all the good that he has
done for his church, belongs to the profit and salvation of every faithful
person, for so much as they have all a common partaking together.


The minister. But where thou namest the church holy: 16. Sunday.
is the holiness thereof now alreadi upright and perfect?


The child. No verily, for it is in contynuall battayll so long as we are in
this world and laboreth always under imperfection and infirmities which shall
never be clean taken a way, until we be al together coupled to our head Jesus
Christ, by whom we are perfitly sanctified, and made holy.


The minister. Is there no other way to know this church but by belief or
faith?


The child. Yes verily, there is a church or company of Gods people which
may be seen to the eye, for so much as God has given outward tokens and
Sacraments by the which we may know the same. But here in this place me^cio^
is made only of the peculiar and chosen co^pani of Gods children who^ whom
he has chosen to everlasting life: the which feloweshyppe cannot be
perfectely discerned here by our senses nor by outward tokens.


The minister What is there more?


The child. I believe the remission of our sins.


The minister What is the right or proper signification of this word,
Touching the forgiues of sins.
Remissyon?


The child. It signifies properlye that God does freelye forgive all the
sins of them which believe in him, in such sort, that they shall never be
called to any accounte: neither shall they make any answer before Gods
justice seat, thereby to receive any punishment.


The minister. It is easy than to be gathered of this, that we do not merit
or deserve by any satisfaction or amends that we can make, that God should
pardon our sins.


The minister. Ye say true: for our savior Christ has made the full payment
himself, and has sustained the pain due unto the same: for we of our part,
be not able to make any manner of recompense, but we are drieue^ to seek upon
God, that of his mere liberality, we may obtain this benefyt freely.


The minister. Wherefore do thou make mention of remissyon immediatelye
after that thou have spoken of the church?


The child. Because that no man can receive forgeuenes of his sins unless
he be incorporated, There is no remission of sins without the body of the
church:
and joined in the fellowship of Gods people, and so continue in the unity
and common partakynge of Christ's benefits, with the same his body even to
the end, like a true membre of his Church.


The minister. By this saying than, without the church there is nothing but
hell, death, and damnacion.


The child. That is most certain: for all such as do divide and disseuer them
selves from the body of Christ, to the intent to make a sect and break the
unity thereof, are utterly destitute of al hope to enjoy everlasting life,
whiles they keep themselves so divided and a part.


The minister. What follows more. The 17 So^day



The child The rysyng again of the body, Of our resurrection.
and life everlasting.


The minister. Whereto serves this article in our belief?


The child. It does us to understand, that our joy and felicity consysteth
not in any thing upon earth: the which knowledge may serve us for two
necessary purposes: The first it serves to teach us to pass through this
transitory world, as if it were through a strange countreye, setting little by
the things of this world, and not setting our affect you on things of so
unstable continuance. Then secondarily it puts us in cou^fort, that
although as yet we have no full taste or enjoying of the felicity which our
Lord god has freelye prepared for us in our savior Christ, that yet we
ought not for that to dyscourage our selves, but patiently to wait for him
unto the time that he shall appear.


The minister. What shall be the manner of our resurrection?


The child. Al they which be dead before that time shall then take their own
bodies again unto them: 1. Cor. 15.
howbeit they shall be of a another sort or fashion: that is to we^e, they shall be
no more subject, to death or corrupcion: and yet notwithstanding they shall be
of the self same nature and substance as before. And such as shall then
remain alive, God will raise them up maruelously and suddenly change their
bodies, in the twinklinge of an eye, (as we have said before.)


The minister. Shall not the wicked be as well partakers of this resurrection,
as the faithful?


The child. Yes verily, but they shall be in condycion or state far unlike:
Ihon. 5. Matt. 25.
for the one (that is to wete) the faithful, shall rise again to everlasting
joy and felycitye, and the other to everlasting death, and damnacion.


The minister. Wherefore then is there not as well mention made of hell, and
death everlasting, as of heaven and life that endures for ever?


The child Because the Creed is a brief sum of our faith conteinynge in as
few words as can be, that, that belongs peculyerly to comfort the
consciences of Gods faithful: therefore Gods benefytes which he freely
bestows upon his people be rehearsed alonely, without any mencyon of the
wicked, who are clean shute out of his kingdom.


The minister. Since we have the very foundation and ground where upon our
faith is builded, 18. Sunday.
we may well gather hereof that this is the very right faith.


The child. Yea verily: what a thing lively faith is,
that is to say, it is a sure persuasion and a steadfast knowledge of Gods
tender love to wards us, according as he has plainly uttered in his
gospel, that he wylbe both a father, and a sauyoure unto us through the
means of our Lord Jesus Christ.


The minister. Is this faith a thing standing in our power, either is it a
free gift that God gives at his pleasure?


The child. The scripture teaches us that it is aspeciall gift of the holy
ghost, and very experience does also confirm the same.


The minister. And why so?


The child. For the feebleness of our wits is such, that we can by no means
attain unto the understanding of Gods wisdom and the secrets of his
spirit, the which things be opened and made known unto us by faith: and
our hearts are naturally inclyned to a certain distruste, or at lest a vain
trust either in our selves, The holy ghost does lyghten our minds.
or in other creatures: but what time Gods spirit has lyghtened our hearts,
and made us able to understand Gods will (the which thing we can not attain
other wise) tha^ does he arm us also with a steadfast co^fydence in his
goodness, sealinge (as it were) and impryntyng the promises of everlasting
health in our hearts,


The minister. What profit comes to us through this faith when we have it?


The child. It does justify us, before God, This faith makes us sure of our
righteousness.
and makes us enherytours of everlasting life.


The minister. Why? the^ is not a man iustyfyed through good works, if he live
holylye, and in the obedience of Gods will?


The child. If any manne were to be found so perfect, as to lead his life
uprightly before God, such a one might worthelye be called a ryghteous manne:
but forsomuche as we every one, may justly count our selves wretched
sinners in the sight of God: we are of necessytye driven, to seek else where
for a worthynes to make answer for us to Gods judgment.


The minister. But, 19 Sunday.
be all our works so disproued, that they can merit nothing at all for us
before God?


The child First, al such works as we do of our selves, Al man's works be
damnable until they be regenerate through gods sprite.
by the inclination of our own nature, are utterly corrupt. Whereof it
follows necessarily, that they can not please god, but rather do provoke his
wrath, and he condemns them every one.


The minister. This is then thy saying: that unto the time that God has of
his favorable goodness received us to mercy, Mat. 7
we can do no manner of thing but sin: even as an evil tree can bring
forth no fruit but that that is evil.


The child. It is even so: for although our works make a fair show
outwardely to man's syghte: yet without doubt they are wicked in Gods
sight, for so much as the heart is naught, and ungracious, unto the which God
chiefly has respect.


The minister. Hereby then thou do conclude that it lies not in our power,
to preuente God with our merytes: and so to provoke him to love us, but much
rather contrarywyse, we thereby do stir him to be more and more angry against
us.


The child. Yea surely: and therefore I say, that without any manner
consyderacion of our own works, he does accept and receive us into his
favor, of his mere lyberall goodness, and bountyful mercy, Titu^. 3
through the merits of our savior Christ, accountyng his righteousness to be
ours, and for his sake, so forgetting our fautes, that he will lay them no
more to our charge.


The minister. What meanest thou then that a man is iustyfied by his faith?


The child, Justification or righteousness is attributed unto faith, for
somuche as through believing (that is) receiuynge with an assurance of the
heart, the promyses of the gospel, we enter into possessyon of this
ryghteousnes.


The minister. This is bryfely thy meaning, that even as God does present and
offer this ryghteousnes freelye unto us in his gospel, even so the only mean
or way to receive that excellent gift of GOD, is faith.


The child. Yea forsooth.


The minister. well then, 20. Sunday.
after that god has once received us into his favor, be not the works which
we do through his grace, of faith, and by the virtue of his spirit,
acceprable unto him?


The child. Yeas verily, The good works which proceed only of faith.
because he does of his free goodness, so accept them and take them: and not
because their worthiness does deserve so to be esteemed.


The minister. How is it that they be not worthy of themselves to be accepted
since they be works procedvnge of the holy ghost?


The child. For So Much as we carry always some infirmity of the flesh about us,
which will have a stroke and a doing in all our works, whereby they are defiled.


The minister. By what means then are they made acceptable unto God?


The child. By the means of faith: The way to do good works to gods pleasure
for through faith, a man is well assured in his conscience, that God will not
look narowly upon his works, nor try them by the sharp rygoure of his
justice: but that he will rather hyde the vnperfytnes and the unclean spots
that be in them, with the undefiled pureness of our savior Christ, and so
accoumpt them as perfect.


The minister. May we say then that a Christian manne is justified by his
works, after that God has called him, or that he does merit through them
Gods favor to the procurement of life everlasting?


The child. No verily: Psalm. 143.
but contrarywyse it is said, that no man living shall be justified in Gods
sight: and therefore it is our duty to pray that he do not enter into
judgment with us, or call us to a coumpte.


The minister. Thou meaneste not hereby that the good deeds of faithful men
are to no purpose and unprofitable?


The child. I mean nothing less: for god promyseth to reward them largely,
both in this world and in the life to come. And yet this notwithstanding,
those rewards of God be not given for the worthy deserts of our deeds, but
only because it pleases GOD of his goodness to love us freely, and so to cover
and forget our fautes, that he will never call them any more to remembrance.


The minister. May we persuade our selves that we are just without good
works, A right faith is never idle.
and without the diligente applying of our selves to walk in all Gods holy
commandments?


The child. That is not possible: for to believe in Christ is as much to say,
what it is to be leave in Christ.
as to receive Christ in such sort and with such properties, as he does give
himself unto us: now this is an evident thing, that Christ does not only
promise to deliver us from death, and to restore unto us the loving favor of
god his father through the only merits of his innocence: But also he promises
to make us new creatures, by his holy spirit, to the end that we should
lead a holy conversation in all good works.


The minister. Then I see, that it is so far from the office or workyng of
faith to make men despysers of good deeds, or negligent to live godly: that
it is the very root or lyuelye fountain, whereout all good works doesprynge.


The child. Ye say as the truth is, The effect of the gospel is faith and
repentance.
and for this cause the doctrine of the gospel does consyste in these two
points: faith and repentance.


The minister. And what manner of thing, 21. Sunday.
is Repentance?


The child. It is and earneste dyspleasure to ward what repentance is.
sin, and therewith al a feruente desire or longyng for godliness, proceadyng
of the fear of God: and inducing us to the mortifying of our carnal
affectyons, inclining us altogether to the guiding and governance of the holy
ghost, to serve God unfeignedly.


The minister. This then which we have touched, is the second point of a
christen man's life which stands in seruyng of God.


The child. Yea verily: wherein the right seruinge of god sta^dyth.
and we have said also that the very right and alowable service of God, does
consyst in submyttyng our selves humbly unto him, studying earnestly to do
according to his will.


The minister. Wherefore stands gods service herin only?


The child. Because he will not be served or wurshipped after our fantasy and
imaginacion, but after his own good pleasure.


The minister. What rules or ordinances has he prescrybed unto us to lead
our life by?


The child. His law.


The minister. What things does yt conteyne?


The child. It is divided into.ii. parts, The law has two parts.
where of the first does contain four commandments, the second
contains.vi. so that there be.x. in the whole.


The minister. Who has made this division thereof?


The child. God himself: Exodus 32.34 Deu. 4.12
who also gave it written in two tables unto Moises saying, that the whole was
reduced into ten sentences.


The minister. What is the matter of substance of the first table?


The child. It touches the due manner of woorshyppyng God. The effect of the
first table.



The minister. What is contained in the second table?


The child. It shows us in what manner we ought to behave our selves toward
our neghboures, The effect of the second table
and what duetye we owe unto them.


The minister. Rehearse the first commandment. 22. Sunday.



The child. HEarke^, The first commandment. Exodus 20 Deu. 5
and take heed Israel: I am the lord thy God, which has brought thee forth
of the land of Egypt, out of the house of bondage. Thou shall have none other
God before my face.


The minister. Declare the meaning hereof.


The child. It is a preface to begin withal, or an introduction to the whole
law: for he does challenge here unto himself, first authority to command,
naming himself everlasting, and the creator of the world: and again after he
calls himself our God, whereby he moves our hearts to have in reverence,
and to esteem highly his doctrine: for if that he be our savior, it is good
reason that we be also his loving subjects, and obedient people.


The minister. But that which follows after, what signifies the deliurance
out of Egypt.
touching the deliverance from the miserable bondage of Egypt: is it not
referred pecularely to the people of Israel?


The child. Yes verily, as concerning the deliverance from bodily bondage:
howbeit it belongs also generallye unto us all with out excepcio^, in so much
as he has delivered our souls from the spiritual captivity of sin, and
from the tira^ny of the devil and his kyngedome, whereof the bondage of Egypt
was but a figure.


The minister. Why does he make mention of this in the very beginning of his
law?


The child, It is done to put us in remembrance, how greatly we are bound to
show unto him al obedience in performyng of his will: and to sygnifye unto us
what ingratitude and unkindness it is to do the contrary.


The minister. And what is briefly the effect of that he requires of us, in
this first commandment?


The child. He enioyneth us to reserve unto him only the honor due unto him:
The sum of the first commandment.
and that in no wise we alienate or put it from him, giving the same unto any
other.


The minister. What is the honor due unto him alone?


The child. To worship him, The honor that is due to god alone.
to put our whole trust in him, to call upon hyma^d such other like, which be
attributed peculiarly and only unto his majesty.


The minister. Wherefore is that clause put to: before my face?


The child. For So Much as he sees and knows al things, and judges the
secret thoghtes of men's hearts: he signifies unto us, that he does not
account it sufficient if we make a countenance or bear a fair show before
me^, but that his will is that also in very deed, even from the bottom of our
heart, with fervent affection, we do take him for our only God.


The minister. Rehearse the second commandment. 23. Sunday.



The child. Se thou make thee no graven image, The second commandment
touching Images and the worshipping of them.
neither any similitude of any thing, either in heaven above, either in the
earth beneath, or in the waters which be beneth the earth: thou shall do no
honor unto them nor wurship them.


The minister. Does he utterly forbydde the making of any images?


The child. No: but he does forbid expressly either to make any image thereby
to represente or figure god: either to make any image to wurshyppe yt.


The minister. Wherefore are we forbidden to make any figure or image of God?


The child. Because there is no similitude nor comparison between hi^ that is
an everlasting spirit, Deu. 4. Esa. 41. Romans 6. Acts 17.
not able to be conceived of the mind, nor possible to be seen with eyes, and
a material body mortal and apt to putrifye, which we may both feel and see.


The minister. Thy mi^de is then, that he does great dyshonor to Gods majesty,
that goth about to represent or figure him in such sort.


The child. Yea verily.


The minister. What manner of adoracion is here inhibited?


The child. We are forbidden here to come before any image to make our
prayers, or to bow our knee before it, Of honor forbydde^ to images.
or to make any other semblant or token of reverence: as though God were more
present there, or showed forth his power unto us more in that place, than else
where.


The minister. This is not then to be taken as though al keruyng or painting of
Images were utterly prohibited: but alonly to make any image to do God
service therewith or thereby to wurship him in visible things: In what sort
images are forbidden.
either finallye to make any Image, whereby the simple may take occasion to
abuse it unto any kind of superstition or idolatry: all such are utterly
forbidden.


The child. It is even so.


The minister. For what purpose principally was this commandment given?


The child. In like manner as in the first commandment, God shows himself
to be alone the very same, unto whom all honor does belong: even so now in
this second commandment he goes about to withdraw us from all
superstitious kind of wurshipping, proceeding of our carnal imagitions.


The minister. Reharse that that follows this commandment. 24. Sunday.



The child. He joins unto it a threatening saying: I am the eternal, your
God, almighty, Jealous, and punishing the wickedness of the fathers in their
children, unto the third and fowerth generation of such as do hateme.


The minister Wherefore does he make mention there of his might?


The child. To put us in remembrance that he is of sufficient ablenes to
uphold, maintayn and defend his honor.


The minister What means he by speaking of iealousy.


The child. He does us to were, that he can not abide a companion with him,
for even as he has of his unspeakable goodness, freely given himself unto us:
in like manner also he chalengeth as duetye of our behalf, that we become
altogether his servants, wholly addycte and given to please him: and this is
the spiritual chastity which he looks for of our souls, that they be
dedicated unto him, and kept holy for him And contrarywyse, Thouching spiritual
whordo^.
it is a very spiritual whoredom, if our minds be alyenated, or any whitte
withdrawn from him, to any kind of Idolatry, or supersticion.


The minister How ought this to be taken, that he punishes the tra^sgressyo^s
of the fathers in their children.


The child To pearce our hearts more depely, with the terror of his wrath,
who does not only threaten to punish the offenders, but also their feed
after them.


The minister What? is not this contrary unto the ryghteuousnes of God, to
punish the one for the others fault?


The child. If we do way and consider aryghte, How God punishes the
fathers wickedness in the child.
the state whereunto the whole nature of man is brought by the fall of Ada^,
it may be thought superfluous and more then needs to move this doubt: for we
are every one of us borne under the curse of God, and the children of his
wrath, so that we can not find fault with God when he lets us alone and
suffers us still to continue such as we are of nature. Now as it is a sure
toke^ of gods tender affection and fauore toward his servants, when he does
also enriche their children with his manyfolde blessings: so likewise it is a
most dreadful token of Gods vengeance toward the wicked, when he suffers
their ofspringe to contynewe in their cursed state.


The minister. What says he more besides this?


The child To the end he might stir us also with tender love he says
moreover that he shows forth his aboundaunte mercy unto the thousand descent
of such as love him and keep his commandments.


The minister. Does he mean thereby, that the obedyence and holy conversation
of a faithful man shall be suffyciente to save his posterytie, althouge it be
naught and wicked?


The child. Not so but the meaning thereof is, How God shows mercy to a
thousand generacions.
that he will in such sort show forth his beneficial goodness toward the
faithful, that for the favor he bears unto them, he will also be known unto
their children to be their God, not only mi^dyng to prospere the^ here in
things of this world, but to saynctifie them also with the gifts of his
spirit, whereby they may become seruisable and ready to please him.


The minister. But this is not altogether a general rule, that the children of
the wicked be accursed: and contrarywyse faithful men's children blessed.


The child No: Romans 6.
for our Lord does reserve this liberty to himself always, to show mercy
unto the childerne of the wicked: and on the other part, he has not so bownd
his grace to the children of the faithful but that he may at his pleasure
reiecte whom he will: yet notwithstanding he does in such wise order these
things, that all me^ne may easily see, that he has not made this loving
promise for noght.


The minister. Wherefore does he rehearse here in the promise? toathowsand
descent, whereas in the threatnynge he made mention but of. iii. or four?


The minister. That is done to sygnifye, that God is of his own good will and
inclination, always more ready to use gentleness and fauourablenes, then
roughnes or rygour: according as he says of himself that he has a ready
inclinacion to do good, Exodus 34. Psalm. 103.
or to show mercy, and contrariwise slow unto anger.


The minister. Let us come now to the third commandment. 25. Sunday. The
iii. commandment.



The child. Thou shall not take the name of the Lord thy God in vain.


The minister What is the right understanding of that?


The child He does not only forbid to abuse and blaspheme the blessed name
of God by periurye: but forbyddeth as well al vain, and superfluous oaths. Of
other.



The minister. May a man then swear lawefully at any time?


The child Yea verily, when there is just occasion: that is to say, to
maintain the truth of a matter when the time shall require, and likewise to
keep and nouryshe brotherly charytye among us.


The minister, Does he dysproue no oaths but such as are made to the
hinderaunce of Gods honor?


The child. In one kind of oath he teaches us a general rule: to wete, that
we ought not swear at all: that is to say, that we may not call God to
wytnes, unless it be done with all humblenes of mind, having a reuerente fear
toward his majesty before our eyes, to the intent to glorify his name: for
even as it is holy, and of most worthy price, with what reverence we should
name God.
so it behooves us to take diligent head, that we do not in such sort name
him, or call him to witness, that either we may seem to pass lyghtelye of him
our selves, either whereby other may take occasion to have him in small
reverence.


The minister How shall a man use his name with such due reverence?


The child If we do neither think nor speak of God, nor of his works, but
with all reverence and honor.


The minister. What follows this commaundeme^te.


The child. He adds unto it a threatnynge: that he will coumpt him that
uses his name irreuerenlye as a wicked malefactoure?


The minister. Seeing that God pronounces threatiningly in other places in a
generalite, that he will punish al transgressoures: what vehemencye is there
besides in these words?


The child. He does expressy declare hereby, in how great estymacion he has
the honor of his holy name: forsomuche as he says precysely, by euidente
words, that he can not abide that any man do use it irreverently, to the
intent we migth with so much the more careful dilygence have it in honor.


The minister. Let us go to the fourth commandment.


26. Sunday.
The child. Remember to keep holy the sabbath day: The.iiii. commauudement.
six days shall thou labor, and do any neadfull work thou have to do? but
the seventh day is the rest of the lord thy God, thou shalt do no work that
day, neither thou nor thy son, nor thy daughter, neither thy seruante, nor
thy handmayde, no not thine ox, or ass, neither the stranger that is with
in thy gates. for in six days God made heaven and earth, and all that is in
them, but the seventh day he rested, wherefore he has blessed the day of
rest, and has dedicate it peculiarly to himself.


The minister. Gives God in commandment that men shall travail six days
every week, and so rest the seventh?


The child. No, he does not precisely command it: but rather he does give
men leave to travail about their commen business for the time of six days,
and so makes a restraint only of the seventh, in the which he forbids to
labor.


The minister. Are we then bound by Gods commandment to refrain one day in
the week from al manner of labor?


The child This commandment has a certain special consideration in it:
for as touching the observation of bodily rest, it belongs to that part of
the old law which is called ceremonial, the which ceremonies, were utterly
abolished at the coming of Christ.


The minister Say thou then, that this commandment belongs peculyerly
unto the Jews, and that God did give it only for the time of the old
testament?


The child. Yea verily, as touching the ceremony thereof, and the outward
bodily rest to be observed therein.


The minister. Why then, is there any other thing contained in it besides the
ceremony?


The child. Yea truly: for there be three consyderacions, for the which this
commandment was given.


The minister. What are they?


The child. The first is, Three considerations for the which the sab both day
was ordained.
that it might be a figure to represente our spiritual rest: The second for a
comely order to be used in the church or congregation: And thirdely, for the
refreshyng of servants, that they might have some relief of their travail.


The minister What is that, thou call spiritual rest?


The child. That we cease to do the works of our own lusts and will, that
the lord may bring forth the works of his spirit in our hearts.


The minister How may we do this?


The child By mortifying our flesche and subduing the inordinate affections of
our nature, to the end that Gods spirit only may beat rule in us.


The minister. Are we bound to this rest but one day in the week?


The child. It is our bounden duetye to continue in this rest always: The
spiritual Sabbath is co^tynuall.
so that when we have once begone to enter in to it, we must go on forward
whiles our life lasts.


The minister. How happens it then that there is but one day appointed to
represent and figure unto us a thing that dureth our whole life?


The child. It is not necessary that the figure or shaddowe of a thing do
rese^ble thoroughly in all points the thing it is ordained to represente: it
is to be thought suffyciente, if they agree and be like in son points.


The minister. And wherefore was the seventh day appointed rather then any
other?


The child. The number of seven does sygnifie and importe a certain
perfection in the holy scripture, The number of seven.
wherefore the seventh day was most meet to set out unto us a thing that
should still continue: moreover it puts us in remembrance that our
spiritual rest or quietness is not full nor perfect, whiles we live in this
world, neither shall it be absolutely brought to pefection until we depart
this life.


The minister. What is mente by that which our lord alleges here, saying, 27.
Sunday.
that it behooves us to rest, for so much as he has done the same?


The child When God had created al his works in six days, he dedicated or
appointed the seventh to the vewe and beholding of his workmanship. And to the
intent we might be the more easily induced to the consideration there of, he
brings forth his own exaumple, for that there is nothing of so much
worthiness to be desired, as to become like unto him.


The minister. Must we than daily have consideration and remembrance of gods
works: or is it enough to have mind of them one day in the week?


The child Verily our bound duty is to have both daily and hourly a
reverent consideracion of his merueillous works: Wear bownde to praise God
continual lie in his works.
but for that we are through frailty so negligent and forgetful, there is one
certain day, peculiarelye appointed, to renew from time to time the
remembrance of this our duty, and that is the politic order which I spoke
of.


The child. What manner of order ought the people to observe in that day?


The child. They are bound that day to come together, As touching
pollitique order for days.
and to give diligente ear to the word of God, to make their prayers unto
God, and finallye to make open profession of their faith and religion.


The minister. What meanest thou by saying, that it was partly ordained for the
recreation and ease of servants?


The child To thintente that they which be under the authority and power of
others, might be released somewhat and lyghtened of their paynful labors, the
which thing also serves to the furtheraunce of the common wealth: for so much,
as every man has just cause to be the readyer willynglye to travail the other
six days, when they consider, that they may take their rest in the seventh.


The minister Go to then, let us now also see how this commandment
belongs unto us.


The child As touching the ceremony there of, Col. 2. The ceremonial Sabbath
is ended.
we have nothing to do with it: for the use of al ceremonies ceased at the
cumming of Christ, who was the end and substance of them.


The minister. How so?


The child. For our old man, unto whom the ceremonies belonged, is now
crucified by the virtue of his death: Romans 6.
and through the merit of his resurrection we rise again into a newnes of life.


The minister. What is there than in this commandment that concerns us?


The child. We are bound to observe the politic order appointed in the
church for the hearing of Gods word, for cumming together to make common
prayers, and for the right use of the sacraments.


The minister And does the figure profytt us no more?


The child Yes verily: for it leadethe us to the truth of that thing, whereof
the sabbath day is a figure: which is, that we being made the true members of
Christ, ought to leave of from doing the works of our own will, and to
commit our selves wholly unto his tuicion and governance.


The minister. Let us come now to the second table. 28. Sunday.



The child. HOnor thy father and thy mother. The 5 commandment.



The minister. What do thou mean by this word, Honor?


The child The meaning is that children are of duetye bound to use humble
obedience and lowlynes, what honor is due to our superiors.
toward their father and mother, bearing a reuerente mind toward them,
ready to assyst and aid the^, and willing to do after their commandments
according to their duty.


The minister. Proceade farther in this commandment.


The child. God joins also a promise to this commandment, sayng, that thou
may lead a prosperous life many years in the land which the lord thy God
has given thee.


The minister. What is the meaning of this promise?


The child. That God will indue them with a long life here in this world,
which have their father and mother in due reverence.


The minister. How cummeth it to pass, that god promises man to prolong his
life here in this world (as if it were a special benefit) since this life
present is so full of al kind of misery?


The child. Though our life here in this world be never so full of
wretchedness, A long life.
yet not with standing a long life is a blessing of God unto the faithful: for
somuche as god does show forth his fatherly affection to wards his in that
they know they are under his protection and defense?


The minister. May a man gather of the contrary part, that he who lives not
many years, is accursed of God?


The child. No: but rather it cummeth to pass many times, that our lord
takes them soneste of all out of this world, shortenyng their life, whom he
loves most dearly.


The minister. Since he does thus, It seems that he keeps not always
promise.


The child. Yes verelye: Benefits of this world are promised with codicion.
for what promise soever god makes us, touching the benefits of this world, we
ought to take it with this condition, so farfurth as it shall be expedient for
the health of our soul. For it were a means to have the promise of god in small
reputacyon, if the eyes of our mind were not directed further then to consider
only the state of this present life.


The minister. And what is to be said of them that be disobedient unto father
and mother?


The child. God will not only punish them with everlasting pain in the day
of judgment, The ponys hement of children which disobey their parents.
but he will execute also punishmente on their bodies here in this world:
either by shortnynge their life, either by procuring them a shameful death,
either at the least a life most miserable.


The minister. Does not God speak expressly and namely of the land of Canaan
in this promise?


The child. Yes verily, as touching the children of Israel, unto whom the
commandment was first given: but since it has pleased god to receive us also
into the noumbre of his people, Psalm. 14. Psalm. 88. Psalm. 3.
we must take it in a more general significatyon, so that, in somuche as the
whole earth is the lords, we ought to acknowledge that what countreye soever
we do inhabit, god has given unto us the same for a dwellinge place.


The minister. Is there nothing else to be understand in this commandment?


The child. Yes, for notwithstanding no mention is made in it expressly but of
the father and mother: yet we must understand in them, al magistrates, rulers,
and superiors, for so much as there is one manner of consideracion of them
all.


The minister. What is that?


The child. AS God has given unto them all, their authority and preeminence:
and because there is no prerogative of superioritye, neither of father nor
mother, neither of prince, or ruler, magistrate, or master, neither any other
office or title of preemynence, Romans 13.
but such as God has ordained: therefore they require al by one manner of
reason their due obedience.


The minister. Go now to the sixth, 29. Sunday.
commandment.


The child THou shall do no murder. The.6. commandment.



The minister. Is there nothing forbidden here but open murder?


The child. Yes verelye: for considering that it is god who gives this in
commandment, the which has chief regard unto our hearts: he does not
only give us a law to restrain our outward deeds, but principally to bridle
the affections of our mind.


The minister. Thy meaning is then, that there is a certain kind of murder
lying prieuelye in the heart, the which is forbidden here of God.


The child. It is even so: and that is a malicious hatred or rancour, and a
desyer to do hurt unto our neighbor.


The minister. Is it enough then if we bear no hatred nor malice toward any
man?


The child. No, for in that, that god forbyddeth hatred, it is to be
understand also that he requires of us to love all men, and that unfeignedly
from the bottom of the heart, procuryng by all means, their wealth.


The minister. Rehearse the seuenthe commandment.


The child THou shall not commit adultery. The.7. Co^ma^dement.



The minister. What is the sum and effect of this commandment?


The child. All whoredom is declared to be accursed of God, Al whordome is
accursed:
and therefore it behooves us to refrain from it if so be we fear to provoke
his wrath against us.


The minister. Is there no other thing contained in this commandment?


The child. We must al ways have an eye and a regard to the lawmaker, who
in so much as he is God, from whom nothing lies hid: he stays not himself
in the consideracion of the outward work, The mind of the law maker is to
be considered.
going no farther, but he requyrethe also that the heart be clean from al
corruption and lust.


The minister. Show me then, what is the full and perfect meaning of this
commandment.


The child. Forsomuche as our bodies and souls are the temples where Gods
holy spirit rests, 1. Cor. 3.
2. Cor. 6.
this commandment requires of us, to keep the^ in all honest pureness. in
such sort that it is not enough for us, if we be chaste as touchi^g the
carnal act, but we must also be without all uncleanly lusts or desires,
without all inordinate fansyes: finally we are inhibyted all words and
gestures which sound or allure to uncleanliness, so that there must be no part
in us, defiled, or unchaste.


The minister. Go on to the eight commandment. 30. Sunday.



The child. Thou shall not steal. The.6. commandment.



The minister. Does this commandment forbydde only such robberies as be
punished by common laws, either does it reach any farther to any other kind
of stealyng?


The child. This commandment reaches unto al naughty, Of theft.
unlawful, or disceauable occupacyons, and forbids all disalowable or
discommendable ways and means, whereby we pluck unto us any part of our
neighbors substance, whether it be by violence by fraud, or by any other
means, that God has not allowed by his word.


The minister. Is it enough if a man refrain from the deed doing, either is
it forbidden also to mind or purpose any such thing?


The child. We must al ways have a consyderacion that God was the maker of
this law: Of inward theft.
who for so much as he is a spirit, has not only regard to robberies that be
committed in deed, but he considers as well our secret enterprises, our
deuyses, and purposes, and the desires of our mind, to come by riches through
our neygh boures loss.


The minister. What behooves it us then to do?


The child. We are bound to do our endeavor that every man may have his due
and right.


The minister. What is the nynth commandment?


The child. Thou shall bear no false wytnes against thy neighbor. The
ninth co^maundeme^te.



The minister. Does god forbid in this commandment, open periurye before a
judge only: either are we charged to make noe lie to the dysprofyte of our
neighbors?


The child. In namynge one kind of lying, A general doctrine towchi^g other.
he forbids utterly to make any leasyng: meaning that we may not speak
any thing to the reproach of our neighbor falselye: and that we may in no
wise backbyte him or make lies of him, whereby he might sustain loss in his
goods, or be hyndered in his good name.


The minister. Wherefore does he speak expressly of open periuryes, rather then
of any other kind of lies?


The child. To the intent that we might the more earnestly deteste, and
abhor, After customable stau^deryng and liing: there follows shore ly in the
neck of it open perjury.
al backbiting, and lying: signyfying unto us withal, that whosoever does
accustom himself to speak sta^derously of his neighbor, or to make any lie
to his neighbors, hinderaunce privily, he will not be ashamed shortly after to
forswear himself openly.


The minister. Be slanderous and lying words forbidden here alone: either be
we also restrained from al evil thynkinge?


The child. As well the one as the other by the reason which we have already
aleged, That that is ill to be deen before men, ye ill to be though before God.
for that that is evil in the doing before men: is as evil to be willed or
thought before God.


The minister. Rehearse then in few words the very sense and meaning of it.


The child. We are taught by this commandment, not to be ready to judge
evil, or to speak any words that sound to the reproach and infamy of
others: but much rather to have a good opinion of our neighbors, and to
speak words to their praise, and to the mayntenaunce of their good fame, and
honest estymacion, so far forth as the truth will bear us.


The minister. Let us come now to the last commandment. 31 Sunday



The child. Thou shalt not desire thy neighbors house: The.x. commandment.
thou shall not desire thy neighbors wife, nor his servant, nor his maid,
nor his ox, nor ass, neither any thig that is thy neighbors.


The minister. Seeing the whole law is spiritual, and requires pureness of the
heart (as thou have said) and forsomuche as every one of the other before said
commandments were ordained, as well to correct and amend the naughtye
rebellyous affections of the heart, as to rule and govern the outward
doings of men, it appears that this commandment is superfluous, and that
there was enough said before.


The child. In the above rehearsed commandments, God forbyddeth all willing
or consenting to do evil, minding thereby to brydell and suppress all rooted
affections, or deliberate purposes of naughtines: but here in this he utterly
inhybiteth all evil thoughts, light mocions, sudden affections, yea though
we never fully purpose them, neither endeavor our selves, or consent
wyllyngly to do them.


The minister. Say thou then, that the least mocion or temptacion that can
enter into the thought of a faithful man is sin, though he utterly refuse
it, strive against it, and will not by any means consent unto it?


The child. Yea verily: for this is certain, Every evil mocion is a sin.
that al wanton thoughts and mocions of evil, do proceade and spring out
of the orygynall sin which contynueth still in us by nature: whereof I
conclude that lusts or mocions which do kendle or stir up man's heart to do
amysse, though he never purpose or consent to do the thing, be nevertheless
directly against this commandment.


The minister. This is then bryefely thy saying, that even as lusts or
desires of evil, which have so far prevailed, that the will is consenting
and fully agreed upon the same, are reproved as sin in the former
commandments: even so by this commandment God requires of us such an
vpryghte clearenes of conscience that there may not so much as one evil
mocion or desire, once enter into our hearts, the which might enclyne or
provoke us to do amysse.


The child. Ye have said all.


The minister. May we not now make a brief some and gatheringe of the whole
law?


The child. Yes verily, The sum and effect of the whole law. Matt. 22.
the whole law is comprehended in these.ii. points: the one is, that we love
God with all our heart, with all our mind, and with our whole might. The
other is that we love our neighbor as our self.


The minister. What is included in the love of God?


The child. It requires of us this duetye, that we love him as our God: that
we acknowledge and take him for our sovereign lord, master, savior and
father: so that hereby our duetye is to fear him, to honor him, to put our
whole trust in him, (...) obey him and love him.


The minister. What do thou mean by these words: with all our heart,
all our mind, and our whole strength.


The child. It is no more to say, but that we must love God with such a zeal
and feruente affection, that there may be in us, no desire, no will, no
thought, no endeavor, no manner of inclynacion, contrary unto this love.


The minister. What is the meaning of the second point?


The child. We are taught thereby, that as we be naturally inclyned to love our
selves, and as this affection is most vehemente and does pass all the rest,
even so our love toward our neighbors, ought in such sort to bear rule
in our hearts: that it should rule and guide us altogether, and should be a
line and rule, thereby to order all our thoughts and deeds.


The minister. And whom meanest thou, when thou say our neighbors.


The child. I do not only sygnyfye by the word our kindred, friends, and
such other as be of our familier acquaintance: but such also as be strangers
unto us, and more then that, our very enemies.


The minister. In what band or alliance are we in with them?


The child There is a knot of frendshyp the which God himself has fastened,
which cannot be loosed by any man's malice, or wickedness.


The minister. Then thou will say, if any man bear any malycious hatred unto
us, that evil affection comes of himself: and yet in the mea^e time, by the
very order which God himself has appointed, he ceasseth not to continue still
our neighbor, and we are bound even so to take him.


The child. Yea verily.


The minister. Seeing the law requires such a perfect upright manner of serving
God, is not every christen man bound to frame his life and conuersacyon after
the same?


The child. Yes truly, but we have in us so much weakness, No man can fulfill
the law.
that there is no man which fully does perform all that the law requires.


The minister. Why does God therefore require of us such an exquisite
perfection as we be not hable to reach unto?


The child. God requires nothing of us but that which we are bound to do,
and our own consciences witness that we are charged with already: And again if
we bend our selves, and give diligence to frame our lives to this rule set
forth in the law, than albeit we be far from being able to attain unto the
perfection thereof, yet the lord will not lay to our charge that defaut or lack
of dooyng the same as our duty requires.


The minister. Speak thou generally of al men: either else meanest thou the
faithful only?


The child. I speak not of such as believe not, for no man is able to begin to
frame himself to do the least poyncte that the law requires, until he be
regenerate and fashyoned again through the spirit of God. Moreover, if it
were possible to find our any manne who were able to perform some part of
that, Deu. 27 Gal. 3.
that the law demands, it should not be enough to dyscharge him before god:
for the lord pronounces openly this sentence, that whosoever does not
thoroughly accomplish every point contained in the law, is accursed.


The minister. Hereof we must needs gather that the law has two distinct
offices, 33. Sunday.
according as there be two sorts of men.


The child. What else? Romans 3. To what use the law serves touching the
vnfeythful 2: Cor. 3.
for as touching them that believe not, it serves to no other purpose but to
reprove and condemn them, and to take from them al manner occasion to excuse
themselves before god: and this is that part of the office of the law, which.
S. Paul speaks, of, namyng it the instrumente of death and damnacio^: but as
touching the faithful, it serves to an other use.


The minister. What profit does the law bring to the faithful?


The child, First the law makes it known unto them, To what use the law
serve the as touchin the feithfull.
that they cannot beiustified by their works: and so by humbling them through
the knowledge of their miserable state, it does stir them to search their
health and salvation in our savior Christ. Secondarily whereas it requires
more then is possible for any man to do, it warns them to pray unto God, that
he will vouchsafe to give them suffyciente strength that they may at least have
a ready willing mind to obey his will, and thereby they have also occasion to
knowledge their daily fautes, and so to think lowely of them selves:
Thyrdelye it serves them in stead of a bridle, to repress their carnal
affections, and to hold them fast in the fear of God.


The minister. We may then finally conclude, as touching this matter, that
albeit for the time of this transitory life, we never attain to be able to
render perfect obedience unto the law, yet it is not to be thought a vain
thing, and to no putpose, that it requires of us such a precyse and exquisite
perfection: for thereby it sets up a mark unto us, to the e^d, that we
every one, according to the grace wherewith God has endued us, might
continually with so much more feruente affection, walk toward it and study
daily more and more to come unto it.


The child. Ye have uttered the thing even as I meant it.


The minister. Have we not a perfect rule of all rigthtuousnes set out in the
law?


The child. Yes verelye: Obedience to the laws gods only (...) and the
sacrifice that he requires of us. 1. Sam. 15. Ierem. 7.
so that God demands no other thing of us, then to frame and order al our
doings by it: and contrary wise God disaloweth and refuses whatsoever man
takes in hand to do besides, For obedience is the only sacrifice and
service, which he requires.


The minister. To what purpose then does al those monicions, declarations,
exhortations, and commandments serve, which the Prophets make and the
apostles?


The child. The doctrine of the prophets and Apostles be nothing else but
exposicions of the self same law more at large, the end of which doctrine is
so far of from the leadyng of us from the obedience due unto God, that it is
rather in stead of a sure gyde to conduct us, and bring us unto it.


The minister. Yet it femeth that the law does not set out every man's
particular vocation and office.


The child. Where as the law of God prescrybeth that we ought to render unto
every man that, that is his due, we may right well gather thereof, what
every man's duty is in his state and calling: further (as we have already
said) the residue of the scripture makes a more particular and plain
declaration of the same: for the self same things which God has in few
words comprehended in these tables of his commandments, other parts of the
scripture do entreat here and there more at large. 34. Sunday.



The minister. Seeing we have now commoned sufficiently, of the right seruyng of
God (that is to say of obedience to his will) which is the second part of the
honor due unto him: The iii. poincte towching the true honoring of God, is
calling on him in our need.
let us speak now also of the third point touching the honor which he
demands of us.


The child. We have said here before that the third manner of honor which he
demaaundeth of us, is to call upon him and to seek for help at his hand in all
our needs.


The minister, Do thou mean, that this honor, to call upon God for help in
our necessities, is due unto him alone?


The child. Yea, for he chalengeth this as a peculiar honor due unto his
high and divine majesty only.


The minister. Since it is so: after what sort is it lawefull for us to
require succor at man's hand?


The child. There is great dyfference between those two things: for we call
upon the name of God, to protest and signifye, that we look for no help nor
benefit but at his hand, having our whole affyance in him, as a sure rock,
and in none else: yet in the mean time we procure and use the help of men
and other creatures, so far forth as God gives us leave, and as he has
lent the^ ablenes and means to succor us.


The minister. Thou meanest then, that to demand succor of man, is no whit
contrary to this that we are bound to make our inuocacio^ and prayer only
unto God for help: for so much as we put not our trust in them, neither seek
their succor, but so far forth as God has ordained them minysters, and
bestowers of his goods to our necessity, and comfort.


The child. Ye say very well: and in very deed, what soever benefit or
frendshyp we receive at any man's hand, we are bound so to take it, as if God
himself did deliver it unto us: for the truth is that it is he, who sends
all such benefits by the hands of his creatures.


The minister Is it not then our duetye to give thanks unto men for their
benefits, and to acknowledge gentilye their fre^delye help; saying the law
of nature so teaches?


The child. Yes verily, and it were for no more but for that it has pleased
God to call them to such honor, as to be the dealers, and distributers of his
benefits: for God in so doi^g, does bind us unto them, and will that we take
the same thankefullye at their hands, but yet always so, that we must
acknoweldge that they are but his ministers and alms dealers, and that he
alone is the prouyder of all.


The minister It appears by this that we may not call upon Angels or
Saints departed for help.


The child. You say truth: for touching saints departed, Neither Angels
nor fainctes departed are to be called upon for any help.
God has not appointed unto them any such office, as to help us, or given
them any such charge as to ministre unto our needs. And as concerning his
angels, although he have ordained the^ as ministers to serve for our health,
yet is it nothing less then his will that we should call upon them for help,
either have our recourse and refuge unto them in time of need.


The minister. Thou supposest the^, that whatsoever is not agreeable to the
order which God has set forth unto us, is repugnaunte unto his will.


The child I mean eue^ so: for if so be that we will become so curious, as
not to content our selves with that order and manner of doing which God has by
his word set forth unto us: An evident token of infidelite.
that is a token most certain of infidelity. Moreover, if in stead of
seeking upon God alone for help in all our needs, we shall have recourse unto
Angels or any other creatures, puttinge any part of our confyde^ce or
trust in them: we commytte therein damnable Idolatry, by attributyng unto
the^, that thing which ought to be peculiarelye reserved unto God.


The minister. Let us come now to the right manner of making our prayer unto God
is it enough to pray with the tongue, 35. Sunday.
Of prayer.
either is a fervent mind, and earnest affection of the heart also necessarily
required?


The child As for the speaking with the tongue is one of the least points,
neither is it always necessary to use the tongue in praying: but an attentife
mind, and earnest affection is always necessaryly required.


The minister. How prove you that?


The child. For somuche as God is a spiritual substance, he requires always
the spirit, We must pray with in hearty affection.
and the heart: and as at al other times, so specially in time of prayer, when
we show our selves in his presence, Psalm. 145. Esa. 29. They are cursed of God
that pray without har^^ affection.
and enter into communication wih him: and thereupon he makes a restrainte of
his promise, seeing that he will be at hand, to hear only all them which call
upon him in truth: co^trarywise he pronu^ceth all the^ accursed which pray
hipocritically or without an earnest affection.


The minister I see then thereby that al such prayers as be made only with the
mouth, be unprofitable and to no use.


The child They be not only unprofitable, but they are superfluous and
provoke God to dipleasure.


The minister. What manner of affection is required to make the prayer
acceptable?


The child. We must first of al have such a feeling of our poverty and
wretchedness, that we may perceive an earnest vexacion and grief of mind,
through the lothsommes of sin, or lack of some grace expedient for us: we
must also have a feruente desire and longing to obtain the same at gods hand,
which desire must kendle our hearts, and enge^der in us a ferue^te prayer.


The minister. Do these things proceed of our nature, either are they given
unto us by the special goodness of God?


The child. It is God that plays the workman: for we are of our selves
dull, and without al lust to prayer: but the spirit of God does styre up in
our hearts such syghes as no tongue is able to express, Romans 8. Gal. 4.
and endueth our mi^des with such a zeal, and feruente affection, as God
requires in prayer.


The minister. Does this doctrine teach us that we ought not to dispose, and
stir up our selves to prayer?


The child. Nothing less: but rather contrarywyse, so often as we do not feel
in our selves such a devotion, or disposition to prayer, we ought to make our
supplication unto the lord, that it will please him to give us of his grace,
whereby we may be framed to prayer with such affection of mind as we ought to
do.


The minister. As touching the use of the tongue, The tongue serves to a very
good use in the making of our prayers.
thou do not count it utterly unprofitable in making of prayers?


The child No verily: for the words which the tongue utters do many times
help to comfort, and to stir up the affections of the mind: yea they do
strengthen, and hold in the mind of man, whereby his thought does not wander
so sodaynely from GOD, as otherwise it would: moreover, for somuche as the
tongue is a creature of GOD, ordained of him to praise and set forth his glory,
above al other members of the body, it is reason and duetye, that the tongue
be employed by all means to that use: finally the very feruente affection of
the heart does many times through a vehement mocion, enforce the tongue to
speak, though a man did not purpose so to do.


The minister, Since it is as thou say, to what purpose is it to pray in a
langage that a man does not understand? To pray in a strange language is a
mocking of God. 1. Cor. 14.



The child. It is to mock God withal, and a supersticious hypocrisy.


The minister. When we make our prayers unto God, do we it at al aue^tures, 26.
Sondvy.
without sure knowledge whether we shall obtain any profyt or not? either ought
we to be surely persuaded that our prayers shall be heard?


The child. We must have this evermore as a sure foundation and ground in all
our prayers, Prayer must proceed of a sure confydence in gods promysse.
Romans 10.
that they shall be accepted of God, and that we shall obtain our request so
farforth as it shall be expedient and necessary for us: where upon. Saint Paul
says, that the right invocation and prayinge unto God, proceeds of faith:
for if we have not a sure affiance and trust in the bountyfull mercy of God, it
is impossible to make our prayer unto him aryghte.


The minister. What say thou then of them which be in doubt and uncertain
whether God will hear them or not?


The child Their prayers are utterly void and nothing worth: neither has
God made any promise to any such prayers, for he says: what soever we shall
ask, if we believe, he will grant it unto us.


Matt. 12. Mark. 11. whosoever doubts whether God hear his prayer, the
taynethe nothing.
The minister. There is nothing now behind but to know by what means, and
in whose name we may come by this sure confidence to present our selves
before God considering that we are vile sinners, Three things make us hold to
ask of God 1. His promise Psalm. 50.91. 145. Esa. 30.65. Iere. 29.
and far unworthy so to do.


The child. First of al we have promises of God whereupon we must stay our
mi^des, without having any regard of our own worthynes: Secondaryly then,
(if we be the children of GOD) he does induce us, 2. His spirit. Joel. 2.
Mat. 6.
and pusshe us forward with his holy spirit, to the entente to allure us to be
familier with him as with our loving father: and finally to the end that we
should not be afraid to come before his glorious majesty, 3. The mediacion of
Christ his own son 1. Tim. 2. Hebru. 4.2. John. 2.
although we be but as poor woormes of the earth, and most wretched sinners,
he has given unto us our Lord JESUS to be our peacemaker and intercessoure,
to the intent that we by means of his merits having recourse unto God our
father, might have an assured trust to find grace at his hand.


The minister Do thou mean it thus, that we may not call upon God by prayer,
unless it be done in the name of our savior Christ?


The child Yea, we may not pray but in the name of our Savior Christ. Ihon.
14.
I mean it even so: for we have an express commandment so to do: and in so
doing we have a sure promise, that through his merytes and intercession, al
our requests shall be granted unto us.


The minister. Is it not then to be taken as a point of rash boldenes or
folyshe presumpcion, to come forth hardely, and to present our selves before
God himself, assuryng our selves that we have our savior Christ for our
advocate, and to set him before us, to the end that God may for hyssake
accept both us and our prayers?


The child. No verily: Romans 8.
for we make our prayers as it were by his own mouth, for so much as he himself
opens the way for us, and makes our prayers to be heard, yea and
entreats also continually for us.


The minister. Let us common now of the substance of our prayers: is it
lawefull for us to pray for all things that we fansye: either is there a
certain rule to appoint what things ought to be prayed for?


37. Sunday.
The child. If we shoold follow our own will and fantasye in making our
prayers, they should be very vnhansomlye framed. For we are so blind that we
are not able to judge what is good and meet to be prayed for: moreover, al
our desires are so inordinate, and repugnaunte to Gods will, that it is
expediente for us to bridle them, and keep them under.


The minister What is then to be done?


The child. We must learn of God what is mete to be prayed for, seeing he
alone knows what is necessary for us: and that he leads us as it were by
the hand, so that we our own selves do nothing but follow.


The minister What instruction has he given us for prayer?


The child. He has taught us sufficiently how and wherefore to pray,
throughoute the whole scripture, but to the intent to bring us to one certain
and sure mark, he has set forth unto us one manner of prayer, wherein he has
brieflye comprehended all such points as be meet or lawful for us to
demand.


The minister. Rehearse that form of prayer.


The child. It is the very same that our Lord Jesus taught his discyples to
pray: Mat. 6. Luke. 11.
for wha^ they asked of him how they should pray, he answered that they should
say on this wise.

OVre father which art in heaven hallowed be thy name, The faithful prayer
which our lord himself taught us.
thy kingdom come, thy will be done in earth as it is in heaven, give us this
day our daily bread, forgive us our trespaces, as we for give them, that
trespass against us: and lead us not into temptacion, but deliver us from
evil. For thine is the kingdom, the power and the glory world without end.
So be it.


The minister. For the more easy understanding hereof, tell me how many
articles or particular requests be contained herein?


The child. Six, of which the.iii. The division of the Lords prayer.
first do concern the glory of God, without any respect or consideration of
our selves: the other, iii. touch us properlye, and concern our wealth and
profit.


The minister. Why then, ought we to desire any thing of God, that brings no
manner of commodity unto our selves?


The child This is true, that God of his infinite goodness does dispose and
order all things in such sort, that nothing can turn to the glory of his
name which is not also profitable unto us: so that when his name is saynctyfyed
and honored, he makes it redounde to our sanctyfycacion: and when his
kingdom comes, we are after a sort partakers thereof: yet notwithstadinge,
our duetye is at such time as we ask and desire these things, to have only
regard to his honor, without any consideration to our selves, or to our own
commodity and profit.


The minister By thy saying then, though these. iii. first peticions are
greatly profitable to us, yet we may not make them for any other purpose, but
only to desire to have God glorified and honored.


The child It is even so: and likewise, albeit the three first requests be
ordained to pray for things expedient and necessary for us: yet even in them
also we ought most earnestly to seek gods honor, so that it must be the
chief end and mark whereunto all our wiss hinges and desires be dyrrected.


The minister. Let us come now to the exposicion of it: 38. Sunday.
and before that we proceade any farther, wherefore is god named here our
father, rather thenby some other name?


The child. Since in time of prayer specially we ought to have a strong
confydence and a steadfast assureaunce of Gods favor in our consciences: In
what sense we call God father.
it pleases God to be called of us by a name which sounds nothing but al
swetenes, bou^tye, and mercifulnes, thereby to drive away all doubtfulnes, and
fear, and to make us conceive a bold courage to come family are lie into his
presence.


The minister. May we then come boldlye and familiarely unto god, even as a
child may unto his father?


The child. Yea, and with a great deal more assured confidence to obtain
whatsoever we shall desyer: for if we being evil, Mat. 7.
cannot chose but give unto our children bread and meat when they ask it:
how much less can our heavenly father refuse to give us such things as we
have need of, since he is not alonelye good, but the very soucrain goodness it
self?


The minister. May we not prove sufficientlye by this that God is named our
father, the same thing which we affyrmed touching Christ, that our prayer
ought to be grounded upon sure trust in his merits and intercession?


The child. Yes certainly, for god does acknowledge us no otherwise to be his
children, but only insomuch as we be the members of his dear son.


The minister. Wherefore do thou not rather call God thy father, than our
father, as it were in common?


The child, Every faithful man may right well call God his father
particularelye: why we call him our father
but in this form of prayer our savior Christ does teach us to pray in
common, that we might remember thereby the duty and charity which we owe to
our neighbors in our prayers, and to monishe us, not to care onesye for our
selves.


The minister. What means this clause? which art in heaven.


The child. It is as much to say, as to name him high, mighty, and of a
majesty incomprehensible.


The minister. To what purpose serves that?


The child. It serves to this end, that when we call upon him by prayer, we
might learn to lift up our minds, and to withdraw our imaginacyon from
thynking any thing of him wordly or earthly, and that we should not measure
him by our flesh ly judgment, and so make him subject or appliable to our will
or appetyte, but rather that we might, with all humblenes of mind honor his
excelle^te majesty, and also that we might have occasion to put so much the
more our trust assuredlye in him, considering that he is Lord and master of
all.


The minister. Make an exposicion of the first peticion. 39 Sunday.



The child. The name of god is his honor and renoume, The first petition.
whereby he is sanctified and pray sed amongst men: therefore we desire that his
glory may be auaunced above al things, and every where.


The minister. Do thou mean that this his glory may either increase or
dymynys he?


The child. No verelye, in it self: In whatsence we wyshe the setting forth
of gods glory.
but the meaning hereof is: that it may be known as it ought to be, and that
all the works which God does, may appear unto men to be glorious and
worthy of high praise, even as they be in very deed, so that he might by all
means be magnifyed.


The minister. What do thou mean in the second request by the kingdom of
God?


The second poticion.
The child. This kingdom consysteth pryncypallye in two points: wherein the
kingdom of God consifleth.
that is to say, first in that he guydeth and governs his elect through his
holy spirit. And again in that he destroys and brvngeth to utter sha me and
confusion the wicked which will not become subjects to his kingdom, to the
end that it may euidentlye appear that there is no power hable to withstand
his incomparable might.


The minister. What understand thou in praying that this kingdom may come?


The child. The meaning is, that it will please god from day to day to
increase the number of his faithful flock, The kingdom of Christ.
that he will continually more and more show forth hysfauour in bestowyng the
gifts of his holy spirit among them, until the time come, in which they
shall be fullye replenished: that it may also please him to cause the light of
his truth more and more to shine amongst us: that he will in such wise make
his justice to be known, that the devil and his kingdom of darkness may
come to utter confusion, and that all wickedness may be clean abolished, and
rooted out.


The minister. Is not this request performed in this world?


The child. It is partly fulfilled already: The perfeict state of Christ's
kingdom
yet our duty is to desire that it may be continually increased, and that the
will auaunce still and further his kingdom, unto such time as it shall come at
length to full perfectyon the which thing shall be at the day of judgment,
what time God alone shall be magnifyed, and all creatures shall appear low,
being subject unto his majesty, 1. Cor. 15,
yea when he shall be euydentlye seen to be all in all things.


The minister. In what sense prayest thou that Gods will may be done? 40.
Sunday



The child. I desire that al creatures may be ready and willing to obey him,
in such sorre, The third request towching the accoplishement of gods will
that what soever, is done may be pleasant to him.


The minister. Do thou mean then, that nothing may be done contrary unto
his will and appoyntemente?


The child. Our request is not only that he will bring al things to pass as
he has appointed by his unsearchable counsel and prouydence: but that it may
please him also to beat down all rebellion, that every man may with a
cherefull courage apply himself to his will only.


The minister. In so doing, do we not renounce and utterly refuse our own
wills?


The child. Yes forsooth: and we pray not only that it may please him to
ouerturne, make void, and bring to naught such desires as be in us repugnyng
unto his pleasure: Regeneracion.
but that he will also in such sort fashion our minds a new, and so frame
the affections or lusts of our hearts, that the work of our own will being
set a part, his spirit may work such a will in us, as may be in all points
agreeable unto him.


The minister. Wherefore put thou unto it, In earth as it is in heaven?


The child. Because the Angels which be his heavenly creatures, study nothing,
How gods will is done in heaven.
but quietly to please him, without any mocion or thought to the contrary: we
desire that the like may be done in the earth, and that al men may be framed
unto a like willing obedience.


The minister. Come now to the second part: what do thou mean by the daily
bread which thou ask?


41 Sunday
The fourth peticion.
The child. That word contains al things whereof we have need in this
present life, what is meant by our daily bread.
not only as touchi^ng meat, dri^ke, and clothes, but all manner of things
that god knows to be expedient for us in this world, whereby we may have the
fruicion of his benefits in quietness.


The minister. Why beggest thou of god thy daily nouryshement, since he has
given a charge unto al men to get their living with the labor of their
hands?


The child. Albeit we are commanded to travail and do our endeavor, yet the
truth is so, that al our labor, diligence, and provision, that we can make,
is not able to procure us a living: but the only blessing of God upon our
hands and travail, which prospers the things we go about in his name:
moreover this is to be considered, that it is not meat or drink that
nourysheth us, Deu. 8.
(notwithstanding we be commanded to make provision for those things) but the
power of god mayntayneth our life, and we use them only as instruments.


The minister. Why call thou it, our bread, since we desire that it may be
given us?


The child. That cummeth of the only bountifulnes of God, whose pleasure it
was to name it ours, albeit it is nothing at al due unto us: and again by
this word we are put in remembrance not to desire the bread that an other
man has travailed for: but to wyshe that only which we shall come by, by
honest and lawful means, agreeable to gods ordinance.


The minister. Why say thou, this day: calling it our daily bread?


The child. Those words do give us monicion to be contented, wherefore we call
it daily bread.
and not to wyshe more then suffyseth for our necessity.


The minister. Seeing this is a common prayer belongyng indifferently to all
men: how is it that the rich (who have provided abundance of goods for a
long time) may make this petycyon for one day?


The child. All men both rich and poor must understand, that what goods
soever they have, they can nothing profyt them, but so far forth as it pleases
God to give the^ the use thereof, and the enioyinge of them: so that when we
have plentye yet we have nothing, onles he of his goodness give us also the
fruicion and use of the same.


The minister. What is contained in the fyfth request?


The 42. So^day
The child. That it will please God to forgive us our trespasses. The.5.
peticion



The minister. Is there any man living so just, that needs not to make this
request?


The child. No surely: for our Lord Jesus prescrybed this form of prayer to
his Apostels for the behofe of his whole church: so then whosoever would
exempte or privilege himself from the saying of this prayer, in so doing he
refuses to be of the company and fellowship of Christ's flock: and in very
deed the scripture does plainly testify, that the most perfect manne that
is, Job. 9.
if he would allege one point to iustifye himself thereby before God,
should be found fautye in a thousand: it is mete therefore that every man
have a recourse co^tinuallye unto the well of Gods mercy.


The minister. After what sort think thou that our sins be pardoned us?


The child. Even as the very words of Christ do sound: In what sort our
sins are forgeuen.
for so much as our sins be as debtes by which we are holden fast bond under
the danger of everlasting damnacion, we make supplycacyon unto GOD that he
will of his mere goodness pardon them.


The minister. Thou meaneste then, that we obtain forgeuenes of our sins by
the free mercy of God only.


The child. It is even so for we can by no means make amends for the least
fault that we have committed, if God did not use his bountiful lyberalytie
toward us, by for geuynge them freely every one.


The minister. What profit comes to us by that that we are pardoned of our
sins?


The child. Besides that, that we are delivered thereby from the pains of
hell, we become as acceptable unto God, as if we were innocent, and without al
spot of vnryghte ousnesse, and also our consciences be surely persuaded that he
bears a tender fatherlye affection toward us, whereby we attain to
everlasting health and felycytye.


The minister. When thou make thy prayer, that he will pardon us our offenses,
even as we pardon them which trespass against us: do thou mean hereby that
we mertye or deserve to have our sins forgeuen in that, that we forgive
other men their fautes?


The child. No verily: Our sins be pardoned freely.
for by that means we should not have pardon of our sins freelye and for
naught, neither should the remyssyon of them be suffycientlye grounded upon the
satysfaction which was made in the death of Christ, as it ought to be: but in
that that we forgette the wrongs and damnages done unto us, we follow his
exaumple in gentleness and meekenes. And now to declare that we are his
children, he has given us this as a mark or badge to be known by, and to
certyfye our selves that we are so: on the other part also, he does us to
were, that we may look for nothing at his judgment, but extreme and rigorouse
handlynge, if we will not, as his children show our selves ready to pardon,
and show favor unto them which be in debte, danger, and fault toward us.


The minister. Thou meanest then, who^ god refuses to count as his children.
that GOD here refuses to take them for his children, which cannot forget
wrongs and trespasses commytred against them: to the entente they should not
think themselves to be partakers of that mercy and favor which the
faithful do look for.


The child. Yea verily: and also to the end that all men might have
knoweledge that the self same measure which they meat unto other, shall be
paid unto them again.


The minister. What is the next peticion? 43. Sunday.



The child. Lead us not into temptacion, The 6. peticio^.
but deliver us from evil.


The minister. Make thou but one request of this?


The child. No, for the second part does expound the first.


The minister. What is the pyth and substance of this peticion?


The child. We desire that God do not suffer us to fall to wickedness, Roma. 7
neither permyt us to be overcome of the devil, nor to be lead with the
naughtye lusts of our flesh, which continually war against us: but that
he will give unto us power to withstand them, holding us up with his hand,
and keeping us al ways in his sauegarde, to be our protector and guide.


The minister. By what means is this brought to pass?


The child. What time God does guide us by his holy spyryte, thereby causynge
us to love goodness, and to hate evil, to seek after ryghteousnes, and to fly
from sin: for he makes us by his holy spyrite, able to overcome the devil,
sin, and the flesh.


The minister. Has every man need thus to be guyded?


The child. Yea every man: 1 pet. 5
for the devil watches continuallye for us, even as a roaringe Lion, ready to
devour us: and we on the other part be so feeble and frail, that he would
out of hand overcome us, if God did not both strengthen us and give us the
victoire.


The minister. What signifies this word, temptacyon?


The child. The wilye guiles and subtle assaults of the devil, what is
temptacion.
wherewith he assaulteth us and goes about to entrap us: who knows full
well, that we are naturally apt to be deceived, yea ready to deceive our
selves: and our will is wholly bente to do evil, and no whitte to do good.


The minister. But wherefore requireste thou of God that he do not induce and
lead us into evil: since that is an office belonging peculiarly to the devil?


The child. Even as God of his infinite mercy does preserve his faithful,
not sufferyng the devil to lead them out of the way, neither permyttynge
that sin have the upper hand of them: so likewise he does not only give
up, cast of, and withdraw his grace from such as his pleasure is to punish:
but also he delyuereth them to the devil, commyttyng them unto his tyranny: he
strikethe theymwith blindness and gives them up into reprobate minds that
they be come utterly slaves unto sin and subject to all temptacions.


The minister. What means the clause which follows? for unto thee belongs
the kingdom, power and glory, world without end.


The child. It puts us again in remembrance, that our prayers be
grounded upon God, and upon his almyghtye power and goodness, and not in any
thing that is in us: since we of our selves be unworthy once to open our
mouths to call upon him: again we are taught hereby to conclude or end all
our prayers in the lauding and praysyng of his power and goodness.


The minister. Is it not lawefull for us to ask any other petycyon or thing
then is here rehearsed? 44. Sunday



The child Albeit we are not forbidden to use other words and to frame them
also after another sort, yet there can no prayer be acceptable unto God,
unless it be in effect and sense framed after this, which is unto us (as it
were) a perfect rule whereby to pray as we ought to do.


The minister. It seems now conuenyente time to come to the fourth point
touching the honor due unto God. The fowrth kind of honor due to godde



The child. We have said already, that it consysteth in acknowledgyng with
the heart, and in confessyng with the mouth, that God is the author of all
goodness that thereby we may maintain his glory.


The minister. Has God set forth no rule to teach us how we should do this?


The child. All the exemples in the scripture, of lauding, praysyng and
tha^kesgeuynge, ought to be as rules and instructions unto us.


The minister. Is there nothing contained in the Lords prayer touching this
matter?


The child. Yes verelye: for in that we pray that his name may be glorified,
we desire also that all his works may be seen (according as they be in deed)
excellent and praise worthy: i^ such sort, that if he punis she us, we may
thereby praise the vprightnes of his judgment: if he pardon our fautes, we
may thereby have occasion to magnifye his mercy: when he performs his
promise, we may acknoweledge him to be the infallyble truth: bryefelye we
require that there be nothing at all done wherein the bryghtnes of his glory
be not showed forth unto us: and this is to give unto him the laud and praise
of al goodness.


The minister. What conclusion may we gather of all that we have hitherto spoken?


The child. Verelye we may well conclude of this, the saying of Christ (which
is the truth it self:) that this is life euerlastig, to know the very living
God, Ihon. 17.
and him whom he has sent, our savior Christ: to know him (I say) to the
end to render due honor unto him, what everlasting life is. Mat. 1.
that thereby he may become unto us, not only a Lord and master, but also a
father and savior: whereby also we on the other part may be his servants,
his children, and a people wholly consecrated to his glory.


The minister. What is the means to come by a state so excellent? 45. Sunday.



The child He has for the same purpose left with us his holy word,
Everlasting life is offered ad presented unto us by gods word.
which is unto us (as it were) an entree into the kingdom of heaven.


The minister Where shall we seek for this his word?


The child It is contained in the holy scripture.


The minister. How must we use this word, to have this profit by it?


The child We must receive it, being perfitly persuaded thereof in our
conscience, as of an undoubted truth sent down from heaven, submittyng our
selves unto it with due obedience, loving it heartily with a fervent and
unfeigned affection, having it so imprinted in our hearts, that we may follow it
and conform our lives wholly unto it.


The minister. Do all these things lie in our power?


The child. No verily, not one of them all: but God woorketh them in our
hearts, in rhys wise by his holy spirit.


The minister. Is it not required of our part, that we take pain, and do our
diligence both to hear and to read this doctrine which is set forth unto us?


The child. Yes forsooth: and first it is requisite, We must give diligente
labor to learn gods word.
that euerve man privately in his own house give himself to the study of this
word: but principally every man is bound to haunt duly al such sermons as be
made in the congregation of Christ, for the better understanding of this his
doctrine.


The minister Think thou then that it is not enough that every manne do
give diligence to read gods word in his own house, unless they come also
together to hear it preached openly?


The child. I think so: at the least way if God of his goodness do provide
such means that we may hear it.


The minister. What is the reason?


The child. Because our savior has set and established this order in his
church, Ephe. 4.
not to the end that. ii. or three only should observe it, but as a general
order for all men: and he has like wise declared that this is the only way to
build his church and to preserve the same: let us therefore every one be content
to have recourse to this rule, and not become wyser then our master.


The minister. Is it then a thing necessary to have pastoures and ministers in
the congregation?


Pastors or ministers in the church are necessary.
The child. Yea very necessary: and at their mouths men are bound to receive
the word of the Lord with all humble obedience: so that whosoever does set
light of the^, Matt. 10. Luke 10.
and regard not to hear their sayings, they contemn also Jesus Christ, and
deuyde themselves from the fellowship of his flock.


The minister. Is it sufficient that we have been once instructed by their
means: eithe else must we hear their doctrine continually?


The child It is nothing if a man begin well, unless he continue still in the
same: for we must keep us in Christ's schole, and continue still his scholars
unto the end: and for that cause he has ordained Ministers in the church to
teach us continually in his name


The minister. Is there no other mean besides his word, 46. Sunday.
by which God shows himself unto us?


The child. God has ordained and coupled the sacraments with the preaching
of his word.


The minister. What thing is a sacrament?


The child. A sacrament is an outward token of gods favor, Of sacraments
which by a visible sign does represent unto us spiritual things, to the e^d
that gods promises might take the more deep root in our hearts: and that we
might so much the more surely give credit unto them?


The minister. What? is this possible that a visible and a material sign
should have such virtue to certifye our conscience?


The child. No, not of it self, but God has ordained it forsuch an end.


The minister. Since it is the proper office of Gods holy spirit, to seal
and imprinte the promises of God in our hearts, how can thou attribute or give
this property unto the sacraments?


The child. There is a great difference between the one and the other: for
gods spirit is he alone, who in very deed is hable to touch and move our
hearts, to illuminate our minds, and to assure our consciences, in such
sort that all these ought to be accounted and reputed his only works, so that
the whole praise and glory hereof ought to be given unto him only: yet this
notwithstanding, it has pleased our Lord to use his sacraments as certain
mean aids or instruments thereof, according as it seemed good unto him,
without diminisshinge (in the mean time) any point of the virtue and woorking
of his spirit.


The minister Thou meaneste then that the efficacy or virtue of the sacraments
does not confyst in the outward elemente or visible sign, but so far forth
as it pleases God to move the conscience therwithall by the working of his
spirit.


The child I mean even so: according as it is gods pleasure to work by
means by him ordained without any derogacion thereby to his glorious power.


The minister. What moved God to institute such instruments or means?


The child. He ordained them to help and counforte our weak nature: The
sacraments were ordained to help our infirmity.
for if we were wholye of a spiritual nature, as the angels are: then we were
apt to consider both God and his manifold graces or been fites, after a
spiritual manner also: but for so much as we are clogged, with earthely bodies,
it was needful for us that God did institute sensible signs, to represente
unto us spiritual and heavenly things: for otherwise we could not so well
comprehend them. Moreover it is necessary for us that al our senses be
exercised in his holy promises, that we might be the better stablyshed in the
same.


The minister. Since God has ordained his sacraments for our necessity: it
were a point of arrogancye and presumpcion to think that they might be as
well left of, as used.


The child. Ye say truth: so that whosoever does willingly forbear the use
of them, The sacraments are necessary.
estemyng them as things more then needs, and of no importance, he
dishonoreth Jesus Christ, he refuses his gracious benefits, and does
willingly quench his holy spirit.


The child But what sure certitude of gods grace be the sacraments hable to
give: seeing both the godly and wicked do receive them?


The minister. Albeit the infideles and wicked do make the grace (which is
offered and presented unto them by the sacraments) void, and to stand them in
none effect: yet it follows not that their office and property is such for all
that.


The child How is it then, and when is it, that the sacraments do produce or
bring forth their operacion and effect?


The child. When a man receives them in faith, when the sacraments take
their effect.
leaning only unto our savior Christ and his merits, seking nothing else but
him in the^.


The minister. What meanest thou by saying that we may seek nothing else but
Christ in them?


The child. I signify thereby, How Christ's ought to be soght in his
sacraments.
that we may not occupye our minds in considering the outward or earthly
signs, as though we would seek our health and salvation in the^: neither may
we ymagine that there is any peculiare virtue enclosed or hid in the^: but
contrariwise we do take the sign for an aid or help to lead and to direct
our minds straight into heaven, to the intent that we may there seek our
savior Christ, and al health and goodness in him alone.


The minister. If faith then be required in the ministracion of them, how may
it be that they are ordained and given unto us to strengthen and stablishe us
in the faith, and to assure us of gods promises?


The child It is not enough that faith be once begone in us for a time, The
sacraments be means to nouryshe our faith.
but we must still nourishe it, and mayntaine it, so that it may grow daily,
and be increased in us. For the nourishement, strength and increase therefore
of our faith, God has given us the sacraments containing his merciful
promises, the which thing Saint Paul declares, Romans 4.
sayng that the use of the^ is to seal or-print the promises of God in our
hearts.


The minister But tell me: is not this a token of infidelity, when the
promyses of God be not sufficient of themselves, to give us certain assurance,
unless there be some visible sign as an aid joined unto them?


The child. Verily as ye say, it is a token of a little slender and weak
faith, and yet of that sort the faith of the most part of all the children of
God is: Gods children are not fully perfect in this life.
and notwithstanding they cease not therefore to be called faithful, albeit
they have not as yet attained unto the perfection thereof. For so long as we
live in this world, there abides continually certain remnauntes of unbelief
in our flesh: and therefore we must endeavor by all means continually to
profit and increase in faith:


The minister. How many sacraments be there in the church of Christ? 48.
Sunday.



The child. There be but.ii. How many sacraments there be.
which be commune unto all men, and which Christ himself ordained for his
whole faithful flock.


The minister. What be they?


The child. The sacrament of Baptism, and the holy Supper.


The minister. In what points do they agree, and wherein dyffer they, the one
from the other?


The child. Baptysme is as it were an entree into the fellowship or
congregation of God: Of baptism.
for it witnesses certainly unto us, that whereas we were before strangers
from God, he does now receive us into his family and houshoulde. The Supper of
the Lord is a sure witness or testymonye unto us, that God wvll nouryshe, and
refreshe us with food: even as a good master of a house, studieth with
paynefull dilygence to sustain and feed such as be of his houshoulde.


The minister. To the end that we may understand them both so much the
better, The signification of baptism.
let us consider them a part one after another: first what is the right
sygnificacyon of Baptism?


The child. The significacion thereof stands in. ii. points: first our lord
represents unto us herin, the remissyon of our sins: secondarely, Ephe. 5
Romans 6.
our regeneration or new birth in spirit.


The minister. What similitude or agreablenes is there between water and those
things, 49 Sunday.
whereby it may be thought meet to represente them?


The child. First the remission of sins is a manner of washing, The mystery
of the water in Baptism.
whereby our souls are cleansed from their fylthynes: even as the uncleanly
fylthe of our body, is washed a way with water.


The minister, What say thou concerning the other point of regeneration?


The child. Because the beginning of our regeneration stands in the
mortyfvcation of our nature, that is to say, in the killyng of our affections:
and the full accomplishynge of the same consists in that, that we become new
creatures as touching our co^uersacio^ through the spirit of God therefore the
water is powered upon the head, to signifye that we are dead or buried: Wherefore
the water is powered on the head.
and that in such sort, that our risyng again into a new life, is
therwithall fygured, in that that the pouring of the water is but a thing of a
very short continuance and not ordained that we should be drouned herby.


The minister. Thou meanest not that the water is the thing where with our
souls be washed?


The child. No: The water does not cleanse us, but the blood of Christ only.
1. Ihon. 1. 2. Peter. 1.
for that belongs to the blood of our savior Christ alone, which was shed
to the e^de that al our fylthe and uncleanness might be clean wipt away: and
that we might be counted pure and without spotte even before God: the which
thing then takes effect in us, what time our consciences be sprinkled
therewith by Gods holy spirit: but the sacrament does testifye and declare
it unto us.


The minister. Why then, meanest thou that the water stands in no other stead
unto us but as a figure?


The child. It is such a figure as has the verity and substance of that
thing which it signifies, The water is not a bare sign: The promise is joined
to it.
joined unto it: for God is a true keeper of his promise and deceaueth no man,
wherefore it is certain that remission of sins, and newnes of life is offered
unto us in baptysme, and that we receive the same there.


The minister. Is this grace received indifferently of all men?


The child No, for diverse through their perverse mind and unbelief, do
refuse this free offer, whereby it stands the^ in no stead: nevertheless the
sacrament loses not his propertye, for it offers this gift unto them also:
albeit that none feel the comfort thereof, but only the faithful.


The minister. What thing is that whereby our regeneracion is wrought in us?


The child By the death and resurrection of our savior Christ: whereby we
are renewed in spirit.
for his death stands in this stead unto us, that by it our old Adam is
crucified, and our synnefull nature is (as it were) buried, so that the
affections and desires thereof bear no more rule in us. As touching the other
part (which is the newnes of life) to use a new conversation in obeying Gods
will and following his ryghteousnes, that we obtain by his resurrection.


The minister. How is it that we obtain this grace in baptysme?


The child It is given unto us in that that Christ does there garnish and
deck our souls with the garmente of his holy spirit if if so be that we make
not our selves unworthy of his promyses which be there given unto us.


The minister. As touching our part, what is the right using or receauyng of
baptysme?


The child. The right use thereof stands in these two: faith and repentance,
that is, wherein the right using of baptism slandeth.
in that we be sure that we have our consciences cleansed in the blood of
Christ. And in that we both feel in our selves, and make it known to others
by our works, that his spirit abides in us, to mortyfye our affections
and desires, and so to make us ready to do the will of God.


The minister. Seeing al this is required in the right using of baptism, 50.
Sunday.
how is it that little children be baptized?


The child. I did not mean that faith and repentance ought always to go
before the ministracion of this sacrament, The haptisme of infantes.
for that is only requisite in them that be of age, and discretion: so that it
is sufficienre if the little children show forth the fruits of baptysme when
they are come to sufficient age to know it.


The minister. How wylt thou prove, that there is no inconvenience in this
doing?


The child. For in like manner circumcisyon was a sacrament of repentance,
Deu. 10. and. 30. Iere. 4. Romans 4.
as Moses and the Prophets do wyttnes: and also a sacrament of faith, (as
saint Paul teaches) and yet God did not debar and exclude little children
from the receyuyng of the same.


The minister No, but art thou able to prove sufficiently, that there is as
good reason they should be received to baptism, as that the other should be
circumcised?


The child. Yea, The promises which were made to the Jews only, are now
offered to al men.
for the reason is largely as sufficienente: for the same promyses which God
did make in time past to his chosen people of Israel, are now extended with
much more euydente declaration into all coasts of the world.


The minister. And follows it therefore, that we must use also the sign?


The child. Yea, if we will consider the thing effectually: For Christ has
not made us partakers of that grace, which belonged in time paste to the
children of Israel, to the intent he would in us dimynishe it and deal it
more sparyngly, or that he would make it now more doubteful or less known
than it was before: but rather to the end, he would show forth his goodness,
not only more euidentely, but also more plenteouslye.


The minister. Do thou coumpt then, that if we did deny baptysme to little
children, the grace and goodness of God should be dymynished and darkened hy the
coming of Christ?


The child. Yea surely: for we should be by that means destytute of the
express sign of Gods bountyfull mercy toward our children, the which
thing, they that were under the law had: and in very deed this thing serves
highly to our comfort, as to the stably shynge of the promise which has been
made unto us from the beginning.


The minister. Thy mind is then, that forsomuche as it pleased GOD in old
time to declare himself to be the sauyoure, yea of little children, and that he
thought it also good to seal his favorable promise in their bodies by an
outward sacrament and mark: that therefore it is very good reason, that there
be no less tokens of assurance after Christ's coming, since the self same
promise co^tinuynge still is reiterate, and more openly uttered, as well by
word as deed.


The child. Yea: and moreover it seems a thing worthy of notable
reprehencyon, if men would do so much wrong unto children, as to deny
them the sign, which is a thing of less price, since the virtue and
substance of baptysme belongs unto them, which is of much higher estimacion.


The minister. For what consideration, ought we to baptize little children?


The child. They are christened in token and wytnes that they are enherytours
of the blessing of God, To what purpose children are baptized.
which is promised to the lynage of the faithful: to this end, that when they
come to age, they should be instructed what the substance and meaning of
baptism is, to profit them selves thereby.


The minister. The 51. So^day
Let us now speak of the Supper: and first what is the signyfycacion thereof?


The child. Our lord did ordain it to put us in assurance, Of the lords
Supper.
that by the distribucio^ of his body and blood, our souls are nouryshed in
the hope of life everlasting.


The minister. Why is it that our Lord represents unto us his body by the
bread, and his blood by the wine?


The child. To sygnyfye unto us, Christ offers to us his body by the bread.
and his blood by the wine.
that even what property the bread has toward our bodies, to were, to feed
and sustain them in this transytorye life: the self same proper tie also his
body has touchi^g our souls, that is, to nourishe and refresh them
spirytually. And in like manner as the wine does strengthen, comfort, and
quicken the body of man: even so his blood, is our full joy, our comforth, and
spiritual, strength.


The minister. Doeste thou mean that we must be in deed partakers of the body
and blood of the Lord?


The child. Yea verily, I mean so: The only stay of our trust.
for since the whole trust and assurance of our health and salvation does
consist in the obedience which he has performed unto god his father: (in that
that God does accept it, and take it as if it were ours in deed) we must
first needs possess him, seeing that his benefits do not belong unto us,
until he have first given himself unto us.


The minister. Why? did not Christ give himself unto us what time he gave
himself to be crucified, to the intent that thereby we might be brought into
the favor of God his father, and be delivered from damnacion?


The child. Yes, but that does not suffyce, unless we do receive him withal,
in such sort as we may feel in our consciences the fruicte and efficacye of
his death and passion.


The minister. Is not faith the ready means to receive Christ by? After what
sort we receive Christ.



The child. Yes forsooth: not only by that that we believe that he dyed and
rose again to deliver us from everlasting death, and to procure us also
everlasting life: but also by that that we feel by faith, that he dwells in
us, and is joined with his members, to the end to make us partakets of al his
graces and benefits because we are unto him united and made all one.


The minister. Have we not Christ joined unto us, 52 Sunday
so that we become partakers of his benefytes, by no other means than by his
Supper?


The child. Yes verelye: 1. Cor. 1.
for we receive Christ with the fruicion of his benefits, at the preaching of
the gospel, (as. S. Paul witnesses) in that that our lord Jesus does promise
and certifye us therein, that we are bone of his bones, and flesh of his
flesh: Ephe. 5
and again that he is the bread of life which came down from heaven to
nourish our souls: and in an other place, Ihon. 6.
that we are one with him, Ihon. 17.
even as he himself is one with his father, and such like.


The minister. What is there more to be had in the sacrament? or to what use
does it serve us besides?


The child. This is the difference, that Christ and his benefits be more
evidently, lively, and plenteouslye, set forth unto us: for albeit that our
savior Christ be in very deed exhibited unto us, and is made ours by
baptism also, and by the preaching of his word, that is but in a part as it
were, and not fully.


The minister. What is it than briefelye, that we have by this sign of bread?


The child That the body of our Lord Jesus, what does the sign of bread
teach us.
for so much as it was once offered up for us in sacrifice, to bring us in to
gods favor, is now given unto us, to assure us that we are partakers of this
joyful reconciliacion.


The minister. And what have we by the sign of wine?


The child. It assures us, what is signified to us by the wine
that as our lord Jesus did shed his blood once on the cross for a full price
and recompense of al our sins: even so he now gives it unto our soul to
drink, whereby we should not doubt to receive the fruit and benefit thereof.


The minister. By these thy aunsweres, I gather that the lords supper does
direct, and as it were conduite us, to the death and passion of our savior
Christ: to the intent we may be partakers of the virtue and profit thereof.


The child. It does even so: for even then when he suffered, the only and
everlasting sacrifice was offered up for our redempcio^. Wherefore there
remains now nothing else, but that we should have the fruits thereof.


The minister. The supper then was it not ordained to offer up the body and
blood of our savior to God his father?


The lords supper is not a sacrifice. propiciatorie.
The child. No: Christ alone is the everlasting bishop. Hebru. 5. Mat. 26.
for there is none but he alone unto who^ that office belongs, for so much as
he is the everlasting sacrificer: but the charge that he has given unto us
is, that we do receive his body, and not offer it.


The minister. Wherefore be there.ii. 53. Sunday
signs institute?


The child. Our Lord did that to help thereby our infyrmite: The ordeining
of two signs was for our wekenes.
signifying that he is as well the drink as the meat of oursoule: to the end
we might be content to seek our nourishment fully and wholly in him, and no
where else.


The minister. Does the second sign (which is) the cup, belong indifferentely
unto al men?


The child. Yea, and that by the commandment of our savior Christ, contrary
whereunto we mayein no wise do.


The minister. Receive we in the supper only the tokens of the things before
rehearsed? either are they effectually in deed there given unto us?


The child. Forsomuche as our Savior Christ is the truth it self, it is
nothing to be doubted, that the promises which he made at his supper, be not
there in deed accomplished, and that which is figured by the signs is truly
performed: so then according as he there may promise, and as the signs do
represent, theris no doubt, but he makes us partakers of his very substance,
to make us also one with him, and in one life with him.


The minister. But tell me how this may be done, Now we receive Christ in the
supper.
seeing the body of our savior Christ is in heaven, and we are here as
pilgrims on the earth.


The child. Verily it cummeth to pass by the woonderous and unsearchable
workynge of his spirit who joins easelye together things being far a
sundre in place.


The minister. Thy mind is then, that his body is not presently included in the
bread, neither his blood contained within the cup.


The child. No not a whit: what is to be done if we will receive the substance
of the sacrament.
but clean contrary wise, if we will have the substance of the sacrament, and
the very thing which is signified thereby: we must at the receiving thereof lift
up our hearts into heaven, where our savior Christ is in the glory of his
father, from whence we have sure hope that he will come for our redemption: and
therefore we may not search him in these corruptible elements, as if he were
presently there.


The minister. So then thy judgment is, that there be two things in this
Sacrament: the substance of bread and wine, which we see with the eye,
touch with our hand and feel, or sauoure with our taste: and also our
savior Christ by whom our souls are inwardlye nouryshed


The child. You say truth: Pleadges of our resurrection
and in such sort that we have therewith also a sure token, and (as it were) an
earnest penye of the rysyng again of our bodies, in so much as they are already
made partakers of the sign of life.


The minister. How ought this sacrament to be used? 54 Sunday.



The child. Saint Paul teaches the right manner of the vsyng thereof: 1.
Cor. 11.
(which is,) that every man examine himself before that he come unto it.


The minister. Wherein ought a man to try and examyne himself?


The child. He must considre whether he be a true membre of Christ our
Savior.


The minister. Whereby may a man have sure knowledge thereof?


The child. If he have a faith or right confidence in Gods promises, The
sure tokens of a true Christian.
being inwardlye sorye for his sins, and do love his neighbor with an
unfeigned charity, not keeping in his heart any rancoure, hatred, or debate.


The minister. But is it requisite to have a perfect faith, and perfect
charity?


The child. We must needs have both the one and the other, sound, right, and
not counterfaited: but to speak of such a perfection, as unto which nothing
can be added, a man shall not be able to find it in the whole multitude of men:
so then this supper had been a thing ordained in vain, if none were mete to
come to it, unless he were thoroughly perfect.


The minister. By this saying, our imperfection does no whit hinder us from
cumming thereunto?


The child. No verily: but rather contrariwyse, it should stand us in no
stead, if we were not imperfect, for it is as an help and succor, against
our infyrmitye.


The minister. Do these two sacraments serve to no other end, but to
supporte and bear up our imperfection?


The child. Yes, they are also very signs and badges of our profession: that
is to say, by them we protest openly that we are the people of God, and make
open profession of our christen relygyon.


The minister. What shall we then judge of him that refuses to use them?


The child. We ought not to count him a christen mane: for in so doing he
refuses to confess or knowledge himself to be a christian, and what is that
else, but as it were covertly to refuse Christ?


The minister. Is it enough to receive them both, once only in our life
time?


The child. Baptism was ordained to be received but once, wherefore it is not
lawful to be christened again: but it is other wise to be thought of the
supper.


The minister. What is the reason thereof?


The child. This: How it is that we receive the supper oftimes though we may
be but once baptized.
by baptysme God doethe bring, and receive us into his church: and when he
has once received us, he declares also to us by the supper, that he will
feed us continually.


The minister. To whom belongs the minystracion of baptism, 55. Sunday.
and of the Lords supper?


The child. Unto them who have taken charge to preach openly in the church:
To whom the ministracion of the sacraments do belong
for the preaching of Gods word and the ministracion of the sacraments be
things ioynctely belongyng to one kind of office.


The minister. Is there not a substancyal proof to be brought for this?


The child. Yes verily: Mat. 28
for our Lord gives special charge to his Apostles, as well to baptyse as to
preach: and as touching the supper, he gives them iniunction to follow his
exaumple: now he did the part of a minyster, in that he gave and distributed
it to others.


The child. The pastors, who be the mynysters of the sacraments, ought they
to receive indifferently every person that comes?


The child. As touching baptism, who ought to be shut out from the supper.
forsomuche as there be none in our time baptized but little children, there
ought to be no choice used: but as concerning the supper, the minister must
have so much dyscrecyon as to refuse to give it to them that be utterly
unworthy.


The minister. Wherefore?


The child. Because that otherwise the supper of the Lord should be defiled
and dishonored


The minister. But yet our Lord admytted Judas to the holy supper,
notwithstanding his wickedness.


The child. Yea, wherefore Judas was admitted to the supper.
for his wickedness was hitherto hyd. and albeit our Lord knew it right
well, yet was it not notoryous and known unto men.


The minister. What way is to be used then toward the hipocrites?


The child. The minister ought not to exclude a^dshut out them, as unworthy:
but he must tarry until it shall please GOD to make their close wickedness
known.


The minister What if he himself know, or if he be prieuely advertised of any
such?


The child. That is not a sufficient cause for him to deny them the supper,
unless he have the thing tried by suffyciente proof: and there with the
judgment of the congregation.


The minister. Is it then meet to have a polytyke order touching this matter?


The child. What else? if the congregation be well ordered: there must be
certain appointed to watch, and take dyligente heed for such open crimes as
may be committed: and they having auctorytye, ought in the name of the whole
congregation, to inhibite such as be by no means mete, neither can be
partakers thereof without the dyshonoure of God, and the offense of the faith
full.


The end of the instruction of children in the faith.
THE MANNER TO EXAmine children before they be admitted to the Supper of the
lord.
First the Minister asks. IN whom do thou believe?


The child answers. I believe in god the father, and in Jesus Christ his
son, and in the holy ghost: and look to be saved by non other means.


The minister. The father, the son, and the holy ghost, be they any more then
one god?


The child, No, although they be distinct in person.


The minister. What is the effect of thy faith?


The child. That god the father of our lord Jesus Christ, (and so by him of us
all) is the beginnynge and principal cause of all things: the which he
governs in such sort, that nothing can be done with owte his ordinance, and
providence. Next, that Jesus Christ his son, came down into this world, and
accomplished all things which were necessary for our salvation. And ascended
into heaven, where he sits at the right hand of the father, that is, that he
has all power in heaven and in earth. And shall come again from thence to
judge the whole world. Forthermore that the holy ghost is very god, becawse he
is the virtue and power of god, and impri^teth i^ our hearts the promesses made
unto us in Jesus Christ. And finally that the church is sanctified, and
delivered from their sins through the mercies of god, and shall after this
life rise again to life everlasting.


The minister. Must we serve God according as he has commanded, or else as
men's traditions teach us?


The child. We most serve him as he has taught us by his word and
co^manndementes, and not according to the commandments of men.


The minister. Can thou keep gods commandments of thy self?


The child No verily.


The minister Who then does keep and fulfill them in thee?


The child The holy ghost.


The minister. When God then geuethe thee his holy ghost can thou parfytely
observe them?


The child No, not so.


The minister. Why? God does curse and reject all such as do not in every point
fulfill his commandments.


The child. It is true.


The minister. By what means then, shall thou be saved, and delivered from
the curse of God?


The child. By the death and passion of our lord Jesus Christ.


The minister How so?


The child. Forbecawse that by his death, he has restored us to life, and
reconciled us to God his father.


The minister To whom do thou make thy prayers?


The child I pray to God in the name of our lord Jesus Christ our aduocat and
mediator, referring all my prayers to that scope, which Christ our savior has
left us as a most sufficient and absolute rule.


The minister. How many Sacraments are there in Christ's Church?


The child. Two, Baptism, and the lords Supper.


The minister. What is meant by Baptism?


The child. First it signifies that we have forgiveness our sins by the
blood of Christ. Secondly it sets before our eyes our regeneration or new
spiritual birth.


The minister. What signifies the Supper of the lord?


The child. That by the spiritual eatinge and drinkinge, of the body and
blood, of our lord Jesus Christ, our sowles are norished unto life
everlasting.


The minister. What do the bread and wine represent, in the lords Supper?


The child. This, that as our bodies are norished therewith: so our sowles are
sustained, and norished with the virtue of Christ's body and blood, not that
they are enclosed in the bread and wine, but we must seek Christ in heaven
in the glory of God his father.


The minister. By what means may we attain unto him there?


The child. By faith, which gods spirit works in our hearts, assuringe us
of Gods promises made to us in his holy gospel.


Thend.

