Of the life or conversation of a Christen man, a right godly treatise, written
in the latin tongue, by master John Caluyne, a man of right excellent
learning and of no less godly conversation. Translated into English by Thomas
Broke Esquier Paymaister of Dover. An: M.D.XLix. The first day of January.

Matthew. v. Let your light so shine before men, that they may se your good
works, and may praise your father which is in heaven. Luke. xix. Be doing
till I come. Ephesians. vi. b: walk as children of light, for the fruit of the
spirit consists in all goodness righteousness and truth Ia. ii. c. show me
thy fayeth, by thy worckes.

Thomas Broke, unto the Reader,
GRace and peace from God the father, through our lord Jesus Christ, be with
the (Christen Reader) and with al ye love our Lord unfeignedly, Amen. The right
godly, and no less famous clearke, Master John Caluyne, wrote in the laten,
this treatise: of the conversation of a christen man. Which little work to
have been made in the treasury, or store house of God, it does so evidently
apere: that for me, to spend time in the commendation of it, it were but
superfluous. This much only I will say: it so sets forth, and paynteth
before our eyes, what is the office or duty of a christen man: yea how in all
things, and at al times, we ought to be have our selves: that who ^o shall
atte^tiuely, read this work, cannot be deceived in iudginge whether he him
selue be a christian man or not, neither shall need, to seek elleswhere besides
the scripture a perfct rule, to order his life by. Here may we learn that it is
not inoughe for us, Gal. v. a. vi. d,
to have received the outward sacrament of Baptime, Ga. iii. d.
but that now, we must also put on Christ, Ephe. v. a. To, vi. a.
and express him in our co^uersacion. For, as many of us, as are christened or
baptized into Christ, are baptized into his death, that, as Christ was raised
up from death, through the glory of his father, even so we should walk in a
newenes of life. Bat. vii. c
For, not all that say, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the kyng^ome of heaven, but
they which do, the will of the father, which is in heaven. Here may we also
learn, yt we ought not to reke^ our selves christians, when our deeds decleare,
that we know not, what Christ has done for us: neither to think it
sufficient to say, or wene, yt we have faith, when contrariwise, our deeds
show, Ia. ii. d
yt we have only a dead faith, or rather no faith at al, but a vain opinion
yt lacks the fruits of a lively fayeth, which are here by the auctor
euedentlye set forth. For faith (as S Paulle discribeth it) is a sure
confidence of things hoped for, Heb. xi.
and a certentie of things, which are not seen. Thou hear (good reader) ye
faith is a sure co^fide^ce (or, as it were, an having already) of things to be
hoped for, and a certentie of things, yt are not seen. Yea, for how ca^ it be
otherwise, Ga. iii. d
when we through it, Ephe. iii. d
be made the children of God: and have Christ him self, thereby dwelling in
our hertes? ca^ it be, ye God has made the his son, and yet keeps it so
secret from the, yt thou can by no fatherly touch nor tender kindness of
his, have any experience or certentie thereof, no more the^ his enemies, the
ungodly persons have: who, though they have often times in this world ple^tie
of riches, very good health, high estimation, multitude of friends, and an idle
and long life, yet are they the children of Satan and carry about with them an
unquiet conscience? Esa. xlviii. d.
Nay nay, i. Cor. ii. d.
God hydeth not so, from his children, his fatherly love, for by his spirit in
us we know what he has given us, yea and we know and believe the love which
he has unto us, and know that he dwells in us and we in him, neither
dwells his son Christ idly in our hertes. For if thou have a true faith
and not an opinion only, thou have now a certentie that thou art the child of
God, i. Io. v. c.
and (as S. John says) that you art translated from death into life. i. Io.
iii. c.
Now therefore, that thou may feel, and know, yt thou have a true faith, a
sure confidence, and an infallible certentie, in thy heart of gods mercy
toward the, I will, by discribing unto yt, what I take a true says to be,
induce the thereunto, after the pore talent of my knoweledge: Faith is such a
trust in the promise of God, as works in a man's heart an ernest repentance
of sin and a desire to do Gods will. Act. ^, ^ Io iii, b.
Ask thou what that promise is? I answer: it is this, that all that believe
in him, have remission of their sins and everlasting life. Or else: faith is
such a sure confidence in the mercy of God the father (promised unto us, for
his son Christ's sake) as works in our heart, an earnest lothyng of our
sin, and a love to his commandments. Or else, to discribe it more at large,
faith is such a sure confidence in the mercy of god (which for Christ's sake he
has promised to all that believe in him) that it not only feels our sins
to be so vile, yt for them God might by his justice, worthily dampne us: but
also feels gods mercy to be so great (first, in the free forgeuenes of
our sins: then, in the enrichynge of us, with the enheritaunce of
everlasting life: and thirdly, in keepynge and defendyng us in this wretched
world, until the time of our departure from hence) that it works now in our
hertes toward God (eue^ of a tha^kfulnes for his goodness) such an ernest
love, as, not only repents our sins, and abhors them, but also hertely
desires to do the will and commandments of God. Here thou see (good
christian) a lively faith and a sensible or feelynge faith. But here considre
well that first herein is required of the, yt thou know, the vileness of thy
sins to be such as God by his justice might worthily dampne the for the^ for,
Romans vi. d.
before thou seeste the^ so vile and dangerous, thou canste never be forgeuen
of them. And this is also very true, that thou can never to much consider the
vileness of sin, so far forth as thou dispeireste not of the mercy of God.
Now that thou maiste therefore consider thy sins and the greuousnes of them,
Lu. v. ^. Mat. ix. b.
it is expediente that thou look in the most holly and ryghtuous law of God,
for it shows unto the, boeth what thou should follow, and what thou
should fly from, if thou shall therefore truly compare thy life and it
together thou shalt undoubtedly find thy self, innumerable ways a sinner by
transgressynge against it, and may see the vileness of thy sins to be
excedyng great by the punishemente that is thretened theru^to, which is the
curse of god and everlasting dampnation. Unto the knowledge of sin, Romans
iii. c.
by the law are brought, not only the faithful, but also the wicked. But in
deed it works in either of them contrary effects. For, the ungodly, when by
the law is declared unto them, the ryghtuous will of God, and the punishment
that is due to the transgressors of the same: they streighte way, either
utterly despair of the mercy of God (which of al sins is the greatest) or
else turning their hertes away from that holy law, Genesis iiii. b. Mat. xxvii. a
which should be a light to their feet to lead the^ unto ryghtuousnes, they
give the^ selves over into security of sin, murmuring against God the geuer
of ye law. Ephe. iiii. c. Romans iiii. c
But contrawise the faithful when by the law they know them selves innumerable
ways tra^sgressours, are the^ by it, Romans iii. c Gal. ii. d.
as by a scole master, brought unto Christ. But the^, where before by the
law they saw their offenses to be heinous and great: Heb ix. d. To. vii. d
now by the price ye was paid for their ransom, the vileness of the^ appearth
more horrible and grievous a great deele: so that they are utterly dismayed,
and as it were in an ecstasy, thereby. But considre and mark well that then they
harken and give ear most gladlye unto Christ. Ie. iii. d.
Who says: he yt believes in me, has everlasting life. O most merciful
promise and most confortable news. He says also: Mat. xi. d.
come unto me al ye ye labor and are lade^ and I will refreshe you. O most
ioyefull voice, to the^ that are burdened with fear of hell pains for the just
reward of their sins there own consiences witnessinge against the^. But how
will he refreshe them? for soth meruelously, Romans ii. c To. iii c. d John. iii,
c Mat. x. c.
for he promises unto all that believe in him first, fre forgeuenes of their
sins: secondarily, after this life everlasting joy: and thirdli, whil they
live in this wretched world, to keep and defend them so, that one here of their
head, cannot be minished without his will and pleasure: Romans viii. c
yea and therwithal promyseth to turn unto the beast for them, what so ever
thing, at any time shall come to them, either by the devil, or any other evil
creature. Me think I here the say: if I were assured to atteyne this great
mercy at Gods hand, then should I have great joy in my heart: I answer,
considre dearly beloved, two things: first, Io. iii. c.
that it is God that has made the promise, who is faithful, and can no more
cease to be true, i. Cor. i. ^. Nu. xxiii. c.
then he can cease to be god, therefore he will fulfill his promise for his
truethes sake. Mat. xi. d I^ iii. c. To. iii c. d Mat. x. ^. Ga. iii. d
And again considre, yt he has made that promise to all that believe it to be
true. Now why do thou not then, believe it? thou doubtest peradventure of
thy faith, lest it be but an opinion: well I shall tell the, or rather, I have
told the already, and now once again I do tell the, how you may know and
feel whether it be a lively faith. For if, it work in thy heart a lothsomnes
of thy sin, and a desire to do gods will 'then art thou sure that thou
haste a true faith: for thy repentance on the one side, and thy desire to
work rygtuously, on the other side, do testify it, yea and that you have
already, and (as I may say) or ever thou art ware, obtained gods mercy,
for, they are the right fruit of a lively fayeth, To, v. a.
yea only, Ephesians. v. c
of such a fayeth, as through the holy ghost, has apprehended mercy, and of
such a conscience, as wherein, the same spirit, who is the earnest of ever
lasting life, does dwell for ever. Haste thou not now cause then to have
great joy in thy heart? To. xiili. c
nay rather how can thou but have exceeding great joy, and Phi. iiii, d.
the peace of god also which passes all understanding? Thus thou see ye
faith, is not a vain opinion, but an assured co^fide^ce, of things hoped for,
and of things which are not seen. And what is more to be hoped for, or less
can be seen, then God him self? then faith is an assurednes and a certentie
of the having of god, yea of having God to be our merciful father, our
tenderly loving brother and savior, our continually present, and most
strongest comforter. Him therefore, of a thankfulness for his mercy and
goodness, let us al our life long so unfeignedly love, that our life and
conversation may declare that we have thus tasted of his plentuouse mercy,
and in is holy ryghtuous and good law, let our meditation be day and
night. And now that we may the more redilie walk therein, behold we have
here before our eyes, the conversation of a true beleuer or Christian, so
godly, so playnlie, and so learnedlie, set forth, that if we shall express
the same in our selves, we shall declare, that we are not feyned Christians,
but worthy warryours of Jesus Christ, against self love, sin, and Satan.
And furthermore we shall show, yt Christ by fayeth, dwells in our hertes not
idelly, but workynge, yea myghtelie workynge, being never unlike unto him
self, so that now thou shall, in thy life and conversation, show thy self
an other certain Christ unto thy neighbor, in so much, that where Christ
came into this world, and bestowed him self upon us, and to our uses, even
so Christ will now, do the same in us: as once he dyed for us, even so, will
he kyndle in our hertes, a love to our brethren and that in so sure and
feru^et wise, that we shall rejoice, not only to be evil spoken of, or to
suffer loss of goods or imprisonment, but allo (if need require) to suffer
death for their sakes. Thou wylt say, I am weak and frail I am not able to do
thus: no. But have faith and thou shalt be strong, Io, xvi. g.
for all things are possible to him that believes, and thou art able to do al
things thorugh him that strengthens the and dwells in the. Therefore
merueilous things shall he do by the, his instrument. For, as when Christ was
conuersaunte here on earth, he let nothing pass him, whereby he might
express his great love toward us, even so now, Christ shall likewise be
minded in the: as the^, for our love, Christ was scourged, crucified, and put
to open shame, even so now, Christ shall be pacient and sufferynge in the: as
then Christ most liberally, gave him self and all that he had, unto us,
while we were sinners and his enemies, even so now Christ shall be boeth
liberal and merciful in the. And as then, Christ desired the cross,
thirsted for our salvation, and humbled him self to very death prayinge for
his enemies: even so now Christ in us, shall neither seek his own profit,
nor think on aduengmente, nor disspise such as be weak, but shall become all
unto all men, that at the lest way he may win some. And by this means shall
we stop the sclau^derous mouths of the enemies of fayeth, which say that
the teaching of it, distroyeth and takes away al good worckes, so that
oneles they be altogether ungodly, as they shall se the good worckes of the
faithful, they shall glorify our father which is in heaven. Now to make an
end, I have (good reader) translated a good part more, of the institution of
a Christen man written by this noble clerk, which I can not now put in
print, partly through mine own busynes, as well at Dover as at Calleis, and,
partly by reason the prynter has presently no leisure for the same. Yet, by
the grace of God, I will shortly (the Kings majesty's busynes geuynge me
leave) put forth either the, same or part thereof, to the edifiyng (I trust (of
the christen congregation. In the mean time, the grace and peace of God be
with the, and with all, that thorugh the hate they have to sin, do longly
look for, and patiently abide, the coming of the great shepherde of our
souls, Jesus Christ. To whom with the father and the holy ghost be praise
world without end. Amen.

(...) or largly to entreat hereof peradventure the time may here after
serve. But this present work, requires that we write a true plain
doctrine, as co^pendiously as we can. But as philosophers have certain ends
or causes of justice and honesty from whence they derive and fetch the
particular properties, and the whole company of virtues: so scripture in this
thing lacks not an order, but keeps in writynge a goodly manner and way,
yea much more certain then all the philosophers. Herein only is the
difference, that, in so much as they were men desirous of honor, they coueted
to atteyne to an exquisite finenes of teaching, that they might thereby boste
out the excellency of their wit. But the spirit of god, because it does
teach without such affectation and desire, observes not so exactly, nor so
often, a co^pe^dious way. But yet, that such ought not to be contemned or
despised of us, it tells unto us sufficie^tli, whiles the same scripture
teaches unto us otherwhilste the same.

Furthermore this lesson, which the scripture teaches, and whereof we speak,
goes chiefly upon two points. The first is: that the love of ryghtuousnes,
to the which else (by nature) we be nothing inclined, should be by little and
little, poured in, and grafted, into our minds. The second is: that there
should be prescribed unto us a rule, which may not suffer us, in the seeking
and desiryng of ryghtuousnes, to be deceived. The scripture has mani ways,
and the same very good, to praise righteousness, and as touching the^, we have
in other places spoken our mind before. But yet some we will here touch
briefly. Upon what foundation may it better begin then when it admonishes
Leui. xix
us that we must be sanctified or holy, i Pet. i.
because our god is holy? For when like dispersed sheep, we were scattered
abroad, and put in sundre in the dangerous deserte of this world, he got us
up again, yt he might gather us together unto him self. When we hear mention
of the ioynynge of god and us together, we ought to remember, that holiness
ought to be the couplinge or knyttynge together of him and us. Not, because we,
through worthiness of our own holiness may atteyne to have fellowship with
him, when rather we must cleave first unto him that we may be thoroughly
washed and sanctified with his holiness: but rather because it greatly
perteyneth to his glory, that we have not fellowship with iniquity and
fylthynes. Wherefore it teaches us this to be the final cause, and intent, why
we were called, and whereunto we must always have respect, if we will answer
unto God, when he calls us. For, to what purpose serves it, that we are
plucked out, and delivered from the wickedness and fylth of the world, in the
which we were drowned, if we suffer our selves all our life long to be
sowsed and waltered in them?

Furthermore it admonishes us also, that we may be counted for the people of
God, Ephe. v. et alibi.
we must dwell in the holy city of Jerusalem: the which, as god has
consecrated it, and made it holy for him self, so it is a detestable thing,
that it should be defiled with uncleanness of thenhabitauntes of it Where upon
these sayings rise: they shall dwell in the tabernacle of God which walk
without spot and love righteousness. Psalm. xv
etc. And that it may the better awake us out of our sleep, Ra. vi.
it shows that god the father, as he made an atonement between him self and
us by his son Christ: so has he showed unto us a pattern and example, unto
the which, he will have us to be made like. Go to, let them, who think that
moral philosophy and exhorting unto good manners, is taught, as it ought to
be, only of philosophers, find me a more excellent rule or order in writing
among them all concerning the same. For they, when they go earnestly about to
exhort unto virtue, allege nothing for it but that we should live according
to nature. But the scripture fetches the ground of exhortation from the head
spring, while it not only commands us to order al our life according to
gods will, who is boeth the gyuer and owner of it: but after that it has
taught us, that we have grown out of kind, from the true beginning and law
of our creation, it brings in Christ, through whom we are come again into
the favor of god, to be set forth unto us for an exsample, that we might
express his likeness or be like unto him in our conversation. What can thou
require of more efficacy the^ this one thing? Mala. i.
Nay rather what canste thou ask more then this alone? Ephe. v.
For, if for this cause we be chosen of our Lord for his children, i. John.
iii.
that our life should represent Christ the bond and cheine of his chosing
of us: Ephe. v.
then except we now faithfully give, and wholly betake our selves unto
ryghtuousnes, Hebr. x.
we do not only traitorously fall away from our creator, i. Cor. vi
through shameful breaking of our allegiaunce and promise made unto him, i.
Pet. i.
but also we forsake him to be our savior. i. Cor. vi.vii.
Furthermore the scripture takes occasion to exhort us by considering as well
of all the benefits of god, John. xv.
as also of every part of our salvation, whice it shows unto us as thus.
For so much as god is become a father unto us, we are worthy to be reproved of
to much unthankfulness, except we again behave our selves as children unto
him. Ephe. v.
And since he has purged, purifyed and made us clean in the bath of his own
blood, yea, and by Baptism made us partakers of this bath: it becomes us
not a fresh, to be defiled with filthynesse. And sith he has graffed us into
his own body, we ought diligently to beware, Colo. iii.
lest we, which are his members, sprynkle upon us any spot or stayne: and
sith he him self, who is our head, is ascended up into heaven, it is meet
that earthly affections being set aside, i. Cor. iii.vi.
we should with all our hertes desire to be there. And sith the holy ghost
has made us holy Temples unto God, ^i. Cor. vi.
we ought diligently to endeavor, that the glory of God, through us, might
beautifully appear. And we ought not to commit any thing wherbi we might
vnhalow and defile our selves with the filthiness of syn. And since both our soul
and body are appointed unto heavenly incorruption, i. These. v.
and to a crown that can not fade, we must manfully endeavor, that they may
be kept and preserved pure, and incorrupt till that day. These (I say) be
the best foundations to make a good conversation withal, the like whereunto,
thou shall not find to be taught of all the philosophers, who in the
co^mendynge of virtue never ascend above the propre worthiness or goodness of the
only natural man.

And here is a good place to rebuke the^, who having nothing that pertains
to christ, but only his name and outward badge, covet nevertheless to be called
christians. But how ca^ they for shame brag of his holy name? Truly none has
any thing to do with Christ, but they which have received the right
knowledge of him through the word of his gospel or joyful tidinges, no, for
the Apostle denies all them ryghtly to have learned Christ, which have not
learned and are taught to cloth the^ selves whyth him, Ephe. iiii.
the old man (which is corrupted by following disceitful desires) being cast
away. Therefore wrongfully and without cause such pretend to have knowledge
of Christ, although they talk of the gospel never so learnedly, and can
rehearse it on their fyngers ends. For it is not a doctrine of the tongue, but
of conversation and living. Neither is it apprehended or learned by
understanding and memory only, as other disciplines and sciences are, but it
is then only received and learned, when it possesses the whole soul, and
fyndeth a seat or restyng place in the inward affection of the heart.
Therefore either let them cease with the dishonoring of god, to bost them
selves to be that they be not: or else let them behave them selves as
disciples or scholars not unmeet for such a master. To the doctrine wherein
our religion is contained, we have given the chief praise, for surely our
salvation begins at it. But the same must be poured into our heart, and must
go forth yea and must so transform and change us into it, that it be not
unfruitful in us. For if philosophers be justly angry and with great
displeasure drive from their company those, which, because they profess the
art which ought to teach an honest conversation, do turn the same into
Sophistical babbling: upon how much greater cause, shall we abhore these
trifling Sophisters (I mean the swynyshe Godspisers, and not Gospellers)
which pass upon no more, but on the only having of the Gospel outwardly
in their mouths? the efficacye and strength whereof, ought a hundredth times
more, then the cold precepts or exhortacions of the Philosophers, to enter
into the innermoste affections and desires of the heart, to abide still in the
soul, and to work in the whole man. Yet I require not that the manners of a
christen man should send forth nothing, but the perfect Gospel, which
thing nevertheless boeth ought to be wyshed, and also is needful to be
gone about. But I require not so straightly the euangelical perfection or that
perfectnes which the Gospel teaches, that I would not acknowledge for a
christen man, who so ever has not yet fully atteyned thereunto. For so all men
should be shytte out from the congregation of Christ. For there is no man
found which is not yet set far from it. And many have yet gone but a
little way forward, who nevertheless should vnworthylye be abiected, or
cast away. What then? let the mark be set up before our eyes, to the which
let us direct and as it were, level our minds and endeavors* let the
prick be appointed before us, whereunto let us both endeavor and strive to
attain for thou may not make such a perticion with god that of the things
which are prescribed unto the by his word, part thou will take upon the, and
part thou will pass over at thy pleasure. For in the first place of all he
commendethe or setteh before us every where, innocency, as the chief part of
honoring of him by which name, he understands a true simplicity of mind
which is without color and fayninge, contrary whereunto is a double heart. But
because no man has so much strength in this erathly prison of his body, that
he hastes thitherwarde with so much swyftnes of runnyng, as he ought to do: and
the greater number are oppressed with such weakness, that they stacker and
halte, yea and creep on the ground and therefore go little forward, let us
therefore go, every man according to the lytletyne power he has, and follow
after in the journey begone. No man shall goo so vnfrutfullye, but he shall at
the least way, daily rid some part of the way. Let us therefore not cease
to do thus, that so we may daily profyt some what in the lords way, and let
us not be discouraged because of little success. For truly though we go not so
fast forward, as we desire: yet the labor is not lost, when this day is
better the^ yesterdaye, so yt with true simplicity we direct our eye unto our
mark, and desire to hit the prycke not folishely flateringe our selves, nor
wynking at our fautes, but with a continual desire endeuoryng that we may wax
better and better in our selves, until such time as we come to that goodness,
which in deed al our life long we seek for, and follow to get, and only then
shall lay hand upon it when having cast of the weakness of our flesh, we
shall be received into the full feloweshyppe of him.

Thoughthe law of god has a very good way and well ordered to teach a man how
to lead his life: yet it pleased our heavenly master by a more exact way,
to fashion his, according to the rule, which he had before fetfurth in the law
And the beginning of that way is this: that it is the duty of the fayethfull
to give unto God there own bodies a lyuelye sacrifice, To. xii.
holy and acceptable, unto him: and here in to consiste the true honoring of
him: whereupon ryseth cause to exhort men that they become not like unto this
world, but be transformed and new shapen by the renewynge of their minds,
that they may prove by experience what the will of God is. Now this is a
great thing, that we are dedicate and offered unto God, to the entente that
hereafter we should not think, speak, ymagyne, nor do any thing, but unto
his honor. For a thing being once holy and offered unto him, is not (with
out his great dishonor) applied to profane uses. Wherefore if we be not our
own but the lords: both what error ought to be fled from, and to what end
all the accio^s or doings of our life, ar to be directed, it appears. We are
not our own, therefore neither our own reason nor will may rule in our
counsailles and deeds. We are not our own therefore we may not appoint to our
selves this end, to desire the thing, that after the flesh or only natural
man, is good for us: we are not our own, therefore, as nigh as we ca^, let us
forget our own selves and all things that be ours. Again we perteyne unto
the Lord, therefore let us live and dye unto him: we perteyne unto the
Lord, therefore let his wisdom and will, rule al our Acts or deeds: we
perteine unto the Lord, unto him therefore, as to the only most lawefull
end, let all the parts of our life enforce to atteyne. O how much has he
profited, which having learned that he him self is not his own, has taken
away the rule and government of him self from his own wisdom to bring it to
our Lord? For as this to destroy men is the most hurtful pestilence, when
they obey unto them selves: so the only haven of health is, neither to
understand nor to will any thing by them self, but alonly to follow the Lord
goinge before them. Let this therefore be the first step: a man to depart
from him self, to thentent he may apply the whole strength of his wit, to
obey unto the Lord. I speak of obedience, not that lies in the obedience of
words only, but whereby the mind of a man being voyed of the very wisdom
of the flesh or natural man, turns it self al together unto the beck and
pleasure of Gods spirit. Of this transformyng or turning which Paul calls
the renuinge of the mind, though it be the first enteraunce into life, all the
philosophers were ignorant, for they say that reason only rules man, only
reason they think worthy to be heard: finally to reason only, they give and
suffer the gouerme^t or rule of their deeds. But christian philosophy bids
reason to give place, to obey and be in subjection, unto the holy ghost that man
do not now him self live, but rather bear Christ lyuinge and reigning in him.

Thereupon follows also this other thing that we seek not the things which
be ours, but which are, according to the Lords will, and make for the setting
forth of his glory. And this is a token that a man has much profited, when,
having in a manner forgotten our selves, yea the consideration of our selves
set aside, we bestow our minds or desires, faithfully upon the Lord and his
commandments. For when the scripture commands us to leave of, the private
consideration of our selves, it does not only race out of our hertes gredy
desire of having and affectynge of power, and the favor of men, but also
plucketh out by the rotes, ambition, and al desire of the praise of men, and
other more secret pestilences. Truly it is meet that a christen man be so
joined and so prepared unto God, that in all his conversation, he count that he
has to do with God. By this means, as he shall call back all that he has, to
gods will and pleasure, so will he refer the whole purpose or entente of his
mind, reuere^tly unto him. For he that has learned to behold God in the
doing of al thing, therwythal turns away from al vain things. This is
that deniynge of our selves, which Christ, as soon as he had called his
disciples, with so great diligence taught them: the which after it has once
taken place in the heart: first leaves no place either for pride, or disdain,
or bragging: and after that, neither for covetousness, nor unlawful lusts, nor
lechery, nor wanton delicates, nor for other mischiefs, which come of the
love to our own selves. Contrarywyse, where so ever it reygneth not, there
either most fylthy vices, without shame, straye about: or else if there be
any outward show of virtue, the same is corrupt with the naughty desire of
praise. For show me a man (if thou can) who, except he have according to
gods commau^demente forsaken him self, wol freely, or for naught, exercise
goodness among men. For who so ever has not been of this mind, they have
followed virtue for praise sake. But who so ever at any time among the
philosophers co^tended ye virtue was to be desired for it self, and not only
for the goodness that was in it, were nevertheless puffed up with arrogancye
that it appears, they desired virtue for none other cause, but to have matter
to be proud of. But god so little deliteth, either in the flatterers of the
common peoples ears, or in their proud hertes, that he tells them that they
have received their reward in this world and makes harlottes and other open
sinners nerer to the kingdom of heaven, then such. But we have not yet
declared with how many and how great hynderaunces a man is let from
desirynge of goodness, so long as he has not denied him self, for it was
truly said long ago: a world of sins to be hid in the soul of a man. And
thou cast find none other remedy, but that first deniynge thy self, and
setting aside the consideration of thy self, thou do apply thy whole mind
to seek those things, which our Lord requires of the: and to recke^, that
therefore only they are to be sought for, because they please him.

Furthermore this denial of our self has respect partly unto men, and
partly or rather chiefly unto God, for when the scripture byddeth us so to
behave our selves among men, that we give honor unto them before our
selves: and that with great faythfulnes, we bestow our selves al together
upon doing good to them: it gives those commandments which our mind can
not understand, except it first lack his own natural wysedom. For every
man thinks, through the blyndnes wherewyth we al run headlyng into the love
of our own selves, that he has a just cause to auaunce him self, and to
despise al other in respect of him self. If God have given us any thing
which is not to be repented of, we putting our delectation therein, by and by
are high minded, and do not only swel, but also well nigh bruste for pride. The
vices wherewith we abound, those we both diligently hide from other men, and in
flattering of our selves, reckon them light and small, yea and other whyleste
delyght in the^ as though they were virtues. And if we see the same gifts in
other men, which we wondre at or be in love with in our selves, yea let them
be greater then our own: yet, lest we should be constrained to take them for
our betters, those gifts we do through malice make worse and diminish: but if
there be any faults in them, then being not contented, with rigorousnesse and
bitter tauntynge, to harken and spy them out, we will maliciously make, of ant
eggs, ant hills, and set out the matter at length. Whereupon ryseth this
lordly presumption with every one of us, that as being by a common law exempt,
eueri one would above the rest excel or be taken higher. There is no man
else but either without cause we fierflie defye him or else at the least
way, as our inferioure, set naught by him. In deed pore men give place to
the rych, the comminaltie to the nobility, the servants to the masters,
and, the unlearned to the learned. But for all that, there is no man, who
inwardly and within his breast, nourishes not some oopinion of excellency.
Thus every man in flattering of him self, does execute or bear a certain
kingdom in his heart. And attributing to much to him self, that he may ye
better stand in his own co^ceite, he takes upon him authority to judge other
men's wits and manners: but if it come so far forth yt they once contend or be
at words, then their poison breaks out. For mani in deed pretend much
meknes or ge^tlenes so long as they find al things pleasant, and after their
own minds.

But how many be there, that when they be once pricte or stirred up, use such
manner of moderacio^ or humblenes? And there is no other remedy but that this
most noisome pestilence of blind love and of love to our selves, must be
plucked up, out of the bottom of our hertes, eue^ as also by the doctrine of
the scripture, it is pulled up. For, this we be taught, that the gifts, which
god has given us, we ought to remember not to be our goods, but the fre
gifts of god, of the which, if me^ be proud, they thereby utter their
unthankfulness. Furthermore by the continual considering of our sins, we
call our selves back unto lowlines of heart. Thus there shall nothing rest
in us wherefore we should swel for anger or pride, but there shall be great
cause, why we should throw down our selves or bear our selves low. Again
we be commanded, what so ever gifts of God we behold in other, so to
reverence and behold those same, that we also honor them, in who^ they be.
For it were a part of great wyckednes, to take away from them that honor,
which our Lord has vouchsaued to give them. But at their vices, we are
taught to wink, not that through flattery we should nourish or maintain
them: but that we should not, because of them, speak reproach of those
persons, unto whom we ought to bear frendshippe and honor. Thus shall it
come to pass that with whom so ever we have to do, we shall bear our selves
not only lowly and gently: but also familiarly and fre^dly: eue^ as
co^trariwyse, unto true mekenes thou shalt never come any other way, but if
thou shall have thy heart tempered boeth with the throwynge down of thy self
and also with the reuerencynge of other.

Now to do thy duty in seking of thy neighbors profit how hard a thing is
it? Surely onles thou depart from the considering of thy self, and after a
sort put of thy self, as a man does his garmente: thou shalt bring nothing
to pass hear. For, how can thou show forth the works, which Paul
teaches to perteine to charity, except you forsake thy self, yt thou may
bestow thy self all together upon other? love or charity (says he) is
pacient and suffers long and is courteous, love inuieth not, love does not
frowardely swells not, deals not dishonestly, seeks not her own, is not
provoked to anger. If this one thing be required of us, that we seek not our
own the^ there must no little strength be brought unto nature, for it
inclines us so to ye only love of our own self, yt it suffers us not so
sone without regard, to over pass both us and ours, that we may care for
other men's profit, yea and wylyngly depart from our own right, that we may ye
more diligently look to our neybours profit. But the scripture to lead us, as
it were by the hand, to it, warns us what so ever gift we obtene of our
Lord, the same to be committed unto us, upon this condition or covenant, yt it
should be bestowed on the common proffite of his congregation: and therefore
the lawful use of all gifts, to be a liberal and gentle departyg from them
unto other. And there could be devised no rule more sure, nor any exhortacion
for the keaping of it more strong, then where we be taught, all gifts and
qualities which we are endued with, to be sent us of God or put of trust
into our hands, on this condition, that they should be bestowed unto our
neighbors profit, yea and the scripture yet goes further, while it compares
the gifts, which every man has, unto the powers or qualities which the
members in a man's body are endued with. Never a member has his power, for him
self alone, neither applies it to his own private use: but powers it forth
upon his fellow members, and takes no profit thereby, but that, which comes
forth, for the common commodity of the whole body besides. So a good man what
so ever he can do: he owes that ability to his brethren: providing no other
wise privately for him self, but that his mind nevertheless, is bente unto the
common edifiyng or mayntaining of the congregation. Therefore let this be a
short rule unto marcie and compassion: what so ever God has endued us with,
whereby we can healpe our neighbor, thereof we, to be stuardes, who are bound
to yield accomptes of the orderyng and bestowynge of it, moreover yt only to be
the right ordering and bestowynge of it, which agreth with the rule of
charity. So shall it come to pass that not only we shall always join the
desire of our neighbors profit with the carynge for our own, but also shall
regard it before our our own. And that we might know that this is the law
of true ministrynge or vsinge of what so ever gifts we have received of God,
in times paste he made the same law also in the smalleste gifts of his
benignitye. For he commanded the first fruits of corn to be offered unto
him: whereby the people should bear record, that it was not leful for them to
take any fruit of such goods, as were not first consecrated or applied to
gods use. Wherefore if the gifts of God be sanctified or holy unto us then
only, when we have dedicate the^ with our hands unto the geuer of them: it is
plain that the abuse is evil which sauoreth not of such dedicacion or
appliyng of them, Yea but thou will say, that thou shouldeste to no purpose
make our Lord rich with the departiuge from thy substance unto him. Well
then, sith thy liberality can not extend unto him, P^. xvi.
as the prophet says, thou must exercise the same upon his holy ons or
saints which live here in earth. Furthermore, lest we should be weary of
well doing (which thing by and by must else needs come to pass) unto this
must be added also, the other thing, which the Apostle speaks of:
charity, to be pacient and not sone stirred to wrath. Our Lord commands us
to do good universally to al men, of whom a great part, are very unworthy, if
they should be esteemed after their own deserts: here the scripture healpeth
by a strong reason, when it teaches, that of us is not to be regarded, what
me^ of them selves deserve: but in all men the Image of god is to be considered,
unto whom we owe al honor and love. But yet in those of the household of faith,
the same image is most diligently to be had in reverence, because yt by the
spirit of Christ it is renewed and repared.

Therefore what soever man be offered unto the, which lacks thy healpe, thou
haste no cause why thou should let to bestow thy self upon him. Say he is
an Alyaunt or a stranger, yea but our Lord has set upon him a mark, which
thou ought to be acquaynted or familiar with: say he is in no estimation nor
any thing worth, no but our Lord shows him to be one, unto whom he has
vouchsaued to give the honor of his lykenes. Say thou art not bound to
him, by any benefit that he has done the: no but god has, as in his own
stead, appointed him in such sort, that toward him thou shouldeste consider
and (as much as in the lies) requite, the whole goodness and great benefits,
for the which thou art bound unto God him self: say he is unworthy that
for his cause thou shouldeste labor any thing at all: but the image of God,
whereby he is set before the, is worthy, that thou should give unto him thy
self and all thine. Now if he have not only deserved at thy hand no goodness,
but has also provoked the with wrongs and hurt yet is this no just cause
wherefore thou shouldeste seace boeth to love him and to execute the works of
love upon him. He has (thou will say) deserved far other wise at my hand:
Yea but what has our Lord deserved? Who while he bids the to forgive him
what so ever he has offended against the, wol surely reckon it even as
forgiven to him self. Surely by this one way, men come unto that thing,
which is not only hard unto man's nature, but also utterly against it, to
wit: that we love them which bear hatered unto us: that we requite euylles
with goodness: and render blessings for curssynges: by this one way (I say)
we atteyne thereunto, if we remember, that we may not regard the malice of
men, but must behold in the^, the image of god, which Image, their sins
being hid and blotted out ought to allure us hertely to love and embrace the^
for the beauty and worthynes of it.

Therefore this mortification shall then only take place in us if we have
feruente charity, but he has so, not that alonly does execute all the offices
or parts of charity, though he pretermitte none: but he that of a pure
affection of love, does the same: for it may be that some man pay fully to
all men, what so he owes them, so far as belongs to the outward duty,
and nevertheless he may the whylest be far from the true manner of paying. For
thou may se sone who will seem very liberal, who yet give nothing which with
a proud cou^tenau^ce, yea and loftines of words to, they cast not a man in the
teeth with afterward. And unto this calamity in this our unhappy days is it
come yt almost no alms, at the least way of ye most part of me^, is given
without rebukes or tau^tes which frowardness or churlyshnes ought not to be
tolerable, no, not among Ethnikes, for of christian me^ there is somewhat more
required, then that they shall show a cherefulnes in their countenance and
with familiarity of words, cause the thing which they of duty do, to be well
taken. For first they must behold the parson of him, who^ they perceive to
lack their help, and even so must pity his necessity, as if they them
selves felt and suffered it, so that, by the feeling of mercy and compassion,
they may be no otherwise desirous to healpe him, then if he were themself. Who
soever being thus encouraged, comes to healpe his brethren, he not only,
shall not with any lostines or casting in the teeth, defile the doing of his
duty toward his neighbor, but also, shall not despise his brother to whom he
does a good turn, as one that lacks his healpe, nor shall therefore bring
him in subjection, as one greatly bound unto him for it. No more surely then
either we rejoice that a membre of our body is sick, when to the healpynge
of it, the rest of the body labors: or else think that membre specially
bound to the other members, because it has had more labor done unto it then
it has requited. For the commune ministration of the members, in doing of
their offices one to an other, is believed to have nothing that it looks to be
recompensed for again. But rather reckeneth the same to be a payinge of that
thing, which by the law of nature is owing and due. By this means also
shall it come to pass that he shall not think him self quitte or discharged
which has done in one manner his duty, as it is commonly wont to come to
pass, that a worldely rich man, after he has given somewhat of his to the
poor, he will appoynte unto other men the other charges, as though they
nothing belong to him But thus rather shall every man think with him self,
that how great so ever he be, he owes him self to his neighbors, and that he
must appointe no other time of seacynge to show mercy and friendship unto them,
but only the^ when he lacks power and ability to do it which ability how
much it is, is to be limited after the rule of charity.

Now let us declare the chief part of deniynge of our self, which we said
did perteyne unto god. Mani things are already spoken touching it, which to
repete were in vain. It shall suffice to speak of it so far forth as it
teaches us equanimitie and patientnes, that is to say, a quiet moderation of
mind yt is neither extolled in prosperitye, nor disco^forted in adversity,
but takes al things in good part. In the beginning therefore, in ye seeking
either of the commodity, or the tra^quilitie of this present life, ye
scripture calls us hither, that resyninge or geuinge over unto our Lords
pleasure, our selves and al ours, we shall give unto him the taming and bringing
under of the affections or desires of our heart. To the desiringe of riches and
honors, to the coveting of power and bearing rule, to the heaping together of
substance, and to the gathering together of those folishnes, which seem to
further a man to high estimacion and pomp, we are almost mad for very
gredines, and our appetite is insaciable. On the other side against poverty
reproach and loss of estimacion or poor state, we have a wonderful fear
lothsomenes and hatred, by the which we be pricked forward, to the remouynge,
and putting of them away, by all possible means. Here upon it is good to se
what unquiet minds they have how many crafts they assaye, and with what
cares they werie and tire them selfs, who so ever order there lives by there
own counsel only, to thentente on the one side they might attain to those
things, wereunto the desire of ambition and covetousness carries them: and on
the other side, that they may escape poverty and low estate. Of good men
therefore, lest they should be wrapped in such snares, this way is to be
holden. First that they neither desire, neither hope neither think, that the
way to prospre and be rich, comes any other way, then by the blessinge or
gift of the Lord, and therefore let them saftie, and with a sure trust lean
unto it, and cast them selves upon it. For how so ever the flesh (or natural
man) thinks that he is very well able to help him self, whylest either by
his own diligence he labors for honors and riches: either endeuoreth by
study, or is helped up the favor of men: yet the truth is, for all that, that
al these things are nothing, and that we shall not prevail any thing either
by wit, or by labor, but only so far forth, as our Lord shall prospre both.
But contrariwise, ye only blessing of our Lord, fyndeth away thorough all
manner of lettes or stoppes, that it makes all things to come unto us with a
joyful and happy end.

Further more, be it so that we could without his blessinge, get some honor
and wealth (as we daily se the ungodly to be heaped up with honors and
riches) yet for so much as they which have gods curse lyinge upon them,
taste not the least part of felicity that may be, the^ without his blessinge,
we shall attain to nothing but that, which turns to our hurt. Further more,
that is not to be desiered which makes me^ more wretched therefore if we believe
yt all the way to prosper consists and is reposed in the only blissinge of
God which being absent, al kind of myserye and calamitye abides us, it
rests also, that we labor not gredelie, to attain to riches and honors,
vsinge either the finenes of our own wit, or our own diligence, or trusting
to the favor of men, or hopinge in the folishe imaginacion of fortune: but
that we have always respect unto our Lord, that by his favorable goodness, we
may be led to what so ever degree or state, he has before appointed. Thus
first shall it come to pass yt we shall not by vnlaufulnes, gyle, and ill
crafts, or through rauyn, or extorcion, or the wrong of our neighbors,
run hedlynge to get riches, and come to honor: but we shall only follow those
fortunes or states, which shall not lead us away from innocence, for who can
hope to be aided with gods benediccion, while he uses disceites, robberies
and other sotelties and wickedness? For, as ye follows none but him that
thinks truly, and does rightfully: so al the^, of who^ it is desired, it
calls back from crooked thoughts and evil deeds. Also there shall be a
bridle cast upon us, lest we burn, with immoderate desire or gredines to
become rich, or left we ambitiously gape for honors. For how can any man
for shame, steadfastly believe that he is helped of God to get those things,
which he desires contrary to his word? for God forbid, that the thing,
which our Lord cursseth with his mouth, he should healpe with his blessing.

Finally if it succeed not after our desire and hope, we shall be kept back
yet from impatientnes, and shall not abhor nor curse, what so ever state we
be in, because we shall know, that to be a murmuring against God: by whose
appointment, riches, and poverty, reproach, and honors, are disposed. To be
short, he, which after that sort, which is spoken before, puts his trust
in the blessing of god, neither shall with deceitful means hawk for those
things which are wont to be outragiously desired of men (for with them he
shall think him self nothing to prevail) neither if any thing shall happen
prosperously, shall impute it to him self, and to his own either diligence,
either industry, either fortune, but shall ascribe it and give thanks
therefore unto God, the auctor and geuer thereof. And farther if other men's
wealth encreasynge, he little go forward, or rather go backwarde: yet shall he
bear his own state with more equitye and moderation of mind, then any
ungodly parson shall do a mean state, which alonly is not al together after
his mind, yea and shall have comfort wherein he shall take more pleasure and
quietness then in the highest degree either of wealth or of honor, because, as
it works for his salvation, so he rekeneth and believes his things to be
ordered of our Lord. And also godly minds may not alonly in this part have
that quietness and patience, but the same must be extended unto all chances,
whereunto this present life is subject, or in danger. Ttherfore no man has
ryghtly denied or forsaken him self, but he, which has so given over him
self all together unto our Lord: that he suffers all the parts of his life
to be ruled by his will and pleasure. But he which shall be so settled in his
mind, what so ever happen, he neither shall reckon him self wretched, neither
shall murmr against God complaynyng of his fortune or state. How necessary
this affection or mind is, hereupon shall appear, if thou considre to how
many casualties or sodeine chau^ces we be subject. A great meany of diseases
on every side assault us, otherwhylest rages the pestilence, otherwhylest
with the calamity of war we be cruelly vexed, some time the froste or hayle,
the hope of the year being put away, brings in bare^nes, which dryueth us
to penury, our wife, parents, children, and neighbors, be taken away by
death, our house is destroyed by fire. These be the things, at the chau^cyng
whereof men wish they had broken their necks, they cry out alas that ever
they were borne, they bid aue^geaunce upon al place and time, or cry out
harrooe, yea they braule with God and curse him, they are eloquent in vtteryng
blasphemies, they lay to his charge boeth unrighteousness, and cruelty. But the
faithful man, in these things also, must behold the mercy and very fatherly
love of God. Therefore, if he se his own house left alone, al his neighbors
being taken away, yet then he shall not cease to praise the Lord: but rather
shall turn him self to this thought: for all this the grace or mercy of our
Lord, which dwells in my house, shall not leave it desolate, or if his
corn, being blasted with lyghtenyng, or destroyed with cold, or beaten down
with hayle, he see famine to be at hand: yet for all that, he shall not be
discomforted in his heart, nor shall murmr against God: but in this sure
trust shall stand fast, thinking: we yet be in the Lords keepynge, and be
sheep bred up in his fold, he therefore will minister unto us fode, yea in
most greatest barennes. Or if he shall be visited with sycknes, he then shall
not be so overcome through the greuousnes of his sorrow, that he should break
forth into impatientnesse, and so should chyde or find fault with God. But
considering in the rod of god boeth justice and mercy, he will call him self
back to patient receyuynge of it. And finally what so ever shall happen,
because he shall know, that it is ordained by the hand of God, he shall take
it with a joyful and thankful heart. And shall not stubournly withstand the
commandment and pleasure of him, under whose power he has once willingly
throwe^ him self and al things that be his. First of all let be cast away
out of christen men's hertes the folishe and most miserable consolation of the
infidels: who, to strengthen the mind against adversities, did impute them
unto sudden chance and fortune, against which to murmr or to be angry, they
thought it folishnes, because it was in vain and to no purpose, for so much
as fortune, being blind, did wound them yt sorowed, as well as them that sorowed
not. But contrariwise, this is the rule of godliness or true honouringe of God:
to think yt the only hand of god, is the judge, or orderer, of both the
fortunes or states, to wit, of prosperity and adversity: and that he runs
not forth headlynge in a rage, without al consideration, but by most true order
of justice appoints, both the good things and the evil. Yea, and yet
higher, must a godly mind asce^d, to wit, thither as Christ calls his
disciples: yt every man take up his own cross. For who soever our Lord has
chose^ to his children, and has vouchsaued yt they should have fellowship with
his, they must prepare the^ selves to a life or co^uersatio^ very hard, full of
labor, unquiet and stuffed full of many and sundry kinds of euyls.

Truly it is the will of our heavenly father, to exercise his children after
this sort, that he may have sure experience or trial of them, yea begynynge at
Christ his first and only begotten natural son, he keeps the same order
and way, with all his children. For where he was his son before al other
beloved, and in whom the fathers mind was fully at rest and well pleased: yet
we see how he was dealt with all, not dayntely and wantonly, that it may truly
be spoken, not only that he was exercised with a continual cross, so long as
he dwelte upon the earth, but also that his whole life, was nothing else, but
the representation of a continual cross. Wherefore then do we go about to
rydde our selves out of that state or condition, into which it was necessary
that Christ our head should enter? specially, sith he intred into it, only
for our cause, to the entente that, eue^ in him self, he would show unto us
an example of patience? Wherefore the Apostle teaches that all the children of
God, Romans viii.
are appointed unto this end, to wit, to be made like unto Christ:
whereupon also this very excellent consolation comes unto us: that in hard
things and sharp, the which are counted unfortunate and evil, we suffer
with Christ: that even as he, from the hurlepole of al euylles, went into
celestial glory: so by sundry tribulatio^s we might be brought into the same.
Phi. iii
For thus says the same Paul in another place: while we learn to suffer with
him, we therwyth lay hand upon the power of the resurrection: and while we be
made like unto his death, we so be prepared unto the fellowship of his
resurrection. How much is this able to aswage and make pleasant, all the
bitterness of ye cross? yt the more we be aflicted with adversities and trobles,
ye more certe^ly our fellowship with christ is confirmed? by suffering with whom,
our sufferinges and adversities be not only made blessed or happy unto us, but
also they greatly help to the atteyning of our salvation.

Put hereunto, that our Lord had no need to take upon him the bearyng of the
cross, but did for our sakes testify and acknowledge, to the father his
obedience. But we have many ways need, to lead our life in a continual
cross, for, first, as by nature, we are to much inclined to attribute all
things unto our flesh or the only natural man: so except our weakness, as it
were with an eye, be showed unto us, we do sone esteem our own power or
strength, more then it is: and doubt not, what so ever may happen, the same
our strength to be able to endure it, yea and think that is it is invincible
against al dangers. Whereupon, we are lift up into a folishe and vain
confidence, or trust, of the flesh or natural man: wherein while we trust,
stoburnly, by and by, we wax proud against god him self, as though our own
powers were, at ye full, sufficient for us, yea, without his grace. This
arrogance or presumptuousnes can not better be beaten down, then when we
learn by expererie^ce, how much both weakness, and frailnes is in us. Therefore
either with reproach, or poverty, or loss of fre^des, or with sycknes, or other
calamities, he scourges us: which to sustain, we, as touching our own
power, are far unable, and so are overthrown therewyth And being so brought
low, we learn to call for the power of him, who only, under the heuye burden of
our afflictions, makes us to endure. Yea the most holy men or seintes here in
earth, how so ever they know them selves to stand by the mercy of God, and
not by there own strengthes, yet they trust to much in there own strength and
stedfastnes, except our Lord, by trial of the cross, do bring them into a
more inward knowledge of them selves. Because therefore, in prosperity, they do
flatter them selves, with an opinion of greater stedfastnes and patience, then
in deed they have, they be made humble by adversities, and so learn that it was
Ipocrisye. By such documentes (I say) when the faith full be warned of there
diseases, they atteyne to lowlines of heart: that castinge of the stoborne
confidence of the flesh or natural man, they may get them to the grace and
mercy of God. Furthermore, when they have once get them hither, they have
experience, and feel the presence of gods power, in the which, there is help
enough and enough again. And this is it that Paul teaches, where he says:
tribulatio^s to be get patience, and patience to be get trial, for where
gods promise is, that he will healpe the faithful in trobles, that do they
prove or feel to be true, when being strengthened by his hand, they
patientely endure the thing, which by there own power they were by no means
able. Pacieence therefore brings experience to godly and holy men, that our
Lord does in deed, when need is, give the healpe, which he promised them. We
se now, how many goodnesses attonce, come of the cross. For, turninge away
that opinion of our own strength, which wrongfully we take upon us to have:
and disclosinge our Ipocrisie, which makes us to delyghte therein: it
shakes of the parelous confidence of the flesh or natural man, and teaches
us, after we are so once brought down, to trust only in one God whereby it
comes to pass, that we nether be overcome, nor yet give over: but after the
victory there follows also hope, for so much, as our Lord, in fulfyllyng
that he has promised does ratefye stablishe and confirm his truth, touching
things for to come. Surely though there were no more causes then these, it
appears how necessary it is for us to be exercised with the cross. And it
is not a thing of small importance, the blind love of thy self to be wyped
away, that thou may be made well to know thin own wekenes and by feling of
thyn own wekenes, that thou may learn to distrust thy self, that you may
repose thy assured trust in god: and to repose, and lay up, thy sure trust in
God, that having his healpe you may persevere unto the end unvanquished: and to
persevere in his grace yt thou may know him to be true in his promises: and
to know assuredly, by experience, the certentye of his promises, that thy hope
thereby may be strenthened.

Our Lord has also another purpose why he afflicts and scouregth his: to
wete, that he may prove there patience, and may teach them obedience. Not
that they can yield to him any other obedience then that, which he him self
has given them: but so it pleases him, by evident documentes or examples, to
make the graces and gifts, which he has given to his lyuinge seintes or holy
men to be boeth known and honorable, lest they should lurk ydelly within
the^. Therefore, when he brings openly forth the virtue, and strength of
patience, wherewyth he has instructed his servants, he is said to try
their patience whereupon come these sayings: God proved Abraham, Genesis xxiiii.
and had sure knowledge of his godliness in that he had not sticked to slay his
own, only son, in sacrifice. And Peter teaches yt our faith is tried by
tribulatio^s, i. Pet. ii.
no otherwise, then gold is tried by fire in a furnes. Who therefore can say,
that it is not meet that the most excellent gift of patience, which the
faithful receive of God, be brought forth, to the intent it may be made
certain and evident? For else, men shall never esteem it, as it is worth.
Therefore if our Lord (lest the virtues, which he has bestowed on his
faithful should be hid in the dark, or rather should lie a side
unprofitably, and be lost for lack of occupiynge) does rightuously and well,
when he ministers matter, wherewyth to stir the^ up: then, the aflictions of
holy men rise on a good cause, yea for without it, they should have no
patience. I say also, that by the cross, they be taught obedience, because, so
they be taught to live, not after their own desires, but according to gods
pleasure. Truly if all things should follow after their own minds, they
should not know what it were to follow god. And this ( Seneca says) was the
old proverb, when men exhorted any man patiently, to bear adversity: follow
god. Whereby truly, they did signify, that then only a man came under gods
yoke, when he did offer his hand, or back, to his correction. Now then, if
it be good reason that we show our selves, in all things, obedient to our
heavenly father, we may not surely refuse, that by all manner of means, he
bring us in ure, to give due obedience unto him. Neither do we, for all this,
perceive, how necessary unto us this obedience is, except we also consider, of
how great strength and force, to cast of ye yoke of god, the wa^tonnes of our
flesh, or of the natural man is, after yt once it is a little softly, and
ge^tly handled. For it fares altogether with it, as with horses, but half
broken, which, if a few days they stand up pampered in the stable,
unlabored, afterward for wyldnes and fersnes, can not be tamed, neither
know they their ryder, whose government and pleasure, before they did some
what obey. And without fail, that thing is continually in us, which our lord
lame^teth to be in ye people of Israel. Deu: xxxii
For, being made fat and pampered with delicates, we wynche, and lashe out
with our heels, at him, who has fed and nourished us. In deed the
liberality, and kyndnesse of our Lord toward us, ought greatly to move
us, to consider and hertely to love his goodness. But saying our wyckednes is
such, that by his continual gentleness, we be the sooner corrupted and evil:
it is more then necessary, that our nose be holde^ to the grynstone, and we
kept in, by some correction, lest we break out, into such wa^to^nes. So
lest we wax ferse and wild, by to much abundance of richesse: lest set up
in honors we wax proud: or lest, puffed up with other gifts, either of the
soul, or of the body, or of fortune, we wax insolente and forgette our
selves: our Lord, as he forseeth to be expedient, meets us on the way, and
healpeth us: and with the remedy of the cross, subdueth and bridleth the
wyldnesse of our flesh, or natural man: and that sundry ways, even so
much, as is needful for every one of us. For neither have we all one
disease, or be in likewise payned in our syckenes, neither are we of like
difficulty to be healed. Where upon we may se that some have one kind of
cross, and some an other laid upon them, But for so much as the heavenly
phisitio^, desires the health and salvation of us al: he handles some very
ge^tly, and purges other some, with very sharp remedies: and so lets none
escape scotfree, or untouched, because that he knows, that al, yea every one
of us is sick.

Add hereunto, that our most merciful father has ne^e, not only to
preuente our infirmity, but also to correct often times our sins paste,
that he may make us to couche quayle, and may keep us in lawful obedience,
toward him. Therefore, as often as we be aflicted, by and by ought to come
to our mind, the remembrance of our life paste, so without fail, we shall
find, that we have committed, wherefore we are worthy of such chastismente.
Yet for all that, we may not take occasion chiefly, upon the considering of
our sin, to exhort unto patience, For, the scripture teaches us a far
better consideration, when it says, that by troubles we are corrected of the
Lord, i. Cor. xi.
to thente^t we should not be dampened with the world. Therefore in the very
bitterness also of our troubles, it is necessary yt we consider ye mercy, and
benignity of our father toward us: for so much as then also, he ceasseth not,
to work our salvation. For, he punishes, not to destroy, or kill, but rather,
to deliver from the damnation, which the world shall suffer. This thought will
lead us to that, which the scripture, in an other place, teaches us, saying:
my son refuse not the Lords correction, Pro. xvi.
neither think it long when you art reproved of him: for whom god loneth, he
chastineth, yea and loves him, even as a father does his child. Now when we
know, and considre that it is our fathers rod, is it not our parts rather
to show our selves obedient and tractable children, then by stubbournesse, to
do like desperate parsonnes, which are become hard herted in their
wickedness? our Lord does in deed destroy us, except, when we be fallen
from him, he call us again by correction. Hebr. x.
So that truly he calls us bastardes and not children, if we be without
correction. We be therefore very froward, and stubburne, if we can not suffer
and abide our Lord, whylest he declares his tender mercy toward us, and his
diligente care, which he has for our salvation. The scripture teaches this
difference, between them that believe, and them that believe not, that the one
sort, as vessels of cankarde and perboyled wickedness, by chastisementes,
become yet worsse and worsse, yea and more stubbourne: but the other, as
natural children, go forth unto repentance or amendment of life. Choose the
now, in whether numbre^ thou haste rather to be. But because, of this thing I
have spoken enough in an other place, being content to have but touched it,
whyppe and go: I will thereof now make an end.

Furthermore it is a special comfort, to suffer persecution for ryghtuousnesse
sake. Yea then, ought to come to our mind, how great honor, god vouchsaueth
upon us, whom he has so marked with the special toke^ of his own warryours.
And I say that not only they, suffer persecution for ryghtuousnesse sake,
which suffer for the defense of the gospel: but also they which suffer for ye
helpyng forth, and furtherynge of any manner of ryghtuousnes. Whether therefore
it be, in affirmynge the verity of God, against the lies of Satan, or whether
it be, in taking upon us to defend the good and innocent, against the wrongs
of the ungodly, that needs we must be an offense, slander and stomblinge
block unto the world, yea and be hated of them, and thereby also stand in
great danger of our life, or goods, or honor and estimacio^: yet for all
that, let it not be grievous, or sorrowful unto us in this point, to bestow our
selves upon God, and to give our selves unto him. Nor let us not think our
selves wretched in those things, in the which, he by his own mouth, has
pronounced us happy and blessed. Poverty in deed, Mat. v.
if it be esteemed in it self, is misery: and so is banishment, disdain,
imprisonment, and open shame: finally death it self, is of all other, the
gretteste calamity. But, when the favor of our Lord aspireth or comes
thereunto, there is none of these things, which turn not to our felicity and
great profit, Therefore let us be co^te^t with the true testimony of Christ:
and believe it, Act. iiii.
rather then the false estimation or judgment of the flesh or natural man.
So shall it come to pass, that by example of the Apostle, we shall rejoice, as
often as our Lord, shall count us worthy to suffer rebuke for his name
sake. For why? if we be Innocents and have clear consciences, and yet,
through the mischeuousnesse of the ungodly, be turned out, from our
substance: in deed, we be then, driven unto poverty among men: but even
that way, true riches grow unto us before God. If we be thruste out of our
doors, and cabbynes we therbi are received the farther in, into the noble
family of God. If we be vexed and troubeled: we take ye deeper rotes in Christ.
If we be distained with rebukes and open shame: we thereby have a large place in
the kingdom of God. Yea if we be slain: so is the enteraunce unto the blessed
life, opened unto us. Let us therefore be ashamed to have those things,
which our Lord has in so high estimacio^, in lesser estimacion, then the
shadow like and vain discetfull pleasures of this present life. For so much
now as the scripture does abundantly inoughe, by these, and such like
warnynges comfort and encorrage us, to bear, the shames, and the calamities,
which we sustain, for the mayntenaunce and defense of justice or
righteousness: we are to much unkind and unthankful, except we take them
willingly and gladly at our Lords hand. And that chefelye, because this is
that kind of cross, which specially perteyneth to the faithful, i. Pet. iiii.
wherebye Christ desires to be glorified or honored in us as Peter teaches*
But that same wyllyngnes, or gladness, which takes a way al fellinge of
bitterness and sorrow, is not required of us, for the Seintes, or godly men,
should have no patience in the time of their cross, except they were grieved
with doloure and anguyshed with heaviness. No, if there were no sharpenes in
poverty, no pain in sickness, no abashfullnes in open shame, nor any fear in
death, the^ what either stedfastenes, or moderation and patience were it, not
to pass, ye waging of a rush for the^* But, for so much as every one of
these, through a natural bitterness that is in them, greueth every one of us at
the heart, in this point the strength and valiantnes of a faithful man shows
it self: if, being proved with the felinge of such bitterness, yet, what so
ever he suffer, he manfully persistinge, abides it: in this point is patience
showed, if, being outragiously sterde up, yet by the fear of God, he be kept
back so yt he breaks not forth into any impacience: and in this thing
apeareth gladness, if wounded with sorrow and heuines a man be delyghted in the
spiritual comfort of God.

This conflict which, against the natural feeling of sorrow, the faithful
(while they heartily desire patience and moderacion) do sustain, ii. Cor. iiii
Paul elegantly discribeth in these words: we are troubeled on every side,
yet are we not with out shyfte: we are in poverty, but not utterly wytheout
somewhat: we suffer persecution, but are not forsaken therein: we are cast
down, nevertheless we perish not: Thou seeste yt to bear ye cross patiently*
is not to be inse^sible as a block, and to lack the felyng of all sorrows: as
the stoykes folyshely discribed, him to be a valiante, or strong man, which
layinge a side humanity, or the natural property of a man, should in
adversity and prosperity, in mirth and heuines, be like wise affected, or
minded yea, that like a stone should be affected or moved with nothing. What
goodness took they of this their high wisdom? for sooth they painted forth an
image, or representation of such a wisdom as nether was, nor can be found at
any time a monge men no, but rather, while they go about to have, to exact
and precise a patience: they did take away the strenght, or virtue, of it from
the conversation of man. Now also be among christians new stoykes, in whose
opinion, not only to mourn and weep, but also to be soroweful, or careful, is
sin. And this doctrine, for the most part, comes forth from idle men, who
occupiynge them selves more in the speculation or beholding of such things
then in doing of them, can bring forth to us nothing but such precepts.
But we have nothing to do with these iron like Philosophers, whom Christ our
Lord and master not only with his word, but also with his example, condemned.
For he lamented and wept, both for his own hurtes, and the hurtes of other,
and taught his Disciples no other wise. The world (says he) shall rejoice but
you shall mourn and weep. And lest any man should find fault therwt, a
co^mau^demte being put forth, he pronounced the^ blessed which mourn. And no
meruel for if al tears were reproved: what should we think of the Lord him
self? out of whose body tears, like blood tricled down? If every fear be
judged infidelity: in what place should we reckon that fear whereby we read
that he him self was not a littel a fearde, if all heuines myslyke us: how
shall it like us yt he confessed his soul to be heavy even unto death? I have
spoken these words for this cause, to call back godly minds from desperacio^
(I mean) lest straight way, they should give over the hertye desire or love
unto patience, because they can not put of the natural affection or feeling of
sorrow. Which desperacion or distrust must needs come unto those, which make
of patience an amasednes: and of a strong and steadfast man, a block. The
scripture gives praise to the seintes or godly men for their sufferau^ce and
patience, while they are so afflicted with yt hardness of evils, that yet they
dispeire not neither give over, and while they are so abashed in the betternes
of their pain, that yet therwithall they are endued with spiritual joy: and
while they are so oppressed with a^guishe, that yet, being chered by the
consolation of God, they take heart of grace unto them, this repugna^cie being
nevertheless in the mean time in their hertes, that on the on side, the feling
of their nature, feleth and abhors those things, which it feleth contrary
unto it: but on theother side, the godly affection or desire, labors and
stryueth, eue^ through these difficulties, to obey Gods will. This repugnau^cy
our Lord expressed when he said thus to Peter: John. xxi.
when thou waste young thou dyddest gyrde thy self, and walkedest whether thou
listed: but when thou art old, an other shall guide the, and lead the,
thither as thou would not. Surely it is not lykely that Peter, since it was
necessary that he should glorify or honor god by his death, was drawn
thereunto spite of his teeth or he resistynge against it. For tha^ his
martirdom should have had small praise. But, although with al reioysynge of
heart, he did obey unto the ordinance of God, yet, because he had not put of,
humanity or the very nature and property of a man, he was bound with a double
will. For, while, by it self alone, he regarded and considered the cruel
death, whereof he should dye: then, being smytten with the fear thereof, he
would gladly have escaped. But again, when he remembered that he was called
thereunto by the will of God: now the fear overcome and trodden under foot, he
went unto it gladly, yea and joyfully to. Therefore this thing we must
endeavor, if we will be disciples of Christ, that our minds may be taught,
so to wait upon God, and to obey him, that we tame and make subject all
contrary affections unto his ordinance. So shall it come to pass, that with
what soever kind of cross we be vexed, yea in the greatest anguishes of our
heart, we shall still keep patience steadfastly. For, the adversities shall
have their sharpness or pinchynges, whereby we shall be grieved: so, being
aflicted with diseases, we shall mourn and be unquieted, yea and desire health
to: so, being punished with poverty, we shall be wrong with the grief boeth
of carefulnes, and sadness: so, shall we be stryken with the sorrow of open
shame, vile estimation, and wrongs: and so, in burialles of our friends, we
shall pay the tears that nature owes. But yet this sentence shall always be
at hand. Well our Lord would have it thus, therefore let us obey his will. Yea
while we shall be presently stonge with sorrows, eue^ amongst our gronynges and
weepynges, needs must that same thought beat a stroke with us, which will
incline our heart gladly to bear and suffer those things, which are ye very
cause, why the heart is so grieved. But because we have grounded the chief cause
of patient bearing of the cross, upon our considering of the will of God, it
is to be showed in few words, what diversity there is, between the patience
of Philosophers and of christians. Few of the philosophers atteyned to the
knowledge, to understand, that by aflictio^s we are excercised of Gods hand,
and to think that it is our duty to obey God in this behalf. No, they bring
no other reason but this, because it is of necessity, or needs must be so.
But what is yt to say, but thou must give place to god, because thou labourest
in vain to resist him? for truly if we obey God, alonly because we must do
so: tha^, if we could otherwise do, we would no lo^gar obey him. But the
scripture bids us to consider a far other thing in the will of god, yt is to
say, first his justice and equity: and then the dilligent care of our
salvation. Therefore such as these be, are the exhortatio^s of a christian unto
patience: whither poverty, banishment, imprisonment, rebuke, sickness or loss
of friends, or what soever like thing trouble us: we must think yt none of
these things happen, without the beck and providence of our Lord: and that
God does nothing, but by most just order. For (alas) do not our innumerable
and daily offenses, deserve that we should be punished more greuouslye, and
with sharper scourges then these be, with which of his mercy we now are
plaged? is it not good reason that our flesh, and natural man, be tamed and
used as it were with a yoke, lest stubbournli, as the very property of it is:
it wax as wild, as ^ bucke of Sherewod? is not the justice and truth of God
worthy, that we should labor and take pain to know it? now if the undoubted
equity and ryghtuousnesse of God appears in our aflictions, we can not
without iniquity, either murmr or resist against them. We allow not now,
this cold song, or faynte excuse, saiynge: we will give place because we ca^
not choose, but rather this lively teaching full of efficacy, thynkyng thus,
we will obey, because it is wickedness to resist or murmr: we will patiently
suffer it, because impatience is a stubbournes against Gods justice. Now
because that thing, at the lest way pleases us well, which we think is for
our own health and advantage or goodness: in this behalf also our good father
comforts us, while, he affirms that, in that he aflicteth us with a cross,
he worcketh our health and salvation. The^ if this be once of a surety, that
tribulations healpe us to salvation, wherefore should we not receive them with
a thankful and joyful mind? wherefore in the patient sufferynge of them, we
are not ouercharged or greuouslie burdened with necessity, but we lean and
co^descend, or agree unto the^, yea and recreate our selves, with the goodness, y^
comes to us, by them. These thoughts (I say) cause yt, so much as our minds,
are dismayed in the cross, by the natural feelinge of the grief: so much
again are they chered with spiritual gladness, whereupon also follows geuyng
of thanks, which ca^ never be, without joy in the thing, that the same
thanks are given for. Wherefore if the praising of our Lord, and geuynge of
thanks unto him can not flow, but from a glad and merry heart: and again there
ought nothing to interrupt or hyndre that praise and thanks in us: hereupon
it appears how necessary it is, that the grief of the cross be tempered
with spiritual gladness.

But with what soever kind of tribulation we be oppressed, always we must
look to this end, that we continually use our selves, to set little store by
this present life, and by that means, be stirred to the co^te^placion of the
life to come. And because our Lord knows very well, how greatly we are by
nature, bente unto the blind and beastly love of this world, he gives us very
good cause to pluck ourselves back therfrom, and to shake of our slugishnes,
lest we should stick to fast in the same love. There is none of us which
will not seem greatly to desire and endeavor all this short course, of his
life, to atteyne to heavenly immortality. For we are ashamed to pass in
nothing, brute beasts, whose condition or state should be nothing worse
then ours, if we had not assured hope of everlasting life, after the natural
death here. But if y^ examine ye cou^sailes, purposes, minds, and deeds of
every man, thou shall find no other thing there but earth. And there upon
comes such lack of feeling, that our mind being overcome and dased, by
the vain glitteringe of riches, power, and honors, as dimmed so that it sees
no further of: yea and our heart being set on couetousenes, desire of honor,
and unlawful lusts, is so pressed down, that it ryseth no higher: finally
the hole soul, being caughte in a snare with the flattering intisementes of
the flesh or natural man seeks in earth her hole felicity? Our Lord to
healpe this mischeife wythall, by daily documentes or lessons of misery,
teaches, unto his, ye vanity of this life. Therefore lest they should promise
to them selves, great and sure peace in it, and so reke^ with out their host,
he suffers them often times to be vnquited and troubled: either with war, or
vprores, or robryes or other injuries: yea lest with to much gredynes, they
should gape on unstable and transitorye riches: or else when they have them,
should put their trust in them, he drives the^ sometime by banishement,
sometime by barre^nes of thearth, sometime by burning of their houses, and
sometime by other means into pouertye: or at least way, keeps them back in
a mean state lest they should be over much delighted in the commodites of
marriage, either with the biternes or unthriftiness of their husbondes: or the
shrewdnes or naughtines of there wives, he causes them to be vexed: or by euel
children brings them low and abateth their pride: or by taking their
children from them afflicts the^. Now if in all these things he somewhat
cocker or spare them, for all that, least either through folyshe reioysinge
they should wax proud: or through trust in those things should
excedingely rejoice: he sets before their eyes at the least way be other
men's deseases, and dangers, how unsteadfast and slypper are all those goods
(as men call them) which are transitorye or subject to mortality. Therefore,
then only have we well profited in the doctrine of the cross, when we learn,
that this life, when we esteem it in it self only, is unquiet, troublesome
innumerable ways miserable, and no way thoroughly blessed or happy: and that
all the things, which be called the goods of it are uncertain, transitorye,
vain, yea and defiled with many myngled myscheffes: and what thereupon, we do
there with decre, nothing here to be sought for, or hoped, but conflicte, or
batayl: and therefore that our eyes ought to be lift up unto heaven, where we
look to have a crown. For this we must reken: the mind never to be ernestely
lift up unto the desire and contemplacion of the life to come, except it be
first taught to despise or set light by this present life. For between the these
two, there is no middle point, but either the earth must be esteemed of us as
vile: or else it will keape us bound unto it with an inordinate love.
Therefore if we have any desire of everlasting life, we must diligentely look
unto this, that we may vnshakell our selves out of these noughty gifts.
Furthermore because this present life has many pleasant toys, whereby
entiseth us: and many outward apparaunces of pleasures and of gifts and of
things sweet in taste, whereby it flattereth or inticeth us, strokynge our
heads, and calling us goldpolles: it stands us much upon, ever now and
then, to call our selves back, lest we be bewitched with such pleasant
disceitfulnes, or disceitful pleasure. For how would the world go with us,
(I pray ye) yea how would we dote upon it, if we should have here continual
abundance of goods and felicity? when with continual pricks and scabbes
of euyls, we can not enough be moved to considre the misery of this life. Man's
life, to be like a smoke or shadow, is not only known to learned men, but
also the common people use no proverb more in their mouths. And because they
saw it was a thing very profitable to be known: they have commended it, or
set it forth, with many goodly sentences. But almost there is nothing, but
either we weigh it to negligently, or remember it to little. For, we go about
all things, as though we ordained unto our selves immortality here in earth.
If any corse be brought forth, or if we walk among graves: because then the
Image of death is present before our eyes, excellently (I confess) we reason
and dispute of the vanity and frailnes of this life, though yet we do not this
always, for many times al these things move us nothing at all. But when it
happens that such things move us, the consideration is very short, the
which (alas) as sone, as our backs be turned is quite gone, and leaves
hehinde it no manner of token, that once we remembered it, for we forget not
only death, but also that we are mortal. Yea and as though we had never
heard tell of ye matter, or knew what it, meant, we be lulled and rocked in a
safenes or retchlesnes of earthie inmortalitye. If any man the whyleste rehearse
this proverb that man is here to day and gone to morrow: in deed we acknowledge
ye same, but yet with out having any consideration thereof, so yt the thinkinge of
co^tiu^ance here, does nevertheless abide still in our minds. Therefore now who
denies that we have all very great need I say not by words to be warned,
but, by as many experiences as may be possible, to be taught, the miserable
state of this earthye life? when we now that be taught it whether we will or
not, yet nevertheless we scacely cease to be astoned with the naughtye and
folishe wonderinge at it even as though it contained in it all manner of
goodness. Now if it be needful yt our Lord teach us this, it is again our
duties to give ear unto our Lord while he calls us and rebukes our
slogishnes, that the world being despised, we may endeavor with all our heart
contemplate or behold the life to come.

But let the faithful accostome them self to such a dispising of this
life, as neither may beget hatered of it, neither vntha^kefulnes toward God.
For albeit this life be full of never so many miseries, yet it is not with out
cause reckened among the good blessings or gifts of God. Wherefore, if we
therein acknowledge or consider no benefit of God, we are then guilty of much
unkindness against God. For the faithful, ought chiefly to bear witness of
Gods mercy, sith the same is wholly appointed to work their salvation, for,
before that he shows openly unto us, the enheritaunce of eternal glory: he
will first by smaller experimentes, declare him self to be a father unto us,
to wit, by the good things which he daily gives unto us. Therefore, sith
this life serves us, to understand the goodness of God, shall we disdain or
loath it, as though it had not a my^e, or crome of goodness in it? nay.
Therefore we must be endued with this understanding and mind, that we nu^bre
it among the excellent gifts of gods mercy and kyndnes toward us. For, if
there lacked hereof testimonies of scripture, which are many and very plain,
yet nature it self exhorts us to give thanks to god, that he has brought
us forth in to the light of the same life, and that he has granted us the use
of it, and that he gives us al manner of helps necessary, to the co^seruatio^
of it. And furthermore, there is yet, a much greater cause the^ this, if we
shall consider, that in it, we are, after a sort prepared unto the glory of the
heavenly kingdom. For thus our Lord has ordained, yt they, which in time to
come, shall be crowned in heaven, shall enter first into conflict here in earth:
that they may not triumph but having first overcome the hardness of the
battle, and having gotten the victory. And yet there is an other cause, to
wit, yt by sundry benefits we may begin in it, to taste the swetnes of gods
goodness and mercy toward us: whereby our hope and desire may be whet and
stirred up longly to look for the full reueling or openinge of it. When this is
once decreed, yt it is the gift of gods mercy, that we live this terrestiall
life: and that as we be bound unto him for it, so we ought to have it in
remembrance and to be thankful to him for the same: the^ in good time we shall
come down to this point, I mean to consider the wretched state of it, that
thereby we may be rydde from the over gredy desiring of yt, whereunto we are by
nature (as I said) of our selves greatly inclined. Furthermore what so ever is
wythdrawen from the naughty love of it, ought to be applied unto ye desire of
the better life. I confess, yt they judged rightly, who thought it best not to
be borne, and next that very shortly to dye: for why, what could they se in it
yt was not unhappy and evil, they being destitute of the light of god, and
true religion, or right honoring of god? And they lacked not reason, which
mourned and wept, at their childrens birth, and made solemn joy and reioysyng
at their burials. But that did they without profit, because, lacking the true
doctrine of faith, how yt thing turns unto goodness toward the godly, which
of it self is neither blessed nor worthy to be desired, they therefore ended
their judgment in desperatio^. Let this therefore be the mark, yt the faith
full shote at, in the estemynge of this mortal life: yt whylest they perceive it
to be of it self nothing but misery and wretchedness, the more merrily and the
more redyly let them therefore get them selves to the co^templation of the
everlasting life to come. When we once come to the comparinge of these two
lives together: then truly this earthye life, not alonly is eassely set light
by, but also, in consideracion of the heavenly, is utterly contempned and
despised. For if heaven be our country, what other thing is the earth here,
but a banishemente? if the going out of the world, be the entering into
life: what other thing is the world then a grave? in it to tarry, what is it
else, but to be drowned in death? if, to be delivered from the body, is to be
planted into perfect liberty: what other thing is the body, but a prison? if
to have the presence of God, be the highest some of felicity: is not the
lacking of it miserye? And more over til we have escaped clean out of the
world, we be strangers from God. ii. Cor. v
Therefore, if the earthye life, be compared with the heavenly, no doubt it
will sone be set light by, or despised, and trodden under foot. But yet, it is
not to be hated, but in that it holds us subject unto sin. Although yet,
that hatred can not properly be turned or applied unto it. For how soever it
be, yet it becomes us, so only, to loath or hate it: that desiringe the end
of it, we may also be ready at the Lords pleasure, to abide in the same, that
is to say, that our lothyng, may be far from al murmuryng and impatience.
For it is like to a standing or gole, Romans vii.
wherein our Lord has set us, to keep it still, till he shall call us thence.
Paul lamenteth his chance that he is longar kept bound in the bands of his
body, then he would, and sigheth, Phi. i.
with a feruent^ desire to be delivered from it. Nevertheless, that he might
obey the pleasure and commandment of God, he confessed that he was ready to
boeth of them, because he considered and acknowledged, that he ought unto god,
that his name might be honored, both through his life and his death. But it
belongs only, unto god, to appoynte what is most expedient for his own
glory. Therefore, if it become us to live and dye unto our Lord, let us leave
to his free choice and pleasure, the term boeth of our death and of our life.
Nevertheless in such wise, that we may burn in the desire and love of him,
and may be diligent in exercisynge of the same, and in respect of the
immortal life to come, let us despise this present life. Yea and because of
our bondage to sin, let us desire to forsake it, when it pleases our Lord.

This is a marvelous, or rather a mo^sterous thing, yt, in the steed of
being desirous to dye, many, who boste themselves to be christians, be taken
with such fear of death: yt, at every namynge of it, they tremble; and their
heart is at their mouth, as at the naming of a very unhappy and unlucky thing.
For soth it is no marvel, if the natural wisdom, which is in us, do
greatly fear when it hears of dissolution, or departure, of our soul from
the body. But it ought not in any wise to be once suffered, that in a
christian man's heart there should not be a light of godlynes, which should
overcome and suppress that fear, were it never so great with a greater
comfort, for if we considre this unstable, sinful corruptible vanishinge,
driynge and rotten house of our bodi, to be dissolved or broken down, for that
intent that we should strayghte way be put into steadfast, perfect,
incorruptible, and heavenly glory, will not faith make us hertely to desire the
thing, which nature greatly fears? if we think our self by death to be
called back from a place of banishment, that we may dwell in our contrie, yea
and yt our heavenly country, shall we take no comfort thereby? will yt set our
hertes nothing a gog? yes, but yet there is nothing (you will say) yt
desiereth not to continue still. In deed I confess that, and therefore I
contend that we should desire the immortality to come, where that sure state
happens, which in earth never appears. Shall brute beasts, yea and the
same creatures that lack life, til ye come to very wood and stones, knowing
there own present vanity, longly look for the last day of resurection, that
they may with the children of God, be delivered from vanity: and shall we,
boeth endued with the light of wisdom and above wisdom lightened with the
spirit of god, when our own being is in hand, not lift up our hertes above
this rattennes of earth? But here, neither the time nor place serves, to writ
against this so great peruersite and naughtines. And more over in the
beginning I said, that I would not take upon me very largly to treat of any
common place, I would therefore counsel such fareful minds to read the
little book of mortality which sain^^ Ciprian wrote: but that they be worthy
to be driven away from it even unto heathen Philosophers, that, for somuche as
the same Philosophers did pretend to have ateined unto that point: that they
despised death, these me^ at last may now begin to be ashamed. And let us
make our reckening of this, yt no man has well profited in Christ's scole, but
he which with joy lo^geth for the day, boeth of death, and of the last
resurrection. For not only saint Paul, blaseth all the fayethfull, with this
difference and token: but also, it is a familiar thing in the scripture, as
often as it wolle set before our eyes a great cause of true gladness, to call
us unto this point: exceadyngely rejoice (says our Lord) and hold up your
heads like men, Tit. ii.
for your redemcion is at hand. Were it, reasonable or semely thing (I pray
you) that ye thing which he would, should be of so much force and strength to
stir us up unto exceeding great reioysinge and mirth, should do no thing
but make us sad and half out of our wits for fear? if ye wind be in that
door, what do we yet brag, Math. v.
as though Christ were still our mayester? Therefore let us pluck our wits
better to us. And though the blind and folish desire of our flesh or natural
man be against it, let us not stick to desire the coming of our lord: yea not
only with wyshinges, but also with groninges and deep sighinges, as that,
which of all things, is the most happy. For our redemer shall come to us who
drawinge us out of this great golfe of all micheifes and miseries, will lead
us into his blessed inheritance, of everlasting life and glory. And this is a
clear case: that the whole company of the faithful so long as they dwell in
earth, must be as sheep appointed to slaughter, that they may represente
Christ their head. Therefore they should be most wretched, except, having their
mind lift up unto heaven, they did overcome, To. viii.
what so ever is in the world, and did pass over the present outward show
of things. ^ Cor. xv.
Contrary wise, after they have once lift up their heads above al earthie
things: al though they se the florisheinge riches and honors of the ungodly:
although they se the^ have great worldly qu^ecnes: although they se the^ to
wax proud, in the bewtifulnes and plentuousnes of al things: yea and
although they se them flow in all manner of pleasures, and dilicates: and
again on the other side though they themselves be hurt by them, and by their
naughtines: though they sustain displeasures and rebukes, through the others
pride: though they be robbed thorough their covetousness, or, by any other
ungodly desire of theirs, be vexed: yet in all such mischieffes, they shall well
enough endure. For before their eyes, shall be that day, wherein, our Lord shall
receive his faithful, into the quietness of his kingdom: and shall wype away,
every tear from their eyes: and shall put upon them, stoles of joy and
gladness. and shall feed them, with the unspeakable sweet taste of his
delicates: and shall lift them up, into the fellowship of his highness: and
finally, shall vouchsafe to make them partakers of his felicity. But the
ungodly, who flourished here in earth, he shall cast forth into utter reproach
and shame: their dilicate, and wanto^ pleasures, he shall change into grievous
torments: their outrageous laughters and mirth, to howlinge and gnashing of
teth: their peace or quietness in sin, shall he disquiet with cruel tormente
of conscience: their nice te^dernes, and effeminate softnes, shall he punish
with unquenchable fire: yea, and under the godlions whose patience they abused,
shall he cast their headdes. This, Psalm. lxxiii.
truly is our only comfort. And if it be taken away, either we must needs
despair, or else, to our own destruction, delight our selves, in the vain
comfortes, and discetefull pleasures of this world. Yea, for the prophet him
self confesses, yt also his fete began to slide, while he tarried to long in
consideringe of the present prosperity of the ungodly: and that he could not
have kept him self still on his fete, but that enteringe into the seintuarye of
the Lord, he turned his eyes to the last end of the godly and ungodly. To
conclude at once, then only in the hertes of the faithful the cross of Christ
has the victory over the deuel, the flesh, syn, and the ungodly me^: when
their eyes be turned, toward the power and strength of the resurrection. By
gross things also, the scripture has well taught us, what the right use of
earthly goods, is. A thing surely in the orderinge of our life not to be set
light by. For, if we must live, we must also use ye necessary helps, and
means, which preserve life. And besides yt, we ca^ not fly or eschew those
things which seem rather to serve for our delectatio^ and pleasure, then for
our necessity, and need. Therefore a mean is to be kept, that we may use a
pure conscience, whether it be touching necessity, or pleasure. That mean our
Lord prescribes in his word when he teaches, that this present life, is
unto his, a certain strange place, in the which they labor, and strive to
come to the heavenly kingdom. Now if we must needs pass through unto it, by
the earth only: no doubt we may, so far forth, use the good things of it,
as they rather further, then hyndre our course. But because this place is
slipper, and on either side ready to give us a fall, let us endeavor to take
sure fotynge, where we may stand saffe. For there have been many, otherwise
good and holy men, who when they saw intemperauncie and superfluity, with
unbridled voluptuousnes continually to go forth, except it were somewhat
sharply restrained, they were desirous to reform that mischeuous evil: but
because they knew no other way, they suffered a man to use the goods of the
body but alonely as necessity required. Truly it was good counsel: but they
were some what to straighte. For (which thing is very dangerous) they did
put straighter snaers, upon men's consciences, then wherewith they are bound by
the word of God. But now in our days many, while in the use of outward
things they seek a color to excuse the vntemperatnes of the flesh or
natural man, and yet in the mean time, will all together agree to it when it
waxes wa^ton, they do stiflie defend (which thing I will not grant) that
by no limittes this liberty ought to be restrained: but that it should be
referred to every man's conscience, to usurp or use it, as often and as much
as he will. In deed I confess that consciences here, neither ought, nor can,
be bound to sure and precise rules, of laws: but, since the scripture gives
general rules of ye right or lawful use: according unto the^, ye use of such
things is to be limited. Let this be the begyninge, or first: the use of
gods gifts not to go a mys, when it is referred to that end, whereunto our
Lord created and appointed it. And he created the^, for our profit, and not
our hurt or destruction. Wherefore no man shall hold his journey streighter
then he, which diligently shall behold this end. Now, if we consider for what
purpose, he has created our fode or sustenaunce: we shall find that he would
not only provide for our necessitye, but also for our recreacion and and
delight. So in garments beside the need we had of them, their end was
co^lynes and honesty. In herbs, trees, and corn, beside their sundry uses,
their is pleasau^tnes of sight and delectatio^ of savor. For without this were
true, Psalm. C. ii.
ye prophet would not have rehearsed among the benefits of God, that wine
cheareth the heart of a man, and that oil makes his face fair. Nor ye
scriptures, would not every where rehearse, to the commendation of his mercy
and goodness, that he gives al such things unto me^. No, and the very natural
gifts of things show enough to what intent, and how far forth, we may use
the^ did our Lord give so much fayrenes unto flowers, which should without
desire of us, come to our sight: and so great swetnes of savor, which should
blow into our nosethrilles, and smelling: and yet shall it be unlawful,
either for the eyes, with the bewtifulnes, or for the nose with the pleasante
smell, to be delighted? why? has he not so divided the colors that he has
made some of them more pleasante then other? why? has he not given a grace or
excellencye, to gold and silver, to Iuery and marble, whereby they were made
more precious then other metalles or stones? Finally has he not made many
things worthy to be praised of us, for more, then for ye necessary use of
the^ alone? Therefore let us cast a way that Philosophy or love of
wisdom, which is so ungentle, that, while it grants unto us none but
needful uses of creatures, not only maliciously depriueth us of the lawful
fruit of Gods liberality and goodness: but also can not take place in a man,
except it drive him into a block and spoil him of al his senses. But with no
less diligence on the other side ought the voluptuous desire, or unlawful
lusts of our flesh and natural man to be prevented, wythstand and helped.
For except it be brought into an order, it ouerfloweth without measure, and has
(as I said) such as will praise it, who, under the cloak of the liberty
which is granted, think they may do what so ever they lust. Now first,
one bridle is put on it, if we think thus: that all things were created for
us, to the intent that we might know and knowledge God to be the geuer of them:
and should for his great love toward us, give unto him thanks. But where is
thy geuinge of thanks: if with meats or drinckes, thou so fylle thy paunch,
that either thou have astonished al thy senses, and so have mind of nothing: or
else, art, at the least way, unmeet and unable to do worckes of Godlynes, and
of thy vocation? where is thy considering of God, if thy flesh, through
ouermuche crammyng in, bublynge out filthy and unlawful lusts, do infect so the
mind with her uncleanness, yt thou can behold or regard no justice, nor
honesty? where is in our apparel, our thankfulness toward God, if by the
sumptuous garnishynge of them, we boeth ouermuche stand in our own
conceits: and also disdain other? if also by the gorgiousnes, and trickenes,
thereof, we prepare our selves to filthiness of living? where is our considering
of God, if our minds be set in the gala^tnes and beutifulnes of them? The
self same thing, is also to be considered in other things. Wherefore it is
plain, that here now, the liberty of abusyng things, is some what
restrained.

But there is no surer nor better way then yt which we get by the setting
little by this present life, and often considering of heavenly immortality. For
there upon follow two rules: that they which use this world be so minded as
though they used it not: ii. Cor. vii
they that have wives, as though they had none: they that bie, as though they
bought not: as Paul teaches. Again that they learn to bear as quietly, and
patiently, poverty: as temperatly prosperity. He that prescribes unto the,
yt thou should use this world, as though thou dyddest not use it, not only
cutteth of glotony the intemperatnes and excessiuenes: and in tables,
buildinges, and raymet, over much delicates, desire of honor and fame, pride,
hautenes of mind, and frowardnes: but also all love and affections, which
should other lead away or let the from thinking on the heavenly life, and
from the desire of garnishing of thy soul. It was truly spoken of Cato long
ago, that to be much careful for clothes, is to be much careless for virtue.
And it is an old proverb: that who so ever is much occupied in caring for the
body, for the most part, cares little or nothing, for the soul. Therefore
admit that the liberty of the fayethfull in outward things ought not to be
driven unto a sure and steadfast rule: yet it is subject unto this law, that
they should make little of the^ selves: and with continual desire of mind,
apply them selves, to cut of all preparacio^ of superfluous store of apparel:
and much more to a void to much abou^daunce of it. And let the^ diligently
take heed, lest of aids, or healpes, or futheraunces, they make unto them
selves hurtes, and hynderaunces. Another rule shall be that they whose substance
is sca^t and poor, learn pacie^tly to want, lest they be troubled with
immoderate desire of having. Which rule who so keeps, has not alitle
proffited in the scole of our lord: as on the other side he ca^ scarsly have,
whereby to prove him self christ's disciple, who has not, in this part, at the
lest way, somewhat profited. For besides that, yt many other vices accompenye
the desire of earthye things: he that vnpatientlye bears penury, utters
for the most part, in prosperity the contrary dissease: I mean this, he
that is ashamed of a pore garmente, will brag of a costly: and he that is not
content with mean fare, shall be unquieted thorough desire of better or
deintier, and will also without measure, abuse those delicates, if they happen
unto him: and he that hardly, and with an unquiet mind, bears a private and
low state, if he shall rise unto honor, he will not absteyne from pride and
disdaynefulnes. Therefore let al me^ which have not a feyned desire of godliness
and of true honourynge of God, labor to atteine unto this point that they
may learn by the Apostles example, to be full and to be hungrye, to have
prosperity and to suffer penury. Furthermore the scripture has yet the third
rule, whereby it measures the use of earthy things: whereof somewhat is spoken,
when we did entreat of the precepts of charity. For the scripture has
judged that al those earthy things are given to us of the liberality of God,
and ordained for our profit: and that they are as things left with us of
trust: whereof hereafter we must make a reckenynge. So therefore we must
bestow them, that this saiynge may always sound in our ears: come make
account of thy baylywyke. Therewythal remember who will require such account
of the. Even he, who, as he has very highly praised abstinence, temperaunce,
liberality, and gentleness: so he abhors excess of meats and sensuality,
pride, bragging, and vanity: who allows no other bestowing of goods but
that only, which is joined with charity: who also has already condemned,
with his own mouth, al such riches as draw a man's heart from pureness, and
cleanes, or dulleth the mind with darckenes.

Finally this is also a notable thing: that our Lord commands every one
of us, in all our deeds, to look well to our own vocation. For he knows
with how great unquietness man's wit boyleth up: with how maskyng lyghtnes,
it is carried hither and thither: yea, and how gredy his ambitions desire is to
embrace and get many things at once. Therefore lest through our folishnes and
gredy rashness, all things should be ministerd without order, he has appointed
unto all men thetr offices by distinct and several kinds of life. And lest
any man should rashly go past his limittes he has named such kinds of
living, our vocations. Therefore man's kind of living is, as a standing
given unto him of our Lord: lest at all adventures, he should be driven
about, during all the course of his life. And this distinction, or
seperatio^, or mark, is so necessary: that all our actions and doings, are
esteemed before our Lord, by it. Yea and that far otherwise often times, then
the judgment of man's reason, and philosophers opinions do weigh the thing.
There is nothing counted a more noble deed, after the minds of philosophers,
then to deliver thy natyue country of a tyrant. But for all that, by the
voice of our Lord, the private parson, is openly condemned, which violently
lays hand on a tyrant. But I will not tarry upon rehersing of examples. It
is enough, if we shall know, that the vocation of our Lord, (or whereunto our
Lord has called us) is the beginning and foundation of doing well in every
matter: to the which, he that refers not him self: shall never hold the
right way in offices. He may perchance, sometime do somthynge worthy of
praise in the outward show: but the same, how so ever it appear in the
sight of men, shall, before the throne and majesty of God, be rejected: and
also there shall be no convenient agreement, in the parts of the life or
conversation. Therefore, then shall thy life be well led: when it shall be
directed unto this mark. And hereupon shall grow an excellent consolation: I
mean that there shall be none, so foul and vile a work, if thou follow thy
vocation in the same, which before God shall not shine bright, and be counted
very precious in his syghte. To whom be everlasting praise. Amen.

Imprinted at London by John Day and Wyllyam Seres dwelling in Sepulchers
parish, at the sign of the Resurrection: and are to be sold at the little
conduit in Chepeside.

Cum gratia and priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.


