A Commentary upon the Epistle of Saint Paul to the Romans, written in Latin
by M.

John Calvin, and newely translated into English by Christopher Rosdell
preacher.

Whereunto is added a necessary table for the better and more ready finding
out of certain principal matters contained in this work.

Collos. 3.16. Let the word of Christ dwell in you plenteouslie in all
wisdom. Imprinted at London for John Harison and George Bishop. 1583.

To the right honorable, and his very good L. Sir Edward Seimer knight,
Baron Beauchampe, and Earl of Hertforde, Christopher Rosdell wishes grace,
and peace from God, etc.
THE Church (right honorable and my good Lord) has never doubted at any time
of the author of this epistle: but as the inscription thereof plainly
testifies, so the godly have always constantly believed, that it was written by
that great doctor, and worthy Apostle Paul. Of whose praise though Chrysostom
and diverse others have said very much: yet if it be compared with his desert,
it is either nothing or else but a little. Act. 9.15.
For with what praises shall we sufficiently set him forth, whom the Lord
himself immediately after his conversion so highly commended: Calling him a
chosen vessel to bear his name before the Gentiles, and kings, and the
children of Israel? 2. Cor. 12.2.
with what speeches shall we accordingly advance him, whom the Lord lift up
unto the third heaven?

And with what ornaments shall we deck him, whom the Lord did so richely
adorn? by kindred of the race of Abraham, by person naturally vehement, endued
with singular dexterity, and of a noble courage, by calling an Apostle of
Jesus Christ, immediately called of the Lord unto the ministry of the Gospel.
As he testifies to the Galath. Saying, Gal. 1.1.
Paul an Apostle, (not of men, neither by man, but by Jesus Christ, and God
the father) etc. immediately taught from above. As it is written, Gal. 1.11.
Now I certify you, brethren, that the Gospel which was preached of me was
not after men. For neither received I it of man, neither was I taught it, but
by the revelation of Jesus Christ. By the visible gift of the holy Ghost
invested into his ministry and Apostleship. And finally by great signs and
wonders confirmed in the same. Act. 9.3. Act. 19.6.
By which things as the dignity and authority of the holy man is confirmed
unto us, so all men are taught with what reverence they should hear and
receive what so ever has proceeded from him. For seeing he speaks unto us
in yt stead of christ, brings a celestial doctrine, and such as is mixed with
no error, we ought to hear and believe him as the voice of God from heaven.
Knowing assuredly that he is of the number of those of whom it is said, he
that hears you hears me, and he that despises you, despises me, etc. And
therefore they commit most horrible blasphemy against God, whose impudent
mouths are open against the apostolical authority of so excellent an
instrument of the Lord. But no doubt such miscreates and rebellious wretches,
do feel the efficacy and light of his apostolical doctrine, whereby their
wicked studies are manifested and reproved, according to the saying of Christ,
because their deeds are evil, they hate the light, and seeing they hate it,
but yet can not extinguish it, they do what they can to discredit it. Yea and
that which of all others is most abominable, they go about by perverting holy
Scriptures to maintain and defend their devilish doctrine.

Whence it comes, that by abusing the testimony of of Peter, they labor to
persuade the unlearned, that the Epistles of Paul are hard to be understood
and obscure: Yea such as minister causes of errores unto the unskillful, and
therefore are not to be read of the common forte, but rather to be
restrained, and forbidden. The words of Peter are these: And suppose that the
long suffering of our Lord is salvation, 2. Pet. 3.15.
even as our beloved brother Paul according unto the wisdom given unto him
wrote to you, as one that in all his Epistles speaks of these things: amongst
the which some things are hard to be understood, which they that are unlearned
and unstable, pervert as they do all other scriptures unto their own
destruction. Which words do so much make for the commendation of the
Epistles of Paul, that they must needs be very impudent, and blinded with
extreme malice, which wrest them to the obscuring of his doctrine. For first
these words give unto Paul a celestial and heavenly wisdom. Secondly they
testify that he wrote his Epistles according to the same wisdom, and that he
wrote the same things, and to ye same faithful people to whom Peter himself
wrote. But it is added, amongst the which some things are hard to be
understood. What then? shall all the writings of Paul be taken away from the
people and Church of God, because of the difficulty and hardness of some
certain places? or rather were it not meet those obscure places should be
faithfully, and sincerely expounded, that the simple might understand the^. By
the same reason let the epistles of Peter also be inhibited and taken away, for
in them there are many things hard to be understood. As may appear in his
first epi. cha. 3. and 4. And in his 2 epist. 2. But they are wrested (quoth
they) of the unlearned and unstable.

Wherefore it were better they were taken from the unlearned, and reserved
only for the reading of the learned. By the same reason also all holy
scripture may be taken away. For Peter testifies of them, that they are
perverted of the unlearned, and those are unstable. What more reason is there
why the use of holy scripture should be forbidden all men, because some by
perverting of them have fallen to destruction, the^ that the use of fire and
water should be debarred al me^, because many have perished by the^. Did the
apostle write his epistles to the Bishops and other ministers of Christ only,
and not rather to all faithful christians were at Rome, Corinth, Galatia,
Ephesus, Collossa, Philippos, Macedonia, etc? Did he write of such things only
as apperteined unto the learned, and not rather of such things as are
necessary to be known of all, and concern the salvation of all? if he wrote
to the learned only, why says he? to all that be at Rome, and not rather to
you learned Christians be at Rome. If he wrote of such things as concern the
learned only (and yet wrote the gospel or glad tidings of salvation in Christ)
why says he? Romans 1.5.
I am not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ: for it is the power of God unto
salvation to every one that believes, etc. But if both the holy man directed
his writings unto all, and also the things contained in them do appertein
unto all, why rob they the vulgar and common people or laity (as they term
them) of that the holy ghost has given unto the^? I mean the light of the
Apostolical doctrine and reading of the holy scriptures. Contrary to the mind
of Chriso. Who vehemenly exhorts all christians, Upon the epi. to the Collos.
Hom. 9.
and specially the laity, that they should get them Bibles, or at the least
the new Testament. Contrary to the mind of the holy Apostle, who says, to
the Colloss. Let the word of Christ dwell in you ple^teously in all wisdom,
Colloss. 3.16. John. 5.39.
teaching and admonishing your own selves etc. Yea contrary to christ himself,
who says search the scriptures, etc. And yet they blush not, (how contrary
soever they be to the pure doctrine of Christ and his apostles) to boast
themselves for the only catholics of the world, and successors of Christ and
his Apostles. But this is no new thing, for vice has always delited in the
cloak of virtue, superstition in the name of religion, and heretics in the
name of catholics. How truly this is said of the romish prelates at this day,
we shall not need to seek far for proof: only it shall suffice to compare them
in their now and new professed doctrines with the ancient and sincere doctrine
was at the first taught and received amongst the old and true Catholic
romans.

The su^me and substance of which doctrine is registered by the holy ghost in
this Epistle: whereat they do chiefly storm besides all other the writs of
that good man, because it does in a special sort, detect their Apostasey,
convince their heresey, and bewray their superstitious hypocrisy. Howbeit the
Church of God is not more bound unto the Lord for any portion of scripture,
then for this most excellent and worthy epistle.

Wherein is contained a clear and compendious Epitome of Christian religion,
as may easily appear by the places therein discussed: namely, of natural
knowledge, civil duties, the law of Moses, the Gospel, justification,
original sin, grace, election, predestination, excaecation of the Jews, and
their restitution, of the sacrifice of Chistians, of Magistrates, and
subjects, of bearing the weak, and avoiding offense, etc. So that if a man
understand it, he has a certain way open unto him, to the understanding of
the whole scripture. Wherefore in my judgment (and I am not of that mind
only) the godly can no where better bestow their labor to their edification
in true godliness, then in reading, studiyng, yea and committing to memory
this notable Epistle.

Which is not therefore put in the first place as though it had bin written
first, neither (as the Romans perhaps would have it) for the dignity and
worthiness sake of the Roman Church, whereunto it was dedicated: but for the
majesty, and excellency of those things are handled in it, specially for the
doctrine of grace and justification: which is so plainly and diligently
handled in certain chapters, that the whole epistle deserves to be read every
day, and learned without book of the faithful. Yet here I would have all
christians admonished, seeing the Lord requires humble and reverent hearers of
his word, as it is written, to him will I look (says the Lord) even to him
that is poor, Esa. 66.2.
and of a contrite spirit, and trembles at my words: that with meek hearts
and due reverence they handle, hear, and read the holy scriptures of God,
always remembering that watchworde of the Apostle, 1. Cor. 2.14 Ioh. 3.4.
the natural man perceives not the things of the spirit of God. etc. And
continually for proof thereof bearing in mind the example of Nicodemus, who by
the dexterity of wit, and all the helps of art were in him, could not atteine
unto the meaning of the words of our savior Christ, and that in a common
principle of religion, namely regeneration. Wherefore let no man through vain
arrogancy contemn the labors of others, neither through folish presumption
trust too much to himself.

Vzziah king of Judah rejecting the priests, 2. Chro. 26.1^
teaching him that he should not offer incense contrary to the law of the Lord,
and thinking that he knew the law better the^ they al, for his arrogancy and
presumption was smitten with a leprosy. But on the contrary the Eunuch of
Ethiopia, acknowledging his own weakness and ignorance, Act. 8.27.
saying, How can I understand, except I had a guide, and humbly craving the
help of Phillip, received a blessing from the Lord. Thus he scatters the
proud in the imagination of their hearts, he puts down the mighty from
their seat, and exalts the humble and meek. He fills the hungry with
good things: and the rich he has sent empty away. No marvel then why so
few at this day profit accordingly in reading the scriptures, seeing the
greatest part of people, holy Commentaries and expositions of the godly being
neglected, having their eyes blinded with self love, comment upon them
according to their own sense, whereby both errors increase and are
maintained, and also the Oracles of God most irreverently profaned. Which
thing as it comes to pass in other books of sacred Scripture, so
principally in this Epistle, wherein without all controversy there are many
things hard to be understood, which the unlearned and those are unstable may
easily pervert to their own destruction. For preventing of which evils it is
meet not only that godly and faithful interpretations be delivered unto the
people, but also that they be diligently exhorted, reverently too embrace them,
as the good helps of God given for their edification in pure and undefiled
religion: and seriously to read, hear, and mark them, as the means whereby
it pleases the Lord to illuminate their minds with the true knowledge of his
heavenly mysteries, always keeping themselves with in the compass of their
capacity. Knowing that it is a good part of learning for a man to understand
his own ignorance, for hence comes the study and desire to be taught. And
this is (right honorable) the only cause has moved me to set forth this
translation upon the Epistle to the Romans: which thing perhaps will seem
unto many needless and unnecessary, considering that the Commentaries of
master Peter Martyr were already in English upon the same matter. Howbeit if
those men diligently weigh with themselves, how the Commentaries of the said
reverend father are higher then that easily, they may be reached unto of the
simpler sort, and larger then that they may hastily be read over of such as
are drawn away by other affairs, I doubt not but they will soon grant this
my labor is not altogether needles and unnecessary. For besides that none
has dealt more sincerely in expounding the holy scriptures, and more
faithfully in drawing forth the true sense of deep mysteries, then M.
Calvin, he has this as peculier to himself, always to match his faithful
sincerity with a plain briefnesse. So that men may without any great loss of
time find that with him which would cost them much seeking in others. And this
is not only a gain of time, but also a notable help for memory, As it is
said.

Quicquid praecipies, Horace
esto breuis, vt cito dicta,
Percipiant animi dociles, teneantque fideles.
Finally, the reasons which have moved me to dedicate this my simple work
unto your honorable Lordship, are in number three. First, that godly zeal in
religion, and tender care for the vulgar people (in such places as apperteine
to your Lordships patronage) that they should not be clogged with an Idol, nor
destitute of a guide, which I have always since my first coming into your
Lordships acquaintance noted in you. For who is more meet to be a Patron
unto that, which tends unto the profit of the common sort, then he who
wishes nothing more, and studieth nothing so much. Secondly, that knowledge of
the latin tongue, wherewithal, amongst other qualities which make you truly
honorable, God has richly endued you. And whereby you are able to judge what
sincerity and faithfulness, I have used in this kind of labor. Thirdly, that
bountifulnes and liberality which your Lordship has lately showed toward
me: which presses me every way (seeing I am by no means able to make
satisfaction) to show my self thankful. And I know your Lordship does not
look for any other recompense.

Wherefore humbly craving pardon for my boldenes, and earnestly beseeching your
honor to accept in good part my poor Newyeeres gift, as a pledge of my good
will toward you. Which notwithstanding it comes somewhat after the time,
yet I trust not out of season. I commit you to the tuition of him who has
loved us, and washed us from our sins in his blood, and has made us kings
and priests unto God even his father. At London the 11. of January. 1583.

Your Lorships faithful servant to command in Christ, Christopher Rosdel.

John Calvin unto Gryney a man very worthy to be honored, wishes
prosperity.
I Remember, that three years ago, when we communed familierly between our
selves, of the best kind of expounding the Scripture, that reason which
pleased you greatly, was also at the same time before all others approved of
me. For we were both of this mind, that the principal point of an
interpreter did consist in a plain briefnes. And truly seeing this is in a
manner his whole charge, to show forth the mind of the writer, whom he has
taken upon him to expound: loooke by how much he leads the readers away
from the same, by so much he is wide of his mark, or rather after a sort
wandereth out of his bounds. So we wished that amongst them, which at this
day seek to further the study of divinity in this kind of labor, there
might some one be found, that both studied for facility or easiness, and
also gave his diligence not to trouble those are desirous of learning, above
measure with long commentaries. And although I know all men are not of this
mind: and they which are not of this mind, have also their reasons which
induce them to judge so: yet notwithstanding I cannot be drawn from the love
of compendiousnes. But seeing through that, variety is graffed in the minds
of men, some things please some men better then othersome: let every man
heerin use his own judgment, so that no one man covet to bring all other men
under his rules, So it shall come to pass, that neither we, who are more
delighted with brevity, shall refuse, or contemn their labors, who are more
copious and large in expounding the holy scriptures: and they again shall
bear with us, albeit they think we are brief and short. I could not choose
but make a trial what good I might do herein to the church of god. Not as
though I had already obtained that, which then seemed best unto us: either
thought when I began that I could obtain it: but I endeavored, so to order
my style or form of writing, that I might seem to apply my mind toward
that example. How much I have profited herein, because it is not my part to
judge, I leave that to you, and such as you are, to be esteemed. Sure I am
many will condemn my policy, in that I durst make a trial, chiefly in this
Epistle of Paul. For seeing so many men of excellent learning, before this
have taken great pains in the interpreting hereof, it is to be supposed,
there remains no place for others to better that they have already done. And
I must needs confess, that notwithstanding I was persuaded my work would
be of some value, yet this cogitation at the first did terrify me, for I
feared to incur the reproach of rashness, if after so many cunning workmen I
should lay hand to this work. There are many Commentaries upon this Epistle,
both of the elder, and latter writers. And surely surely they could no where
better have bestowed their labor: seeing if a man understand it, he has a
certain way opened unto him, to the understanding of the whole Scripture. I
will speak nothing of the old writers: who for their piety, knowledge,
sanctimonie, and antiquity, are of such authority that we ought to contemn
nothing, which has proceeded from them. And name by name to recite all those
that live at this day were to no purpose. Therefore I will declare my mind
touching those who have bestowed special pains herein. Philip Melancthon
according to that singular knowledge, industry, and dexterity, Whereby he
excels in all kind of learning above those which came forth before him,
has given great light. But because as it may seem, his purpose was only to
discuss the principal things: whiles he stays in them, wittingly he
passes by many things, which may greatly trouble a simple wit. After him
comes Bullinger, who also for his merits has gotten great praise. For he
had an easiness coupled with his learning, wherein he greatly approved
himself.

Finally, Bucer having set forth his travails, did (as a man would say) make
up the matter. For that man (as you know) besides the hidden learning, and
abundant knowledge of many things, besides the sharpnes of wit, great reading,
and many other virtues, wherein he is almost inferior to none at this day, to
be compared but with few, and excels many: is chiefly to be commended in
this, that none in our time has used more exact diligence in expounding the
scripture then he. Therefore as I do confess, it were a token of too impudent
emulation, to contend with such men, so it was never in my mind to take from
them the least part of praise. Let them have that favor and authority, which
by the confession of al good me^ they have deserved. Yet notwithstanding (as I
hope) this will be granted unto me, that there was never at any time amongst
men any thing so absolute, in polishing, garnishing, or setting forth whereof,
there was not place left for the diligence of those came after. I dare say
nothing of my self, but that I thought this my labor would not be
unprofitable: whereunto nothing else did ever moon me, then the public
benefit of the Church. Moreover, I well hoped that in a diverse kind of
writing, I should not be pressed with any spite of emulation, which thing I
was chiefly to take heed of. Phillip has obtained his purpose, which was to
open the principal points, wherein whiles he bestowed himself, he let many
things slip, which are not to be neglected, not forbidding others to declare
those also.

Bucer is both larger then that hastily he may be read of those, are tied to
other business: and also higher, then that easily he ca^ be understood of the
simple, and those are not very circu^spect. For what argument soever he takes
upon him to entreat of (through that plentiful wit, wherein he passes) he
has such store of matter, that he knows not where to leave of. Seeing
therefore the one of them has not pursued all, and the other is more large
then that he can be read in short time: me think mine attempt has no show
of emulation. Yet I doubted with my self a good while, whether I were better
make (as it were) certain gliemings after them, and others, wherein I might
gather those things which I thought profitable for the meaner sort: or else
should make an whole Comment, wherein of necessity I must repeat many things,
which either of all, or at the least of some of them had been said before.
But because they many times vary amongst them selves, which thing, greatly
troubles the simple reader, who doubts to whether of them he might the
rather lean unto: I thought also it were not amiss, if by showing the best
interpretation, I did ease them of the pains of judging, who of themselves are
not sufficiently able to judge aright: specially seeing I determined to
comprise al things so briefly, that the Readers should not spend much time,
to read those things with me, which are contained in others. Finally, I had
great regard, that no man should justly complain, there were many superfluous
things here. Concerning the profitablenes hereof I will say nothing: and yet
perhaps the godly, after they have read, will confess that they have gotten
more hereby, then modesty will suffer me in words to promise. And whereas I
do sometimes disagree from others, or rather am somewhat contrary unto others,
therein I am to be excused. For verily the word of God ought to be of such
reverence with us, that through the diversity of interpretations, it might not
be drawn asunder of us, no not one hay^e breadth. For so the Majesty thereof
is (I cannot tell how) diminished, and so much the more if the same be not done
with great choice, and sobriety. For if it be a sin to pollute any thing
that is dedicate unto God: surely he is not to be suffered, which does
irreverently handle that thing, which of all other things are in the earth is
most holy.

Therefore it is abominable boldness to use the scripture at our pleasure, and
to play with them, as with a tenis ball: which many before this have done. Yet
a man might see at all times, how that even those, who have godly,
religiously, and soberly handeled the mysteries of god, have not always agreed
amongst themselves. For God at no time has voutchsafed his servants with so
singular a blessing, that every of them, should be endued with a full,
perfect, and absolute knowledge. And it is not to be doubted but he does it
partly to the end he might humble us, and partly to retain us in the study
of brotherly communication. Wherefore seeing it is not to be looked for in this
present life, albeit it were greatly to be wished, that there were a perpetual
consent amongst us in expounding the places of scripture: we must do our
endeavor, that neither stirred with desire of innovation, nor compelled through
lust of defaming others, or moved by any hatred, ne yet tickeled with any
ambition: but only constrained thereunto of necessity, seeking nothing else
then the public profit of the Church, we depart from the judgments of
those were before us: and again that the same be done ^n the ^^positio^ of
the scripture: for concerning the points of religion, wher^^ chiefly God would
have his to be of one mind less liberty is to be taken. The Readers shall
easily find in me care of both these. But because it is not seemly for me
either to judge, or pronounce of my self, I do willingly per^^it this office
to you: to whose judgment if all men attribute much, there is nothing which I
ought not to attribute, Wherein you are thoroughly known unto me by familier
conversation, which notwithstanding it many times diminishes the reputation of
others, it has greatly augmented yours, which otherwise is famous with all the
learned.

Farewell. At Argentine the 15. of the Calend. of November. 1539.
The Argument of the Epistle to the Romans.
IN setting forth the utility of this Epistle, I know not whether I were best
to tarry long, both because I fear least through my commendatio^s, which most
certainly are far inferior to the dignity thereof, it be nothing else but
obscured: and also because even in the entrance thereof, it does more clearly
declare it self, and more lively show forth it self, then by any words can be
described. Therefore I think it now best to come unto the Argument, wherein
without all doubt it shall presently appear, that besides many others, and the
same very excellent virtues, this does properly apperteine unto it, which ca^
never according to the dignity thereof be sufficiently praised: that if a man
have attained unto the true understanding of it, he has a speedy passage
made him, unto all the most secret treasures of the scripture.

The whole Epistleis so methodicall, that the very entrance of it, is framed
according to art. The workmanship whereof as it is to be seen in many things,
which shall be observed in their places, so specially in that, that the
principal argument is drawn hence. For he having begun with the confirmation
of his Apostleship, descends thence to the commendation of the gospel: which
because it does necessarily bring with it the disputation of faith, he passes
thereunto, the words of the text (as a man would say) even leading him by the
hand. And so he enters into the principal question of the whole Epistle,
Sciliz. that we are justified by faith. Wherein he is occupied unto the end of
the 5. Chapter. Let us therefore put down the general proposition of these
Chapters, to say, The mercy of God in Christ is the only righteousness unto
men, whiles it being offered by the Gospel, is apprehended by faith. But
because men are so secure in their sins, and flatter, and deceive themselves
with a false imagination of righteousness, that they think they stand in no
need of the righteousness of faith, except now they be cast down from all
trust in themselves: again, they are so delghted with the sweetness of
carnal lusts, and sound a sleep in great security, that they are not
easily raised up to seek after righteousness, unless they be smitten with
the terror of Gods judgment. Therefore he does not only convince them of
their iniquity, but also being co^uicted does rouse them from their
drowsinesse.

First of all, he condemns all mankind since the world began of
ingratitude: that in so excellent a workmanship, they did not acknowledge the
workemaster: yea when they were constrained to acknowledge him, they did not
worthily honor his majesty, but profaned and violated the same with their
vanity. So all men are proved guilty of impiety, then the which there is no
more detestable wickedness. And to the end it might more plainly appear,
that all men are fallen from the Lord, he rehearses the fylthie and
abominable works, whereunto every where men are subject. Which is a
manifest argument, that they have degenerate from God: for as much as they are
tokens of Gods wrath, which appear not but in the godless. And because
certain of the Jews, and also of the Gentiles having covered their inward
wickedness with the cloak of outward holiness, did seem unreprovable of
these impious works: And therefore were thought to be exempted from the
common condemnation: the Apostle directs his style against that fained
holiness. And because that visarde before men, could not be drawn from
those petty saints: he reuoketh them unto the judgment of God, whose eyes
behold the very hidden thoughts.

Afterward having made a distribution, he cites the Jews by themselves, and
the Gentiles also by themselves before the tribunal seat of God. He takes
from the Gentiles that excuse of ignorance, which they pretended. For their
conscience whereby they were sufficiently convicted, was unto them in steed of
a law. He urges the Jews with that chiefly, which they took for their
defense: namely, with the written law, whereof in as much they were proved to be
transgressors, they could not clear themselves of iniquity: seeing the mouth
of God had already pronounced sentence against them. He preuenteth also that
objection which might seem to make for them, videliz. that the covenant of
God, which was unto the^ the mark of sanctification, was violated, unless
there were difference put between them and others. Here, first he teaches
that the title of the covenant, made them nothing better then others, seeing
through their unfaithfulness they were fallen from it. Secondly, least the
constancy of gods promise should be in any part diminished, he grants unto
them some prerogative by the covenant: but such as consists in the mercy of
God, and not in their merit. Then finally by the authority of the scripture,
he proves al both Jews and Gentiles to be sinners: where also he speaks
somewhat of the use of the law.

Thus when he has deprived all mankind both of the trust of their own virtue,
and also of the glory of righteousness, and thrown them down with the
severity of gods judgment, he comes unto that which he purposed: namely,
that we are justified by faith: showing what faith that is, and how we
obtain thereby the righteousness of Christ. Hereunto he adds in the end
of the third Chapter, a singular sentence to beat down the fiercenes of man's
pride, least he should advance himself against the grace of God. And also
least the Jews should hemme in the grace of God within the compass of their
nation, he proves by the way that it appertains to the Gentiles also.

In the 4. chap. he argues from an example, which, because it was clear and
therefore free from cauillations, he puts it down: to wit, in Abraham, who,
in as much as he is the father of the faithful, ought too be in steed of a
rule and general example. Having therefore proved him to be justified by faith,
he teaches that the same way is to be holden of us,

And hereupon he infers, by the comparing of contraries, to follow, that
the righteousness of works must vanish where place is given to the
justification of faith. Which thing he proves by the testimony of David, who
reposing all the blessedness of man in the mercy of God, does take this from
works, that they should make a man blessed.

After this he handeleth that more at large, which he had briefly touched
before: namely, that there is no cause why the Jews should advance themselves
above the gentiles, who are partakers of the same felicity with them, seeing
the Scripture declares righteousness to have happened unto Abraham when he
was uncircumcised. In which place he takes occasion to entreat of the use of
circumcision. After this he adds that the promised salvation does depend upon
the only goodness of God: for if it depended upon the law, then could it
neither bring peace unto our consciences, wherein it ought to be firmly
rooted, neither were it like ever to come unto his perfection. Wherefore, that
it may be firm and sure, in embracing of it, we are to consider the only
truth of God, and not our selves: and that after the example of Abraham, who
not considering himself, did wholly set before him the power of God. In the
end of the Chapter, to the intent he might more aptlye apply the alleged
example unto the general cause, he conferreth those things which on both
sides are like.

In the fifth Chapter, after he has touched the fruit and effect of the
righteousness of faith, he is almost wholly occupied in amplifications, which
serve to make the matter more clear. For by an argument taken from the
greater, he shows how great things, we now being redeemed, and reconciled
unto God, are to expect and look for at his hands through his love: which was
so bountiful toward us being sinners, utterly undone. and cast away, that he
gave unto us his only begotten, and only beloved son. After this he
compares sin with righteousness which comes by free grace, Christ with
Ada^, death with life, the law with grace. Whereby he declares that the
infinite goodness of God does ouermatch our sins, how great so ever they are.

In the sixte Chapter, he comes unto sanctification which we have in Christ.
For our flesh is prone, as soon as it has tasted a little of this grace, to
cocker wantonly his sins, and concupiscences, as though it had now dispatched
al. Therefore Paul on the contrary declares here, that we cannot be partakers
of righteousness in Christ, unless also we lay hold on sanctification. He
fetches his argument from Baptism, whereby we are admitted in the fellowship of
Christ: therein we are buried together with Christ, that being dead in our
selves, by his life we might be raised unto newnes of life. Whereupon it
ensues, that no man without regeneration, can put on his righteousness. From
hence he draws exhortations unto purity, and holiness of life, which
necessarily ought to appear in those who are translated from the power of
sin, into the kingdom of righteousness, having cast away the wicked cockering
of the flesh, which seeks a more licentious liberty of sinning in Christ.
Finally, he does briefly make mention of the abrogation of the law, in
abrogating whereof the new testament is made manifest, where, besides the
forgetting of sin, the holy spirit is promised.

In the 7. Chapter, he enters into a most necessary disputation of the use of
the law, which he had lightly by the way touched before: giving a reason
why we are loosed from the law, because that by it self, it had no power, but
unto condemnation. And least this should turn to the reproach of the law, he
does mightily clear the law from all reproaches. For he shows that through
our fault it came to pass, that the law which was given for life, was made
the matter of death. Declaring also how sin is increased by it. From hence
he passes to the description of the fight between the spirit and the flesh,
which fight the children of God feel in themselves, so long as they are shut
within the prison of this mortal body: for they bear the relics of
concupiscence, whereby they are continually drawn partly from the obedience of
the law.

The eight chapter is full of consolations, least the consciences of the
faithful being feared with that disobedience which he reproved before, or
rather imperfect obedience, should be overthrown. But least that the wicked
should take occasion herby to flatter themselves, first he shows that this
benefit does not appertein unto any but unto the regenerate, in who^ the spirit
of God lives and is of force. Therefore he unfolds two things: the first,
that all those which are graffed into the Lord Christ by his spirit, are freed
from the danger, and fear of condemnation, howsoever they are yet laden with
sins. Secondly that they which yet remain in the flesh, without the spirit of
sanctification, are not partakers of this so great a benefit: the^ afterward he
declares how great the certainetie of our trust is, seeing ye spirit of God
by his testimony does drive away all douting and wavering. Moreover by an
anticipation or preventing he shows that the assurance of eternal life
cannot be interrupted or disturbed through the present miseries, whereunto, for
the time of this mortal life, we are subject: but rather by such exercises,
our salvation is furthered, unto the excellency whereof, if all the present
miseries be compared, they are nothing. This thing he confirms by the
example of Christ: Who as he is the first begotten, obteining the principality
in the house of God, so he is the first pattern, whereunto we ought all of us
to be conformed. And therefore as unto a thing most safe and sure, he adds a
notable triumph, wherein he triumphs courageously against the power and
engines of Satan.

And for as much as many were greatly moved, when they saw the Jews which
were the principal keepers, and heirs of the couenat, to despise Christ: for
thereby they gathered, that either the covenant was translated from the
posterity of Abraham, which contemned the keeping of the covenant, or else
this was not the promised Savior, which provided not better for the people of
the Jews: he begins to meet with this objection in the entrance into the
nienth chapter. Having therefore first of all testified his goodwill toward
his countrymen the Jews, that they might not think he spoke any thing of
malice, and also having mentioned those ornaments whereby they excelled others,
he descends easily to the taking away of that offense, which did arise of
their cecitie or blindness. And deuideth the sons of Abraham into two sorts:
that he might declare how that all those which are borne of him according to
the flesh, are not to be reckoned in his seed, to participate the grace of
the covenant. And on the contrary those which are not borne of his seed, to be
counted for sons, if they be ingraffed by faith: Whereof he proposes an
example in Jacob and Esau. Therefore he calls us here, unto the election of
God, upon the which, this whole matter must necessarily consist and depend.
Again, seeing this election leans only upon the mercy of God, in vain is
the cause thereof sought for in the worthiness of men. Reprobation is contrary,
which notwithstanding it is most just, yet is there no cause above the will of
God. About the end of the chapter he declares by the testimonies of the
Prophets, both the calling of the Gentiles, and also the reprobation of the
Jews.

In the tenth chapter, having begun again with the testification of his good
will toward the Jews, he shows that the vain trust of works was the cause
of their ruin. And least they should pretend excuse by the law, he
preuenteth that, declaring, how by the law we are also led as it were by the
hand, unto the righteousness of faith. Adding that this righteousness,
through the bountifulness of God is indifferently offered unto all nations:
but yet to be apprehended of those only, whom God has lightened with his
special grace. And whereas more Gentiles then Jews are partakers of that
blessing, he shows that that also was forespoken of, by Moses and Esai: The
one whereof prophesied plainly of the calling of the Gentiles, and the other
of the hardening of the Jews.

Here yet remained a question, whither the covenant of god, put not some
difference between the seed of Abraham, and other nations. Whiles he goes
about to satisfy this question, first he admonishes, that the work of God is
not to be bound unto the sight of the eye; seeing many times the elect pass
our understanding.

Even as in old time Elias was deceived, who thought that religion was utterly
perished among the Israelites, when as yet there were seven thousand alive.
Secondly, that we are not to be troubled with the multitude of unbelievers
which we see abhor the Gospel. At the length he affirms that the
covenant of God abides, yea even in the posterity of Abraham according to the
flesh, but yet in those, whom God according to his free election has
predestined. Then he conuerteth his talk unto the Gentiles, least they
growing too proud through their adoption, should lift up themselves against
the Jews as reprobates, when in the mean time they excel the^ in nothing,
but in the favorable acceptance of the Lord: which ought rather to be unto
them a cause of humility. And the same also, is not utterly departed from the
seed of Abraham, for the Jews at the length, by the faith of the Gentiles,
shall be provoked unto emulation: that so GOD may gather unto him all his
Israel.

The three Chapters following conteyne precepts or instructions touching
manners: but they are diversely distinguished. The twelfth Chapter conteyneth
general precepts concerning a christian life. The thirteenth chapter for the
most part is spent in establishing the authority of Magistrates. Whereby we
may make a most certain collection, that there were then some unquiet persons,
which thought christian liberty could not stand, unless the civil power
were overthrown. But least Paul should seem to impose any thing upon the
Church besides the duties of charity: he shows that this obedience is also
contained under charity. After this he adds those precepts for the
instruction of our life, which he had not mentioned before.

In the next chapter he takes on him an exhortation, which was very
necessary for the present time. For there were some, who, through obstinate
superstition, being addicted to the observations of Moses, could not without
great offense suffer the neglect of them. Again, there were othersome, who
being confirmed, touching the abrogation or taking away of them, whiles they
went about to remove superstition, purposely showed forth a contempt of them.

Both parties offended through vntemperatures. For the superstitious condemned
the others, as contemners of the Law of GOD: and they again without
discretion despised the simplicity of the others.

Therefore the Apostle puts down for them both a convenient moderation:
calling those were strong from pride and disdain, and those were
superstitious of infyrmitie and weakness, from their too much frowardness.

Moreover he prescribes a notable form of Christian liberty, that it might
consiste, within the bounds of Charity, and edifycation: he gives those are
weak wholesome counsel, whiles he forbids them to attempt any thing
against their conscience.

The fifteenth Chapter begins with a repetition of the geenerall sentence,
as the winding up of the whole disputation, that those are strong might
bestow their strength to confyrme the weak.

And because there was a perpetual strife between the Jews, and the
Gentiles, about the ceremonies of Moses, the material cause of pride being
taken out of the way, he ends all the quarrel between them. For he
teaches them, that the salvation of them both does depend upon the only
mercy of GOD: whereunto they leaning, ought to lay down all pride: and wherein
they being coupled together in the hope of one inheritance, ought every way to
embrace one another.

Lastly, he coveting to make a digression unto the commendation of his
Apostleship, which brought great authority to his doctrine, takes occasion
thereof whiles he exscuseth, and craves pardon for his rashness, that he was
so bold to take upon him the office of a teacher among them. Furthermore, he
puts them in great hope of his commming, which thing he says in the
beginning of this Epistle, he had in vain hitherto gone about, and proved:
and this he does, adding the cause which presently did hinder him:

Namely that the Churches of Macedonia and Achaia had committed to his charge,
the carriage of that alms unto Jerusalem, which they had given to relieve the
poor brethren there.

The last Chapter stands wholly almost upon salutations: but that it being
here and there tempered with certain precepts not to be contemned, is
concluded with an excellent prayer.

A Commentary of Ioh. Calvin upon the Epistle of Paul to the Romans.
The first Chapter.
1 Paul a servant of Jesus Christ, called to be an Apostle, put a part to
preach the Gospel of God. 2 Which he had promised before by his Prophets in the
holy Scriptures. 3 Concerning his son Jesus Christ our Lord which was made
of the seed of David according to the flesh. 4 And declared mightily to be the
son of God, touching the spirit of sanctification by the resurrection from
the dead. 5 By whom we have received grace, and Apostleship (that obedience
might be given unto the faith) in his name among the Gentiles. 6 Among whom ye
be also the called of Jesus Christ. 7 To all you that be at Rome, beloved of
God, called to be Saints: grace be with you, and peace from God our Father,
and from the Lord Jesus Christ.
The Commentary of Ioh. Calvin.
PAul. I would speak nothing at al of the name of Paul: seeing it is a thing of
no such weight, that we should stand long upon it: and nothing can be brought,
which has not been spoken of other interpreters before: but that with small
labor, I may satisfy some, without any great contempt of others, this
question shall be dispatched in few words. Those which think the Apostle did
take unto him this name, as a testimony of his victory over Sergius yt under
co^sul, Acts 13.7.9.
whom ye converted unto Christ, they are confuted of Luke himself, who shows
yt he was so called before that time: neither do I think it like, that this
name should be given unto him, ever since he was converted unto Christ. Which
thing I suppose pleased Augustine, only yt thereby he might take occasion of
disputing wittingly, whiles he says that of a proud Saul, he was made an
humble disciple of Christ. The opinion of Orige^ is more probable, Paul had
two names.
who judges him to have had two names. For it is not unlike, that this name
Saul being a name of his ancestors, was given unto him of his parents, to
declare his religion and kindred: and the other name Paul, to have been added
for to testify the title of the city of Rome: both because they neither would
have this honor obscured in him, which then was greatly esteemed: neither
made they such reckoning of it, that it should extinguishe the remembrance of
the stock of Israel. That he uses the name of Paul oftener in his Epistles,
this may seem to be the cause, it was more famous, and more used in the
Churches, unto the which he wrote, it was more gracious in the Roman Empire,
though less known in his own kindred. For it behooued him to have great care
to avoid that vain suspicion and hatred, wherein the very name of a Jew was
at that time with the Romans, and Prouincials: and to beware he increased
not the madness of his Countriemen, and to take heed to him self. A Servant of
Jesus etc. He adorneth himself with these titles, Paul two ways gets
authority to his doctrine.
that he might get authority unto his doctrine. And that he does two ways:
first, whiles he affirms his calling unto the Apostleship. Secondly, when
he teaches that the same calling is not strange from the Church of Rome. For
it was both very expedient that he should be an Apostle by the calling of God,
and also known to be appointed to the Church of Rome. Therefore he says that
he was a minister of Christ, and called unto the office of an Apostle: whereby
he signifies yt he did not rashly intrude himself thither. Straight way after
he says, he was separated or put apart: that he might the better prove, he
was no vulgar or common fellow, but an excellent Apostle of the Lord. In
which signification he had also before descended from the general, unto that
was more special: seeing that the Apostleshippe is a kind of ministerye. For
who so occupies the function of teaching, is to be counted amongst the
servants of Christ: But Apostles, by degree of honor are most excellent
amongst all others. This selection or putting a part whereof he speaks, does
declare both the end and use of the Apostleship. For his mind is briefly to
show, to what end he was called unto this function. Therefore whereas he says
he was a servant of Christ, that is common to him with all other teachers. In
chalenging unto himself ye title of an Apostle, he prefers himself before
others: but because he deserves no authority which intrudeth himself, he
admonishes yt he was ordained of the Lord. The meaning is thus: that Paul is
a servant of Christ, not a common servant, but an Apostle, and that not by
intrusion, but by the calling of God. Then follows a more clear exposition
of the duty of an Apostle, namely that he is ordained to the preaching of the
Gospel. For I am not of their mind, which refer ye calling, whereof he
speaks, unto the eternal election of God: by separation or putting apart they
understand either that whereby he was separated from his mothers womb, whereof
he speaks to ye Galathia^s, Galat. 1.15.
or that whereby Luke says, he was appointed unto the Gentiles. For simply he
rejoices yt he had God his author, least any should think he had
presumptuously usurped this honor. Here we are to note, All men are not meet
for the ministry.
that all me^ are not meet for ye ministry of the word, wherein there is
required a special calling: yea they which think themselves most fit, are to
take heed, yt without calling they thrust not themselves in. Moreover, of what
sort the calling of Apostles and Bishops is, shall be declared in another place.
We must observe also, that the office of an Apostle is to preach the Gospel.
The office of an Apostle is to preach the Gospel.
Whereby may appear how ridiculous those dumb dogs are, who when they are
glorious only in a myter, a crooked staff, and such masking attire, yet they
boast themselves to be the successors of the Apostles. The name servant
signifies nothing else then a minister: for it is referred unto the office.
Which I note for this cause that the error of those may be taken away, who to
no purpose dispute subtly of this word servant, whiles they think there is
contained under it, a contrariety between the seruise of Moses and Christ.

Which he had promised before, etc. Because that doctrine which is suspected to
be new even through the suspicion of newness has lost a great part of his
authority: he establishes the faith of the Gospel, by the antiquity thereof:
as if he should say, Christ came not into the earth upon the sudden, The
doctrine of the Gospel is no new doctrine
neither brought he a new, and strange kind of doctrine: for he himself
together with his Gospel, has been promised, and looked for, since the
beginning of the world. Now because antiquity is many times feined, he adds
witnesses, and those also approved, that all suspicion might be taken away:
namely the Prophets of God. Thirdly he adds that their testimonies are truly
registered: namely, in the holy Scriptures. Out of this place we may geather
what the Gospel is: which he teaches not to have been preached, but only
promised by the Prophets. Therefore if the Prophets did promise the Gospel, it
follows then, that the Lord being at the length manifested in the flesh, it
was exhibited: they are therefore deceived that confound the promises with the
Gospel: A difference between the Gospel and the promises.
seeing the Gospel properly is a solemn preaching of Christ manifested, in
whom the promises are exhibited.

Of his son etc. A notable place, wherein we are taught, that the whole
Gospel is comprehended in Christ: so that whosoever goes a foot from Christ,
withdraws himself from the Gospel. For seeing he is the lively and express
image of the father, it is no marvel, though he only be set before us, unto
who^ all our faith ought to bend it self, and in whom it ought to consist.
Christ is the sum of the Gospel.
This is therefore a certain description of the Gospel: whereby Paul shows
briefly what is contained in it. I have turned the words following in the same
case, Jesus Christ, etc. For this conjunction of the text, seemed unto me, best
to agree. Whereupon it is to be concluded, that he which has profited
accordingly in the knowledge of Christ, has obtained, whatsoever may be
learned out of the Gospel. As on the contrary, they which seek to be wise out
of Christ, are not only foolish, but altogether mad. Two things to be
considered in Christ.
Who was made etc. Two things are to be sought for in Christ, that we may find
salvation in him: his divinity, and his humanity. His divinity conteyneth in
it self, his power, righteousness, and life, which are communicated unto us by
his humanity. Wherefore the Apostle put them both down precisely, in the
sum of the Gospel, that Christ was exhibited in the flesh, and in the same
declared himself to be the son of God: like as John, John 1.14.
when he had said that the word was made flesh, he adds that his glory was
seen in the flesh, as the glory of the only begotten son of God. And it is
not without great consideration, that he fetches the kindred, and petigrue of
Christ, specially from David his great Grandfather: for hereby he calls us
unto the promises: least we should doubt, whether this were he, that was
promised in old time. The promise made unto David, was so famous, that it is
evident, by use to have been taken up amongst the Jews, to call the Messiah
the son of David. This thing therefore makes for the assurance of our faith,
that Christ came of David. He adds. According to the flesh: That we might
know he has somewhat above flesh, which he brought from heaven, and took it
not of David: Namely that, which he adds afterward of the glory of the
dietie. Moreover in these words. Paul does not only prove Christ to have
taken the true nature of flesh, but also plainelye distinguishes the human
nature, from the divine in him: and so he refuteth the wicked doting of
Seruetus, who feigned Christ to have flesh composed of three uncreated
elements.

4 And declared to be the son of God etc. Or if you had rather, determined or
appointed: as if he should say, the virtue of his resurrection, was in steed
of a decree, Psalm. 2, 7.
whereby he was denounced to be the son of God: as it is said, this day have
I begoten thee. For that same begetting is to be referred unto knowledge. And
albeit some men make here three diverse testimonies of Christ's divinity, by
power understanding miracles, secondly, the testimony of the spirit, Christ
declared to be true God by his resurrection.
lastly the resurrection of the dead: I had rather join them all together, and
reduce all three unto one, after this manner, Christ is the determined or
appointed son of God, having openly declared a true celestial, and the very
same power of the spirit, when he rose from the dead: but this power is
comprehended, when it is sealed by the same spirit in our hearts. Unto which
interpretation the phrase of the Apostle agrees very well: for he says he was
declared in power, or mightily, because there appeared in him such power, as
was proper unto God, and proved him most certainly to be God. This power
appeared in his resurrection: as in another place the same Paul, after he has
acknowledged, ^. Cor. 13.4.
that the infirmity of the flesh appeared in his death, commends the virtue
of the spirit in his resurrection. Yet this glory is not known to us, until
the same spirit seal it in our hearts. And that Paul together with that
wonderful power of the spirit, which Christ showed forth in rising from the
dead, does also understand that testimony which every faithful man feels in
his heart, may be seen by this, that he does express sanctification by name:
as if he should say, the spirit as it sanctifies, does establish and ratify
that experiment of his power, which it once declared. For ye Scripture uses
often to adorn the spirit of God with such titles as may serve for the present
purpose. So it is called of the Lord the spirit of truth, of that effect,
Ioh. 14.17.
whereof he spoke in that place. Moreover, a celestial power is said to have
appeared in the resurrection of Christ, because he rose again by his own
strength, as he testified many times, saying, destroy this temple, and in
three days I will raise it up again. Ioh. 2.9. Ioh. 10.18.
No man takes my life from me. For he conquered death (to whom he gave place
according to the infirmity of the flesh) not by external help gotten by
entreaty, but by the heavenly operation of his own spirit.

5 By whom we have received, etc. Having ended the description of the Gospel,
(which, for the commendation of his office, he inserted) now he comes to
speak of his calling, for it stood him greatly upon to make the same approved
with the Romans. Paul not called to be an Apostle for his worthiness.
Whereas he names grace and Apostleship one from the other, it is an
Hyppallage, for free Apostleship, or grace of Apostleship: whereby he
signifies, that it was wholly through the bountifulness of God, and not of his
worthiness, that he was called unto so high an office. For although in the
sight of the world, it has nothing besides perils, labors, hatred. and
infamy: yet with God and his Saints, it is of singular and great dignity. Or
if you had rather say thus, I have received favor that I should be an Apostle,
it is all one. Where it is said, In his name, etc. Ambrose expounds it, that
in the steed of Christ, he was appointed unto the Gospel: according to that
saying, we are Ambassadors for Christ. 2. Cor. 5.20.
Yet me think their opinion is more sound, which take name for knowledge,
because the Gospel is preached to this end, 1. John 3.23.
that we might believe in the name of the son of God. And Paul himself is
called a chosen vessel to bear the name of Christ amongst the Gentiles. Acts
9, 13.
In his name therefore is as much as if he should say, that I might make known
what Christ is.

Into the obedience of faith, etc. That is to say, we have received
commandment to bear the Gospel unto all nations, whereunto they may become
obedient by faith. From the end of his calling, he aduertiseth the Romans
again of his office: as if he should say, it is my part to execute that, which
is given me in charge, that is, to preach the word: and it is your parts to
obey the word with all obedience: They are contumelious against God, and
injurious to themselves that reject the Gospel.
unless you will make that calling frustrate, which the Lord has given unto
me. Whereby we may gather, that they do stubbornly gainstand the power of God,
and pervert his ordinance, who irreverently and disdaynfully refuse the
preaching of the Gospel, whose end is to bring us into the obedience of God.
Here also the nature of faith is to be observed, which is therefore adorned
with the title of obedience, because the Lord does call us by the Gospel: and
we aunsweare to his calling by faith. As on the contrary, infidelity is the
cause of all disobedience against God. I choose rather to translate it, into
the obedience of faith, then to obey faith: because this latter cannot be
said, but improperly, and figuratively: albeyt it is once read in the Acts.
For properly it is faith, Acts 6.7.
whereby we obey the Gospel.

Amongst all the Gentiles, amongst whom etc. It was not enough that he was
appointed an Apostle, except his ministry should have respect unto the making
of Disciples. Therefore he adds, that his Apostleship did extend unto all the
Gentiles. Though all the Apostles were sent to preach the Gospel to the
Gentiles, yet Paul specially.
Straight ways after he calls himself more plainly the Apostle of the
Romans, whilst he says the Romans were comprehended in the number of the
Gentiles, to whom he was given to be a minister. Moreover, the Apostles have
this commandment common unto them, that they should preach the Gospel in all
the world: neither were they appointed over certain Churches, as Pastors and
Bishops are. And Paul besides the general charge of his function Apostolical,
by a special ordinance was appointed a minister to preach the Gospel amongst
the Gentiles. Acts 16.6.
Neither hinders that any whit, that he was forbidden to go through
Macedonia, and preach the word in Mysia, which was done, not that certain
bounds should be limited unto him: but that for the present time, he was to
hasten other where: for the harvest was not yet ripe there.

6 Called of Jesus Christ. He gives a reason which is somewhat nearer:
scilicet because the Lord had already showed in them an experiment, whereby he
declared that he called the^, to the fellowship of the Gospel. Whereupon it
followed, if they would have their calling to stand, they ought not to reject
the ministry of Paul, who was chosen by the same election of the Lord.
Therefore I understand this short sentence called of Jesus Christ, by the way
of a declaration, as though this word namely, or to say, came between. For he
signifies, that they are partakers of Christ by calling. Whom God has chosen
in Christ, those he has committed to his tuition.
For they which shall be the heirs of eternal life, are both chosen of the
heavenly father in Christ, and also being elected, are committed to his
custody, and tuition as of a shepherd.

To all you which are at Rome. By an excellent order he shows what is praise
worthy in us. First, that the Lord of his bountifulness has received us into
favor, and love. Secondly, What is commendable in us, and when the same
commendation takes place in us.
that he has called us. Thirdly, that he has called us unto holiness: which
commendation then takes place, if we become answerable to our calling. Here
arises unto us a very fruitful doctrine, which I will comprise in few
words, and leave to the consideration of every man. Assuredly Paul defines
not ye praise of our salvation, to be in our selves, but deriueth it wholly
from ye fountain of Gods free and fatherly love toward us. Gods free and
fatherly mercy is the fountain of health and salvation.
For he makes this ye original, yt God loved us. And what other cause was
there of his love then his mere goodness? Hereupon not only our calling
depends, whereby in his time he seals his adoption in those, Two things
required in the true members of Christ, faith in Gods mercy and the study of
piety.
whom he had freely chosen before. But also we geather, that none can rightly
associate or couple himself unto the number of the faithful, but they must
certainly believe that the Lord is merciful unto them, although they are
unworthy, and miserable sinners, and being stirred by his goodness, must give
all their study to come unto holiness. For he has not called us unto
uncleanness but unto holiness. 1. These. 4.7.
Seeing the Greek may be translated by the second person, I do not see the
reason why the person should be changed. Grace and peace. Before all other
things it is to be wished, that we may have GOD favorable toward us: which
is signified by grace. As all things fall out for good, where Gods favor
shines, so on the contrary etc.
Then secondly that prosperity and success of al things may proceed from
him, which is understood by the word peace. For howsoever al things seem to
laugh upon us: if God be angry, even blessing it self is turned into a curse.
Therefore the only foundation of our felicity is the favor of God: whereby we
enjoy true and perfect prosperity, yea even in adversities also our salvation
is advanced. And whereas he prays for peace from the Lord, we understand,
that whatsoever good thing comes unto us, the same is a fruit of Gods
favor. Neither is this to be omitted, that he does also pray for these good
things from the Lord Jesus. All good things come unto us through Christ.
For worthily is this honor given unto him, who is not only the minister and
disposer of his fathers bountifulnes toward us, but also together with the
father works all things. Yet the mind of the Apostle properly is to note,
that all the benefits of God come unto us through him. There are some which by
the word peace, had rather understand the peace of conscience: which
signification I deny not but sometimes it has: but seeing it is most certain
yt the mind of the Apostle in this place, was briefly to put down the sum of
good things, that former interpretation which is approved of Bucer, is more
convenient by a great deal. Therefore he willing to wish the sum of
felicity unto the godly, goes unto the fountain, as of late, namely the
grace of GOD, which alone does not only bring unto us eternal blessedness,
but also is the cause of all good things in this life.

8 First, I thank my God through Jesus Christ for you all, because your faith
is published throughout the whole world. 9 For God is my witness (whom I
serve in my spirit in the Gospel of his son) that without ceassing I make
mention of you. 10 Always in my prayers, beseeching that by some means one
time or other, I might have a prosperous journey by the will of God to come
unto you.

11 For I long to see you, that I might bestow among you some spiritual gift to
strengthen you. 12 That is, that I might be comforted together with you,
through our mutual faith, both yours and mine. 8 First etc. Here begins the
entrance, which is very aptly applied unto the cause, for by reasons taken as
well from his own person, as from theirs, he does conveniently prepare them
unto docilitie or easines to be taught. Paul prepares the mynds of the
Romans by reasons taken both from his own and their person.
The reason from their person is, that he reports ye famousnes of their
faith. For thereby he insinuates, that they being laden with the public praise
of Churches, could not refuse an Apostle of the Lord, but they should deceive
that opinion which all men had conceived of them: which is counted barbarous,
and in a manner nigh unto infidelity. As this report therefore ought to
induce the Apostle, that having conceived well of their obedience, he should
take upon him according to his office, to teach and instruct the Romans: so
it bound the Romans again, that they should not despise his authority.
From his own person he stirs them unto docilitie, with a testification of
his sincere love. For there is nothing more effectual to procure credit unto
him that counsels, then if he have gotten this opinion, that he is thought
even from his heart, to study and provide for our wealth. First this is
worthy to be noted, that he so prayseth their faith, that yet he ascribes
it unto GOD, Faith is the gift of God.
as received of him. Whereby we are taught, that faith is the gift of GOD.
For if thanksgiving, be an acknowledging of a benefit: then he does
acknowledge faith to be of GOD, who so does give him thanks for it. And in
as much as we see the Apostle begins his gratulations with thanksgiving:
We are at all times to use such speeches as may move us and others to
acknowledge Gods goodness.
we may know that we are admonished that all our good things are the gifts
of GOD. And also it is expedient that we acquaint our selves with such kind
of speeches, as thereby we may the rather at all times be removed to
acknowledge GOD to be the giver of all good things: and provoke others also
unto the same mind. And if it be meet to observe this in the least
blessings, much more in faith: which is an excellent and singular grace of
GOD. We must give thanks to God through Christ.
Furthermore, here we have an example, how we are to give thanks by
Christ, according to the commandment of the Apostle to the Hebrews: Heb.
13.15.
even as we ask and obtain mercy at the hands of the father in his name.
Finally, he calls him his God. This is a special prerogative of the
faithful, to whom only God gives this honor. For therein is contained a
mutual respect, Iere. 30.22.
which is expressed in the promise: I will be their God, and they shall be my
people. Although I had rather restrain it unto ye person which Paul did
bear: that it might be an approbation of ye obedience which he performed
unto the Lord in the preaching of the Gospel. So Ezechias calls God, the God
of Esaias, Esaias 27.4.
when he would give testimony unto him that he was a true and faithful prophet.
So also by a kind of excellency he is called the God of Daniel: because Daniel
had maintained his pure worship throughout the whole world. Dan. 6.19.
The commendation of good me^ was unto Paul in esteeming the faith of the
Romans, like unto the whole world. For Infidels, By the whole world is meant
the number of the faithful which were scattered over the whole world.
to who^ their faith was rather an abhominatio^, could neither give sincere,
nor probable testimony of it. Therefore we understand it, yt the faith of the
Romans was published in the whole world by the mouths of all the faithful,
who could both judge and speak aright of it. That this small and base company
of me^, was not known to the wicked, no not to those were at Rome, that is no
matter: seeing Paul passed by their judgment, as a thing of naught.

9 For God is my witness. He shows his charity by the effects. For unless
he had loved them greatly, Paul shows his love by the effects.
he would not so carefully have solicited their health with the Lord, and
specially he would not have so earnestly desired to advance the same by his
own labor. Therefore that carfulness, and that desire are sure tokens of his
love: for except they sprung from that, they could never be. And because he
knew it was expedient for establishing credit to his preaching, that the
Romans should be well persuaded of his sincerity: he adds an oath, A
necessary remedy as often as that talk which ought to be firm and out of all
doubt, is called into question. For if an oath be nothing else then a calling
of GOD to witness, for the confirmation of our talk, they are very foolish
which deny the Apostle to have sworn in this place, and yet notwithstanding
he transgressed not the commandment of Christ. Whereby appears that the
meaning of Christ was not (as the superstitious Anabaptists dream) altogether
to put down oaths, An oath is not altogether unlawful.
but rather to call us unto the true observation of the law. And the law
permits an oath, forbidding only perjury, and superfluous swearing.
Therefore if we will, accordingly as we should, swear, let us follow the
sobriety and reverent discretion which appeared in the Apostles. God is so
called to witness in an oath, that he is called to be a revenger if we deceive.
2. Cor. 1.23.
And to the end thou may understand this rule, know thou, that GOD is so
called to be a witness, that he is also called to be a revenger if we do
deceive. Which thing Paul expresses in another place in these words, Now
I call God for a record unto my soul.

Whom I woorshippe in spirit. Because wicked men which delude God, use no
less boldly then rashely to pretend his name, Paul here commends his
holiness, that he might have the more credit. For who so does fear, and
reverence God, will abhor to swear falsely. Moreover, he opposes his spirit
against outward hypocrisy. And because many do falsely boast themselves to be
the worshippers of God, Which is the true worship of God.
and in outward show appear to be so, he testifies that he does woorship
God from his heart. It may be also he had respect unto the old ceremonies, in
which only, the Jews thought the woorshippe of God did consist. Therefore he
lets to understand that although he retained not that exercise, yet
nevertheless he was a true worshipper of God: Philip. 3.3.
as he says unto the Philippians. We are the true circumcision, which serve
God in the spirit, and glory not in the flesh. Therefore he rejoices that
he woorshipped God in sincere piety of mind, which is true religion, and ye
lawful worship of God. It was expedient (as I said before) to the end his
oath might have the more certainty, that Paul should testify his devotion
toward God. For perjury which the godly abhor more then a thousand
deaths, Where true fear of God is, there is also a reverence of his name.
is but a sport with the wicked. For it cannot be, but where there is a
serious fear of God, there should also be such reverence of his name. It is
therefore as much as if Paul should say, I know how great reverence, and
religious devotion there ought to be of an oath, I therefore do not call God
to witness as the wicked use to do. And so by his example he teaches us, A
rule to be observed in calling God to witness.
that so often as we swear, we should give such testimony of holiness, that
the name of God which we use in our talk might have his weight. Secondly, he
proves by the sign, that he worshipped not God hypocritically, namely by his
ministry. For that was a notable token, that he was a man given to the glory
of God, who having denied himself, refused not for the advancing of the
kingdom of God, to sustain what dangers soever, whether of reproach,
poverty, death, or hatred. Some understand this clause, as though he did
therefore commend that worship, wherwithal he said he worshipped God, because it
was according to the prescript rule of the Gospel. Sure it is that the
spiritual worship of God, is commanded in the Gospel. But yet the former
interpretation is much more consonant: namely, that he bequeathed his
obedience to God, in the preaching of the gospel. Yet in the mean while he
distinguishes himself from hypocrites, who have another purpose then to serve
God: Hypocrites seek not God in the administration of their office.
as ambition or some such like does cause most of them, and it is far to
seek, that all should behave themselves sincerely and faithfully in that
office. The sum is, that Paul was occupied sincerely in the office of
teaching: because he applied that, which by the way of circumstance he had
spoken of his piety, unto the present cause. The preaching of the gospel is a
precious service unto god.
But hence we gather a profitable doctrine, which ought greatly to encourage
the ministers of the gospel, when they hear that they do a thankful and
precious service unto God, in preaching the gospel. For what is it that
should hinder them, when they know their labor so to please God, and to be
approved with him, that it is counted an excellent service of God? Moreover he
calls it the gospel of the son of God, because Christ is manifested in
it, being ordained of the father unto this, that whiles he is glorified, he
should again glorify the father.

That without ceasing. Yet he expresses a greater heat of love, by his
continual praying. For it was much, always to make mention of them, when he
made his prayers unto God. And that we may have the sense more plain, I take
this word, (...), in steed of a nowne: as though it were said, in all my
prayers, or as often as I come unto God in prayers, I make mention of you. And
he speaks not of every invocation of God, but of those prayers, whereunto
whiles the saints will bestow themselves, The godly have used set and solemn
prayers.
all cares being set a part, they give their whole study to them. For
oftentimes he might upon the sudden burst forth into this or that wish, and
yet the Romans not in his remembrance: But as often as he did purposely, and
as it were with meditation pray unto God, amongst others he was also
mindful of them. Therefore he speaks of peculiar prayers, whereunto the
Saints do purposely dispose them selves: as we see the Lord himself in
such prayers to have sought for a solitary place. And withal he gives to
understand how often, or rather how continually he was occupied in them,
whiles he says, he prayed without ceasing.

Beseeching, that by some means. Because it is not like, that from our heart
we seek his profit, whom we are not ready to further with our help:
after he has declared his carfulness in procuring their salvation, now he
adds another argument whereby he testified before God, his love toward
them: namely, in beseeching that he might help them. Wherefore, that you may
have the full sense, read these words as though the word yea were interposed:
Yea, beseeching, (that by some means.) And when he says, a prosperous
journey by the will of the Lord, he declares that he does not only look
for the prosperity of life from the favor of the Lord, Al things ought to be
counted prosperous which please God.
but even thereupon to esteem his journey prosperous, if it be approved of
the Lord, according to which rule, all our desires ought to be ordered.

For I desire to see you, etc. He might after a sort being absent, have
confirmed their faith with his doctrine: but because counsel is always
better taken of one present therefore he coueted rather to be with them face
to face. And he shows the end of his counsel, to signify unto them, that
he would not take upon him so wearisome a journey for his own, but for their
profit. By spiritual gifts, he understands either the gifts of doctrine,
or exhortation, or prophecy: which he knew he had received of the grace of
God. Here he has notably set forth the lawful use of those gifts, under the
word, The right use of Gods graces.
communicating or bestowing. For to that end are diverse gifts given peculiarly
to every one, that all might graciously one help another, and one make another
partaker of those things, which are given to every one: of this afterward. To
strengthen you. He qualifieth that which he said of communication, Romans
12.3. and 1. Cor. 12.11
least he should seem to count them such, as were yet to be instructed in
the first elements, as though they were not yet rightly entered in Christ.
Therefore he says that he coueteth to help them in that respect, wherein,
they may yet be helped, which have profited greatly. For all of us have need to
be confirmed, Ephe. 4.13.
till Christ be made perfect in us. And not being content to have spoken so
modestly, he adds over and besides, a castigation or correction, wherein he
shows that he did not so take upon him the office of teaching, but that also
he coueted to learn again of them. As if he should say, I desire so to
confirm you according to the measure of grace given unto me, that my faith
also, by your example may be encouraged: and so we may profit one another
amongst our selves. Behold into how great moderation this godly man
submits him self, that he refuses not to seek for confirmation of those
were but raw scholars.

Neither speaks he dissemblingly. None is enriched with such plenty of
Gods graces, but he may some time reap profit by the simplest.
For there is none in the Church of Christ so void of gifts, that he can not
profit us somewhat: but our malignitie and pride hinder us, that we do not
receive any such commodity. We are so high minded, and dronken with foolish
glory, that dispising others, and setting them at naught, every man thinks
him self to be sufficient enough for him self. I had rather read it with
Bucer by the way of exhortation, then of consolation: because so it agrees
better with the premises.

13 Now my brethren I would not that you should be ignorant, how that I
have often times purposed to come unto you, (but have been let hitherto) that I
might have some fruit also among you, as I have among the other Gentiles. 14 I
am debtor both to the Grecians, and Barbarians, both to the wise men, and to
the unwise.

15 Therefore as much as in me is, I am ready to preach the Gospel to you
also that are at Rome. Whereas hitherto he had testified that he did
continually desire of God that he might at some time see them, The counsels
and purposes, yea even of the godly are many times interrupted.
because that might seem to be but a vain thing, unless he would take
occasion offered, now he certified them in that point: for he says there was
no want of will but of opportunity: because he was often interrupted of his
purpose.

Where we learn, that the Lord many times overthrows the counsels of his
Saints, that he might humble them, and by such humbling, teach them to have
respect unto his providence, that they might depend upon it, although the
Saints, who deliberate nothing without the will of God, are not properly
driven from their counsels. For that is wicked boldness without regard of
God to determine upon things to come, as who should say, they were in our
power: which boldness, James reproves sharply. Jacob. 4.13.
Whereas he says he was let, thou may not otherwise take it, then that
the Lord did lay before him more urgent business of the Church, The godly
esteem not impediments as the godles do.
which he could not leave without great damage to the Church. Thus yt
impedimentes of the godly and faithles differ: that these think them selves
then at length to be let, when by the violent hand of the Lord they are so
hemmed in, that they can not stir them selves: the other are content to take
some lawefull reason for an impediment: neither do they permit them selves to
attempt any thing, either besides their office or contrary to edification. That
I might have some fruit. Undoubtedly he speaks of that fruit, to the
gathering whereof the Apostles were sent of the Lord: Io. 15.16.
I have chosen you, that ye might go, and bring forth fruit, and your fruit
might remain. Which fruit albeit he gathered it not for himself, Gods
glory and the felicity of the godly are joined together
but for the Lord, yet he calls it his: because there is nothing more proper
unto the godly, then that which aduaunceth the glory of the Lord, whereunto
all their felicity is coupled. And he says he had received fruit amongst
other nations, to the end the Romans might be in hope, his coming unto them
should not be unprofitable, Gods glory and the felicity of the godly are
joined together.
which so many nations had proved to be fruitful.

14 Grecians and Barbarians. Whom he understands by Grecians and Barbarians
he shows by an exposition: when he names the same in other tytles wise
men and unwise: for the which Erasmus turns it, learned and unlearned: but
I had rather keep the words of Paul. He reasons therefore from his
office, that he is not to be counted arrogant because he thought him self
partly able to teach the Romans, how soever they excelled in learning,
prudencie, and knowledge of things. For it pleased the Lord to send him also
unto the wise.

Two things are here to be considered. First that the Gospel is appointed and
offered by the commandment of God unto the wise, Wise me^ must hear and
learn the Gospel.
to the end that the Lord might subject unto him all the wisdom of this
world, and might cause all wittiness, all kind of science, and highness of
arts give place unto the simplicity of this doctrine: And so much the more,
because they are brought into an order with idiotes, and are so tamed, that
they can now abide those to be their school fellows under the
Schoolemayster Christ, Unlearned men are neither to be feared away nor yet to
flee away of themselves from the school of Christ.
whom before they would not have suffered to have been their scholars.
Secondly, the unlearned neither are to be driven from this school, neither are
they through vain fear of themselves to flee away from it. For if Paul were
indebted to them, and is to be thought to have been a faithful debtor,
undoubtedly he performed that which he ought. Wherefore here they shall
find, whereof they may be capable to inioye it. Here also all Teachers have a
rule which they may follow, namely, that modestly, and courteously they humble
them selves to the unlearned and idiotes. Hereuppon it shall come to pass,
Preachers must so apply themselves to the capacity of the foolish, that they
cocker not their foolishness.
that they may bear more patiently many trifles, and devour almost innumerable
contempts, whereof otherwise they might be overcome. Yet withal let them
remember, that they are so bound unto the foolish: that they are not by over
much cockering to mainteyne their foolishness.

15 Therefore as much as in meee is. Now he concludes that which he spoke
before of his desire. Namely, that in as much as he saw it was his office to
sow the Gospel amongst them, that he might reap fruit unto the Lord: he
coueted to answer the calling of God, so far forth as the Lord would
permit.

16 For I am not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ: for it is the power of God
unto salvation to every one that believes, to the Jew first, and also to the
Grecian. 17 For by it the righteousness of God is revealed, from faith to
faith: as it is written, the just shall live by faith. 16 I am not ashamed.
This is a Preoccupation, or preventing of the adversaries objections, wherein
he foresheweth that he cared not for the scoffinges of the wicked, wherein also
by the way he makes unto him self a passage unto the setting forth of the
dignity of the Gospel, least it should be contemptible to the Romans. Whiles
he says he is not ashamed, thereby he gives to understand that it is
contemptible in the sight of ye world. Wicked men scoff and despise the
Gospel but the godly esteem it as ye instrument where in god shows forth his
power unto salvation.
And so he prepares them now to the bearing of the reproach of the cross of
Christ, least they should esteem less of the Gospel, whiles they see it
subject to the scoffinges and reproaches of the wicked: but on the contrary he
shows in how great price it is with the godly. First, if the power of God
ought to be in high estimation with us, that shyneth in the Gospel. If the
goodness of God be worthy to be sought for and loved of us, the Gospel is
an instrument of that goodness: worthy therefore is it to be reverenced, and
honored, if the power of God be to be reverenced: and as it is an instrument
of our salvation, it is to be loved of us. And observe how much Paul
attributes unto the ministry of the word, when he testifies, that therein
God shows forth his power unto salvation: for he speaks not here of any
secret revelation, but of the vocal preaching of the Gospel.

Whereupon it follows, that they do as it were purposelye refuse the power
of GOD: and repel far from them his hand of deliverance, which withdraw
themselves from the hearing of the word. But because it woorketh not
effectually in all, but only where the spirit the inward teacher lighteneth
their hearts: therefore he adds, to every one that believes. Indeed the
Gospel is offered all men to salvation: but the power thereof appears not
every where. And whereas it is the savor of death unto the wicked, That the
gospel is the sauoure of death to the wicked, it is of their malice and not of
the nature of the gospel.
that comes not so much of the nature of the Gospel, as of their malignitie
and wickedness. By declaring one salvation, he cutteth off all other
confidence: from which only and sole salvation, whiles the wicked withdraw
them selves, they have a certain manifestation of their destruction in the
Gospel. Therefore seeing the Gospel does indifferently call all men unto
salvation, it is properly called the doctrine of salvation. For Christ is
offered in it, whose proper office is to save that was lost. And those which
refuse to be saved by him, shall find him a Judge. Yet every where in the
Scriptures this word salvation is simplye opposed against destruction.
Therefore when it is named we are to regard what thing is spoken of. Seeing
therefore the Gospel does deliver from the destruction and curse of eternal
death, the salvation thereof is life eternal. To the Jew first and also to
the Grecian. Eternal life is the salvation of the gospel.
Under the name of Grecians now he conteyneth all the Gentiles, as may appear
by his division wherein he has comprehended all men under two members. And
it is like that he chose this nation of Grecians chiefly, to set out other
nations by them, because it was first, after the Jews, admitted into the
communion or fellowship of the couenaunte of the Gospel: Secondly, because
both for nighnesse, and famousnesse of tongue the Grecians were best known to
the Jews. Synecdoche is when by one ^^ny, or by a part the whole, or by a
speaciall the general is understood.
It is therefore the figure Synecdoche wherein generallye he conioyneth the
Gentiles to the Jews in the participation of the Gospel: yet notwithstanding
he puts not the Jews down from their degree and order, in as much as
they were the first in the promise and calling. Therefore he reserueth for
them their prerogative: but forthwith he adioyneth the Gentiles, albeit in a
lower degree, partakers with them.

17 For the righteousness of God. This is an exposition and confirmation of
the former sentence, namely, Salvation is life with god.
that the Gospel is the power of God unto salvation, For if we seek for
salvation that is to say, life with God, first we must seek for
righteousness, Without righteousness, there is no life.
whereby we being reconciled unto GOD, through his mercy may obtain life,
which consists only in his benevolence. For seeing God hates
unrighteousness, we must needs be righteous before we cann be loved of
him. Therefore he signifies that we can not obtain salvation otherwhere
then in the Gospel: because GOD does not else where manifest unto us his
righteousness, which only delivers us from destruction. And this
righteousness which is the groundworke of our salvation is revealed in the
Gospel: whereupon the Gospel is called the power of God unto salvation: So he
reasons from the cause unto the effect. Moreover, note how rare and precious
a treasure the Lord does bestow upon us in the Gospel, namely, the
communication of his righteousness. Righteousness of God, is yt which is
approved before God.
By the righteousness of God I understand that righteousness which is
approved before the tribunal seat of God: as on the contrary he is wont to
call that the righteousness of men, which in the opinion of men is reckoned
and counted for righteousness, although indeed it be but a smoke. And yet I
doubt not but Paul alludeth unto many Prophesies, where the spirit of God
often celebrateth the righteousness of God in the kingdom of Christ to come.
Others expound it for righteousness which is given unto us of God. And surely
I confess the words will bear this sense: because God does justify us by
the Gospel: therefore he saves. Yet that former interpretation seems unto me
to be more agreeyng: Although I do not greatly stand upon that matter. That
is more weighty, where some think this righteousness does not only consist
in the free remission of sins: but partly also in the grace of regeneration.
But I do understand it, that we are therefore restored into life, because God
has freely reconciled us unto himself: as we shall show more at large
afterward in his place. And whereas he said before to every one that
believes, now he says from faith: for righteousness is offered by the Gospel,
and is received by faith. Righteousness is offered in the Gospel, and is
received by faith.
And he adds to faith: for look how much our faith increases in us, and how
much we have profited in this knowledge, by so much the righteousness of God
together with them is augmented in us, and after a sort ye possession thereof is
established. As soon as we do taste of the Gospel, we see the countenance
of GOD, but a far off, favorable and pleasant toward us: the more that the
knowledge of piety grows in us, As faith and knowledge of ye Gospel
increase, so the righteousness of God increases in us.
as it were by coming nearer, we behold the grace of God more clear and
more familiarly. Whereas many think there is under these words a secret
comparing of the old with the new Testament, that is more subtle then firm.
For Paul does not here compare the fathers which lived under the Law with
us, but notes the daily progress and proceeding in every faithful man. As
it is written. By the authority of the Prophet Habacuc he proves this
righteousness of faith. For he, when he prophecieth the destruction of the
proud, adds also, that the life of the just consists in faith. And we
live not in the sight of GOD but by righteousness: Therefore it follows that
our righteousness also does depend upon faith. And the verb future notes
the continual perpetuity of that life whereof he speaks: as if he had
said, it is not momentaney, but shall endure for ever. For the wicked also are
proud through a false opinion of life: but whiles they say peace and all is
well, 1. These. 5.3.
sodaynelie destruction comes upon them. The life of the wicked is but a
shadow.
It is therefore but a shadow which continues but a moment: and it is faith
only which brings eternal life. Whence is that, but because faith does
bring us unto GOD, and setleth our life in him? For unless this were the
meaning of the Prophet, that then, and not before, we stand, when by faith
we lean upon GOD, Paul had not aptlye applied this testimonye. And
undoubtedly he has not otherwise ascribed the life of the Godly unto faith,
but so far as, the pride of the world being condemned, they gather them
selves under the safegarde of one God. He does not now upon set purpose
handle this cause: and therefore he makes no mention of free righteousness:
but even by the nature of faith it is sufficientlye apparaunt, that this
testimonye is fittely applied unto the present cause.

Furthermore, by this disputation we do necessarily gather the mutual
relation between faith and the Gospel. For because it is said the just shall
live by faith, he infers that this life is received by the Gospel. Faith
and the Gospel have a mutual respect one to ye other.
Now we have the state, or principal point of this first part of the
Epistle, namely, that by the only mercy of GOD we are justified. As yet we
have not this particularly expressed in the words of Paul: but by the Text it
will easily appear afterward, The state of the first part of this Epistle.
that our righteousness which is grounded upon faith, does wholly depend upon
the mercy of God.

18 For the wrath of God is revealed from heaven against all ungodliness, and
unrighteousness of men, which withhold the truth in unrighteousness, or
unjustly. 19 For as much as that, which may be known of GOD, is manifest in
them: for God has showed it unto them. 20 For the invisible things of him,
that is, his eternal power and Godhead, are seen by the creation of the
world, being considered in his works, to the intent that they should be
without excuse. 21 Because that when they knew God, they glorified him not as
God, neither were thankful, but became vain in their imaginations, and their
foolish heart was full of darkness. 22 When they professed themselves to be
wise they became fools. 23 For they turned the glory of the incorruptible GOD
to the similitude of the Image of a corruptible man, and of birds, and four
footed beasts, and of creeping things. 18 The wrath of GOD is revealed. Now
he argues from the comparing of contraries, whereby he proves, that
righteousness happens not, neither comes otherwise then by the Gospel: Out
of the Gospel all men are condemned.
for out of this he shows all men are condemned. Therefore in it only is
salvation to be found. And he brings for the first argument of
condemnation: that when the frame of the world, and this comely composition of
Elements, ought to have been a spur unto man, that he should glorify
GOD: no man was found to do his duty. Whereby appears, how all men
are guyltye of sacrilege, and wicked, and abominable ingratitude. Some men
think this to be the first proposition or general sentence: that Paul
might begin his Sermon at Repentance: but my mind is, that the disputation
begins here: And that the state of the cause was set down in the former
proposition. For the purpose of Paul is to show where salvation is to be
sought for. And he has already pronounced that we do not otherwise obtain
it then by the Gospel. But because flesh does not willinglye humble it self
thus far, that it might assign the praise of salvation to the only grace
of GOD, Seeing al men are guilty of eternal death in themselves who so will be
saved must seek for life else where.
Paul proves the whole world to be guiltye of eternal death. Whereupon
it ensues that we must seek for life else where, seeing we are all lost
and utterly cast away in our selves. How be it the words being
diligently weighed will help greatelye to the understanding of the tenor of
the proposition. Some put a difference between impietye and unrighteousness
after this sort, by the first word they understand the violating of the
woorshippe of GOD, by the second the violating of that equitye should be
amongst men. But because the Apostle immediately after refers that
unrighteousness unto the neglect of religion, we will understand both as one,
and the same.

Secondlye, all impietye of men: Hypallage is when in speech the order of
things is turned.
by the figure Hypallage, for the impiety of all men: or, whereof all men
are guiltye. One thing, to wit unthankfulness against God, is set forth
by two names, because we offend therein two ways. It is called Asebeia id
est impiety or ungodliness, as a dishonouring of God. It is called Adigeia ^d
est unrighteousness, or injustice, because man in taking unto him self that is
Gods, has unjustly robbed GOD of his honor. Wrath, an humane affection, after
the manner of the Scripture, How God is said to be angry.
is put for the reue^gement of God: because GOD when he punishes seems (in
our opinion) to be angrye. Therefore it does not signifye any motion in GOD:
but only has respect unto the sense of the sinner that is punished. When
he says that the same is revealed from heaven, although this particle from
heaven, be taken of some in steed of an Epitheton as though it were said, of
the Celestial GOD: yet I think there is more efficacy in it, after this
sense, whether soever a man look about him, he shall find no health, for so
far and wide as the heavens are, the wrath of God is powered out into the
whole world. The truth of God, signifies the true knowledge of GOD. Gods
truth is withholde^, when his true knowledge is suppressed or obscured.
To withholde it, is to suppress or obscure it: whereby they are as it were
accused of theft. Where we translate it, unjustly, Paul has, in
unrighteousness: which phrase of the Hebrews is all one: but we study to
be plain.

19 For as much as that, which may be known of God. Thus he terms that,
which is lawefull or expedient for us to know of GOD. And he understands
all that which appertains to the setting forth of the glory of the Lord:
or (which is all one) whatsoever might move or stir us to glorify God. By
which word he signifies that GOD can not be conceived of us, God cannot
be known as he is, but only so far as it has pleased him to make himself
known.
how great he is: but there is a certain measure, within the which men
ought to keep them selves: even as God applies to our capacitye what so ever
he testifies of him self. Those dote therefore whosoever they be, contend
to know what God is: because it is not vain that the Spirit, the Teacher of
true wisdom does call us unto To gnoston to say, which may be known of
God. And how it may be known he will show straight way in that which
follows. For the greater Emphasis, he says rather, in them, then simply,
them. For although the Apostle, does every where use the Phrases of the
Hebrewe tongue, wherein Beth is often superfluous, yet here it is thought he
would show such a manifestation of God, whereby they might be urged more
neerelye then that they could make any evasion: as undoubtedly every one of
us does feel it graven in his heart. Whereas he says, God has showed it.
the meaning is, that man was therefore made, that he might be a beholder of the
frame of the world, and that therefore were eyes given unto him, that by the
beholding of so goodly a spectacle, The beholding of Gods workmanship in the
creation should lead us unto God.
he might be carried unto the author him self.

20 For the invisible things of him. God by himself is invisible: but because
his Majesty shyneth in all his works and creatures, men ought in them to
acknowledge him: For they do plainly show forth their woorkemaister. In
which respect the Apostle to the Hebrews calls the world a glass or
spectacle of invisible things. He reckons not particulerly, what things
may be considered in God: By the glass of Gods creatures we may come eue^ to
the knowledge of his eternal power and Godhead.
but he teaches that we may by that glass come even unto the knowledge of
his eternal power and Godhead. For it behooves him who is the author of all
things to be without beginning, and of him self. When we are come thither,
now the Godhead shows it self: which cannot consist but with every the
virtues of God, seeing they are all comprehended under it.

To the intent that they should be without excuse. Hereby it does easilye
appear, what men get by this demonstration: namelye that they can allege
no excuse before the judgment of GOD, but they are iustlye condemned. Let
this distinction therefore stand: the demonstration of God, whereby he makes
his glory apparaunt in his creatures, The revelation of God in his creatures
has a two fold consideration.
in respect of the brightness thereof is clear enough: but in respect of
our ca^^citie is not so sufficient. Yet we are not so blind, that we can
pretend ignorance, to quite us from the blame of naughtiness or peruersitie.
First we conceive with our selves there is a God: Secondly, that the same
whosoever he be, is to be woorshipped. But here our reason fails, before
it can obtain either who is GOD, Heb. 11.3. It is the light of faith whe^eby
we profit aright in the creation of the world.
or what he is. Wherefore the Apostle to the Hebrews ascribes this light
unto faith, that a man should profit truly in the creation of the world.
And not without cause: for through blyndnesse we are so hyndered that we can
not come unto the mark, we see so far that we can not pretend any excuse.
Paul declares both these things notably when he says, that God in times
past suffered the Gentiles in ignorance: Nevertheless he left not himself
without witness, Acts 14.17.
because he gave unto them rain, and fruitfulness from heaven. Therefore this
knowledge of God, which avails only to take away excuse, Io. 17.3. Iere.
9.24.
differs greatly from that knowledge brings salvation, whereof Christ
speaks and wherein Jeremy teaches we are to rejoice.

20 Because that when they knew God. Here he testifies plainly, that God
has put into the minds of all men the knowledge of himself: that is to say,
he has so manifested him self by his works, that needs they must behold
that, which of their own accord they seek not after, namely that there is
some God. For neither the world was existant by chance, neither did it come
forth of it self. But we must always note in what degree of knowledge they
abode in, as now it follows, What manner of knowledge was in ye Gentiles:
namely an ineffectual.
they glorified him not as God. God can not be conceived without his eternity,
power, wisdom, goodness, truth, righteousness and mercy. His eternity
appears in this, that he is the Author of all things. His power, that he
holds all things in his hand, and makes that they consist in him. His
wisdom, by the most apt disposing of all things. His goodness, because
there was none other cause why he should make all things, neither can he
be moved by any other reason to conserve them, then for his only
goodness. His justice, in the ruling or governing of all things, because he
punishes the guiltye, and delivers the innocent. His mercy that with so
great patience he suffers the peruersitye of men. His truth, in this
that he is immutable: Therefore he which has conceived the knowledge of
GOD, now owes unto him the glory of eternitye, wisdom, goodness and
righteousness. Whiles men do not acknowledge such virtues in GOD, but
dream of him as upon a vain fantasy: they are woorthilye said to rob
him wickedlye of his honor. As we are indebted to God for infinite benefits,
so chiefly for that he has revealed him self unto us.
And it is not without cause he adds, they were not thankful. For there is
no man that is not indebted unto him for infinite his benefits. Yea and if
it were in nothing else, even herein has he sufficientlye made us his
debtoures, that he has vouchesafed to reveal him self unto us. But they
became vain, etc. That is to say, having left the truth of God, were turned
to the vanity of their own sense, all the quickness or sharpness whereof is
but vain, and passes away like a smoke. And so their foolish mind, could
understand nothing aright: All man's sharpnes is but vain to understand and
serve God aright.
but by all means was carried headlong into errors and lies. This is that
unrighteousness, which by and by choketh through his prauitie the seed of
true knowledge, before it come to perfection.

22 When they professed. Out of this place commonly they take an argument, to
think that Paul has here to do with Philosophers, who specially
challenged unto them selves the praise of wisdom. And they think this to be
the course of Paul's disputation, that the excellency of the great Doctors
being beaten down, it might consequently follow, that there was nothing praise
worthy in the common sort of people.

But they seem unto me to have over slender a reason to move them. For this
thing was not peculiar unto the Philosophers, that they should think them
selves wise in the knowledge of God: but it was a thing common to the
Gentiles, of what degree or order soever they were. Fore there was none, which
would not bring the majesty of GOD under his capacitye: and make God such
one as he could conceive in his own sense. This temeritie is not learned (I
say) in schools, but being ingraffed in us, does come together with us
(that I may say so) even forth of our mothers womb. It has been a common
fault in all ages, that men trusting to their own wit, have imagined of God
and his worship according to their own fantasies.


For it is evident that this mischief has reigned in all ages, that men
should take unto them selves all liberty in coining superstitions. This
arrogancy therefore is reprehended: that when men ought in their humility to
have given the glory to God, they would be wise in themselves, and pull GOD
down unto their humility. For Paul holds this principle fast, that it is
his own fault, if any man be estraunged from the woorshippe of God. As if
he should say, because they have proudelye lift up them selves,
therefore through the just vengeance of God they have been infatuated or
made foolish. Concerning that interpretation which I refuse, my reason is at
hand that makes against it: because this error of fayning an Image to GOD,
had not his original from the Philosophers, but they having received it of
others with their sentence did approve it.

23 And they turned. After they had faygned God to be such one, as they
could apprehende by their carnal sense, it was far from them to acknowledge
the true God: but they made a feigned and new GOD, or rather an image in the
steed of God. That is it he says, They turned the glory of the Lord:
because like as if a man should suborne, or put a strange child in the
place of the natural, so they departed from the true God. Neither does this
pretense excuse them, that yet notwithstanding they believed GOD dwelled in
heaven: and that they counted not the wood for God, but for an Image: For even
this same is contumelious against God, It is great contumely against God to
imagine so grosely of him, as to resemble him to a mortal, yea or immortal
creature.
that they imagined so grosely of his Majesty, that they durst make unto him
an image. And from the guyltinesse of such presumption no man can be exempted:
no not the Priests nor Lawgiuers: nor Philosophers, of whom he that was most
sober, even Plato him self seeks also for a fashion in God. This madness
therefore is noted, that all would figure God unto them selves, which thing
undoubtedly declares their gross and foolish imaginations of God. And first
they defiled the majesty of God with the similitude of corruptible man. For so
I had rather turn it, then with Erasmus, of mortal man: Because Paul does
not only oppose the immortality of God, against the mortality of man: but
also that glory of his, subject to no corruptions, against the miserable
condition of man. Secondly, not being content with this so great wickedness,
they descended even unto beasts and to those also in their kind were most
vile. Whereby their sottishness is to be seen more clearly. Of these
abominations thou have with Lactantius, Eusebius, and Augustinus in his book
de Ciuitate Dei.

24 Wherefore also God gave them up to their hearts lusts, unto uncleanness,
to defile their own bodies between themselves. 25 Which turned the truth of
God unto a lie, and worshipped and served the creature, above the creator,
which is blessed for ever, Amen. 26 For this cause God gave them up unto vile
affections: for even their women did change the natural use into that which
is against nature. 27 And likewise also the men left the natural use of the
women, and burned in their lust one toward another, and manne with manne
wrought filthiness, and received in them selves such recompense of their
error as was meet. 28 For as they regarded not to know God, even so God
delivered them up unto a reprobate mind, to do those things which are not
convenient, 29 Being full of unrighteousness, fornication, wickedness,
covetousness, maliciousness, full of envy, of murder, of debate, of
deceit, taking all things in evil part, whisperers. 30 Backbyters, haters of
God, doers of wrong, proud boasters, inuenters of evil things, disobedient to
parents, without understanding, covenant breakers, without natural affection,
such as can never be appeased, merciless. 31 Which men though they
knew the Law of God, how that they which commit such things, are
worthy of death, yet not only do the same, but also favor them that do
them. 24 Wherefore also GOD gave them. Because impietye is a priuye or secret
mischief: least yet they should find some startinge hole, by a more
sensible demonstration, he shows that they can no way escape but they are
iustelye condemned, for because such fruits followed that impietye, as
thereby might be gathered evident tokens of the wrath of the Lord. And if so
be that the wrath of GOD be always just, then it follows that there went
somewhat before which made them damnable. From the tokens or signs of Gods
indignation he now urges the Apostasy and reuoltinge or slipping away of
men: Outrageous sinning is a token of Gods wrathful indignation, and a just
punishment of the abuse of his majesty.
for GOD verilye so reuengeth these alienate them selves from his goodness,
that he casts them headlong into manifold perdition and confusion. And
comparing the likelinesse of the vices wherewithal they were pestered, with
that impietye whereof he accused them before, he proves that they were by
the just judgment of GOD so plagued. For seeing nothing is more dear unto us
then our own honor, this is extreme blyndnesse, when we doubt not to be
reprochefull unto our selves. Wherefore it is a most conuenience punishemente
for the blasphemye committed aagaynst the majesty of GOD. He prosecuteth this
one thing unto the end of the Chapter, but yet he handeleth it diversely,
because the matter stood need of great amplification.

This therefore is the sum of that he goes about, namelye, that hereby it
does appear, the ingratitude of men toward GOD is inexcusable: because by
sure testimonies they show forth the fierce wrath of GOD against them. For
they should never have been plunged in so filthye lusts after the manner of
beasts, unless the Majesty of God had been maruellouslye displeased and
provoked against them. Wherefore, seeing they every where abounded in most
detestable abominations, he gathers that the testimonies of Gods wrath were
extante in them. Gods wrath always just.
Now if this wrath of GOD never rage against any temerously or unjustly, but
always it holds fast the moderation of equitye: hereby he shows it is a
plain case that no less just then sure destruction hangs over all men.
Of the manner how God does give men over unto wickedness, it is not
necessary I should make any large discourse in this place. For it is
certain he does permit men to fall, not only by suffering and winking
at them: but also by his just judgment he so ordeyneth it that they should
be led and carried both of their own concupiscence and the Devil into
such madness. Therefore he uses the word delivered, according to the
perpetual manner of the Scripture: which word they rack too violentlye who
think we are carried unto sin only by the sufferaunce of God. For as
Satan is the minister of Gods wrath and as it were his tormentoure, so he is
armed against us not by the dissembling or sufferaunce, but by the
commandment of the Judge. Satan is the minister of Gods wrath.
And yet is neither God cruel, nor we innocent, seeing Paul declares
plainlye, that we are not otherwise delivered under his power, then if we have
deserved such punishment. This only we except, that the cause of sin
comes not from God: The roots of sin remain in the sinner.
seeing the roots thereof remain still in the sinner. For this must always
be true: Destruction is thine O Israel, thy help is only in me. When he
joins the lusts of man's heart with uncleanness, Osce 13.9.
privily he gives us to understand what fruit our heart brings forth
when it is once left unto it self. This clause between them selves, has his
Emphasis or force, for it expresses more significantlye how deep and
incurable notes of infamye they had printed in their bodies.

25 Which turned. To the end he might plant it better in their hearts, he
repeateth the same reason which he handled above, although not in the same
words. Whiles the truth of GOD is turned into a lie, his glory is stained.
They therefore deserve iustlye to be imbrued in all kind of ignominy, which
both go about to rob GOD of his honor, and also to slander or blaspheme
him.

And they worshipped. That I might apply two verbes to one construction I have
thus translated it. What honor for religion sake is given to the creature, ye
same is unjustly taken from God.
He properly notes the sin of Idolatry: for honor can not be given for
religion sake unto the creature, but it shall be vnwoorthelye and by the way
of sacrilege taken from God. In vain is the excuse, that Images are
woorshipped for Gods sake: seeing God acknowledges not this woorshippe,
neither does he accounte it acceptable to him. And then the true God is not
woorshipped at all, but a faygned God which flesh has devised unto it self.
And that which is added, who is blessed for ever, Amen. I interpret to be
spoken to the greater reproach of the Idolaters, after this sense, whom only
they ought to have honored, and woorshipped, and from whom they ought to have
derogated nothing, though it were but a little.

26 For this cause GOD gave them up. As though he had interposed a
Parenthesis, he returns unto that which he had begun before,
concerning the reuengemente of the Lord: and he brings the first example,
in the horrible sin of preposterous lust: Whereby appears they were not
only given over too beastlye lusts: but also became worse then beasts, when
they ouerthrewe the whole order of nature. Secondly, he reckons a great
Catalogue of vices, which have both been extant in all ages, and at that time
reigned every where most licentiously. Neither hinders this one whitte that
every one was not laden with such a heap of vices: For in reproouinge the
general corruption of men, it is sufficient if every one be compelled to
acknowledge some mole or blemishe.

Thus therefore it is to be taken that Paul does here brieflye touch those
vices, which both were common in all ages, and also were specially to be
seen in that age. For it is marvelous how common that filthiness was, which
the brute beasts abhor: as for the other vices they were vulgar.
Secondlye, that he recites such a Catalogue of vices as all mankind is
comprehended in it. Though al men be not thieves or murderers etc. Yet every
man is polluted with some vice.
For although all men be not murderers, or thieves, or adulterers: yet there
is no man that is not found to be polluted with some vice. unto vile
affections. He calls those vile affections which even in the opinion of
men are most vile or shameful: And serve to the dishonor of God.

27 And received in themselves such recompense of their error. For they
which of their own malignitie closed their eyes against the offered light of
God, that they might not see is glory, deserved to be blinded, that they might
forget themselves, and not see what were convenient for them. Moreover they
deserved to have their sight dimmed at noone day, who were not ashamed (as much
as in the^ was) to extinguish the glory of God, which only does lighten us.

28 As they regarded not to know God. In the judgments of God there is a
proportion between the sin and the punishment.
In these words we are to observe a resemblance or comparison, which notably
shows the equal relation of the sin, and the punishmente. Because they
regarded not to abide in the knowledge of God, which only directs our minds
unto true wisdom, the Lord gave unto them a perverse mind, which now can
allow of nothing. Whereas he says they approved not, it is as much as if he
should say, they followed not the knowledge of God with such study as they
ought, but rather purposely they turned their cogitation from God: He
signifies therefore that through their wicked election they preferred their
own vanities before God: and so that error wherewith they were deceived, was
voluntary. To do those things which are not convenient. Because hitherto he
has mentioned only that one execrable example, which though it were common
amongst many, yet it was not common unto all, he begins to reckon such
vices as no man could be found to be free of. For albeit (as it is said)
they appear not all at once in every one, yet all men know themselves to be
guilty of some of the^, that every man for his own part might be reproved of
manifest prauitie. First of all, whereas he calls them not convenient,
understand that they abhorred from all judgment of reason, and were far
from the duties of men. For he declares the tokens of a confounded mind,
that without all difference men addicted themselves to those vices, which
common sense ought to have refused.

Moreover, they labor in vain which go about to reduce these vices into an
order, that one might be drawn out of another: seeing that was not the
purpose of Paul, but to set them down as every one came first to his
remembrance. What every of them signifies, let us briefly run over them.
Understand injustice, when the right of humanity is violated amongst men, in
not giving to every one that is his, Ponerian according to the sentence of
Ammonius I have turned lewdness or ungraciousness. For he teaches Poneron,
id est, a lewd, naughty, or ungracious fellow to be Drasticon Cacou, id
est, a doer or worker of mischief. Lewdnsse therefore or ungraciousness is a
practiced or exercised kind of wickedness, or a more loose license of
committing naughtines. As for maliciousness, it is that prauitie and
crokednesse of the mind which strives to do harm to our neighbors. Where
Paul has the word Porneian, I have put this word lust, yet I am not
against it if any man had rather translate it fornication: for it signifies
as well the inward lust, as the external action. The words covetousness,
envy, and murder, have no doubtful signification. Under strife or
contention, he comprehends as well brawlings as fightinges, and seditious
motions. Cacoetheia, For the which we have put down, peruersitie, to say,
famous and notable lewdenesse: when a man by custom and an evil use, is
hardened in corrupt manners, Theostugeis, are, no doubt haters of God. For
there is no reason why it should be here put passiuely, that is, hated of
God, seeing Paul in this place goes about by evident vices to prove the
giltinesse of men. Those therefore are noted which hate God, whose
righteousness they seem to gainstande with their wickedness.

Whisperers, and backebiters are thus distinguished: that those namely,
Whisperers, do by privy accusations break the friendship of good men, inflame
their minds to hatred, defame the innocent, and sow discord, etc. These, to
say, backbiters, through a certain ingraffed malignitie spare the name of no
man: and as though they were vexed with the frenzy of evil speaking, they
slander together both those have deserved and those have not. I have
translated Hubristas, evil doers, because the latin authors are wont to call
notable injuries, as are robberies, theftes, burninges, witchraftes, which
Paul would note in this place, by the name of evil deeds. I call those
contumelious whom Paul calls Huperephanous, for so the Greek word
signifies. Hence comes the name, because such being as it were set on high,
contemptuously despise the lower sort, neither can they abide any equality.
Those are proud or hautie, which do swell with the vain wind of
superiority. Those are called insociable or such as will not be kept in the
duty of civil obedience and fellowship, which through iniquities reuoulte
from the conseruing of man's society, or in whom there is no sincerity or
constancy of faith, as though you should say truice breakers. Without
natural affection, who have put off even the first affections of nature
toward theirs. Because he puts the defect of mercy amongst the tokens of
man's corrupted nature: Heerevpon Augustine gathers against the stoickes, that
mercy is a Christian virtue. Who when they knew the righteousness of God. And
albeit this place is diversely handeled, yet this does seem to me the truest
interpretation: that men have left nothing might serve unto the unbridled
licentiousness of sinning, because all difference of good and evil being
taken away, they approved both in themselves and others, To flatter our selves
in sin, and to be so far past shame of sin that we defend unrighteousness
against the justice of God, is the top of all mischief.
those things they knew displeased GOD, and by just judgment, were condemned
of him.

For this is the head of all mischief, when as the sinner is so past all shame,
that he both flattereth his own sins (neither will he have it disliked in
him) and also by his consent and cockering does nourish them in others. So is
desperate wickedness described in the Scripture, they glory in it when they
have done evil. Item, she has spread her feet abroad and gloried in her
wickedness. Pro. 2.14. Ezech. 16.25.
For he which is yet ashamed is curable. But when through the custom of
sinning such impudency is contracted, that vices please, and are counted in
steed of virtues, there is no hope of amendment. And therefore I expoude it
thus, for that I see the Apostle in this place goes about to reprove some
thing was more grievous and abominable, the^ the committing of ye vices. Ier.
11.15.
What that should be I know not, unless we refer it to that sum of
wickedness, when miserable men having cast off the shame of sin, take upon
them to defend their vnrighteousnsse against the justice of God.

CHAP. 2.
1 THerefore thou art inexcusable, O man, whosoever thou art that iudgest: for
in that thou iudgest another, thou condemnest thy self: for thou that iudgest,
do the same things. 2 But we know that the judgment of GOD is according
to truethe, against them which commit such things.
THis reprehension concerns hypocrites: who whiles they bleare the eyes of
men with the shows of external holiness, think themselves also to be safe
before God, Hypocrites if they can satisfy the eyes of men, they think all is
well.
as though they had sufficiently discharged all their duty toward him.
Paul therefore after he had showed the grosser faults, least he should
leave any for just before God, inuadeth this kind of Saints, which could not
be comprehended in the first Catalogue.

Now the conueiance is plainer, and easier, then that any ought to marvel
whence the Apostle gathers this reason. He therefore makes them
inexcuseable, because they themselves knew the judgment of God, and yet
nevertheless transgressed the law: as though he should say, albeit thou
do not consent to the vices of others, yea, do seem purposely to be an
enemy, and revenger of vices: yet because if thou do truly examine thy
self, thou art not free from them, thou can not pretend any defense. For in
that thou iudgest another. Besides the notable resemblance, or mutual respect
of the Greek words, Crinein cai catacrinein: The exaggeration which he
uses against them is to be noted. For the phrase or manner of speech
avails as much, as if he should say, thou art twice damnable, They are
twice damnable that are guilty of the same faults they reprove in others.
who art guilty of the same vices which thou reprouest, and accusest in others.
For it is a known sentence, that they which ask an account of another of his
life, do denounce the law of uprightness, continency, and all other virtues
to themselves: neither are they worthy of any forgiveness, if they commit the
same which they took upon them to correct in another. For thou judging do
even the same. So it is word for word, which you may turn thus: For thou
that iudgest another, do the same things. Moreover, the meaning is,
notwithstanding thou iudgest them, yet thou do them. And he says, they
did them, because they were not of a right mind: seeing sin properly is of
the mind, therefore in this they condemn themselves, because whiles they
reprove a thief, or adulterer, or an evil speaker, they pronounce not
judgment against the persons, but against the vices which stick even in
their own bones.

2 We know that the judgment of God etc. The purpose of Paul is to shake
hypocrites out of their flatterings, least they should think they had gotten
some great thing, Hypocrites shall not be tried by their own judgment.
if either they were praised of the woorlde, or else were clear in their own
sight, because there abides for them a far other judgment in heaven.

Furthermore, because he accuses the^ of internal impuritie, which, in as
much as it is hidden from the eyes of men, and cannot be reproved, nor
convicted by humane testimonies, he provoke them to the judgment of God, to
whom the darkness it self is not secret, and with the sense whereof
sinners ill they ^uill they, must needs be touched. Finally, the truth of this
judgment consists in two things: first, The truth of god judgments
consists in two things.
that without respect of persons he will punish sin, in what man soever
he finds it: Secondly, that he stands not upon the outward appearaunce:
neither cares he for the work it self, unless it proceed from a true and
sincere mind. Whereupon it follows, that the visarde of counterfeit
holiness, lets not, but by his judgment he may take vengeance even upon
the secret wickedness.

And it is an Hebrewe phrase, for verity is oftentimes as much with the
Hebrews, as the inward integrity of the heart: and so it is opposed not
only against gross living, but also against the external show of good
works. For then at the last are hypocrites roused, when it is said: That GOD
shall not only take judgment upon their counterfeit righteousness, but also
upon their secret affections.

3 And think thou, O thou man, that iudgest the^ which do such things,
and do the same, that thou shall escape the judgment of God? 4 Or despisest
thou the riches of his bountifulness, and patience, and long sufferaunce, not
knowing that the bountifulness of GOD leads thee unto repentance. 5 But
thou after thy hardness, and heart that cannot repent, heapest unto thy
self wrath, against the day of wrath, and of the declaration of the just
judgment of God, 6 Who will reward every man according to his works: 7 To
them which by continuance in well doing seek glory, and honor, and
immortality, eternal life. 8 But unto them which are contentious, and
disobey the truth, and obey unrighteousness, indignation and wrath. 9
Tribulation and anguishe upon the soul of every man that does evil: of the
Jew first, and also of the Grecian,

10 But to every man that does good, glory, and honor, and peace, to the
Jew first, and also to the Grecian, 3 And think thou, O thou man. etc.
Because the Rhetoritians do charge that a man should not descend unto more
vehement reprehension, before the crime be manifestly proved: Paul may be
thought of some, foolishely to rise up against them here, who as yet not having
fully accomplished that accusation which he intended, is carried so fiercely
against them. But the matter is otherwise. For by sufficient proof they were
convicted to be guilty of sin: seeing he accused them not before men, but
accused them by the judgment of their conscience. And by this he counted that
undoubtedly to be proved, which he went about, namely, Hypocrites must be
sharply reproved else they will not awake out of their security.
that if they descended into them selves, and admitted the examination of Gods
judgment, they could not deny their iniquity. Neither is that without
great need that with such severity and sharpness, he reprooueth this
counterfeyte holiness. For this sort of men with wonderful security trust
in them selves, unless this vain confidence be violently shaken from them.

Let us remember therefore that this is the best way to convince hypocisie, if
it be awaked from his drunkenness, and drawn into the light of Gods
judgment. That thou shall escape. The argument is drawn from the lesser. For
if wicked deeds must be subicet to the judgment of man, much more to the
judgment of GOD, who is the only judge of all things. It is verilye through
an heavenly instinct that men are carried to condemn wickedness, but this is
only an obscure and small shadow of his judgment. They therefore which will
not let others escape their judgment, are greatly deceived to think they can
escape Gods judgment.

Neither is it without special force, that he expresses again the name of
man, that he might compare man with God.

4 Or despisest thou the riches, etc. I do not think with many that there is
here a Dilemma: Dilemma is an argument that conuinceth every way.
but a Preoccupation. For because Hypocrites for the most part are puffed up
with the prosperous success of things, as though by their good works they had
merited the clemency of the Lord, and so they are more hardened in the
contempt of God: the Apostle meets with their arrogancy: and by an argument
taken from the contrary cause, he shows there is nothing should move them
to think by reason of their external prosperity that GOD is pleased with
them, seeing the purpose of God in doing good, is far otherwise, namely that
he might convert sinners unto him. Therefore where the fear of God reigns
not, Without ye fear of God, security in prosperity is a contempt of Gods
goodness.
security in prosperous affairs, is a contempt and mockery of his
incomprehensible goodness. Whereupon it ensues that they shall suffer more
grievous punishments, whom GOD has spared in this life, because unto their
other wickedness this has been added, that they have refused the fatherly
calling of GOD. And although all the benefits of God are so many testimonies
of his fatherly goodness: yet because he often respects a diverse end, the
godless do wickedly to flatter themselves in their prosperity as though they
were beloved of him, whiles he nourishes them tenderly, and bountifully. not
knowing that the bountifulness etc. For GOD by his leuitie declares himself
unto us, that it is he unto whom we ought to be converted, if we desire to
be well: and together he cheereth up the confidence of looking for mercy. If
we use not the bountifulness of GOD to this end, we abuse it: Although it is
not always to be taken after the same manner. For whiles the Lord does
deal fauourablye with his servants, Diversity between the end why God
bestows his blessings upon the godly and godless.
and bless them with earthly blessings, by such testimonies he declares
his benevolence, and also teaches them to seek for the sum of all good
things in him. Whiles he deals with the transgressors of the law in the
same sort, by this bountifulness he goes about to mollify their
stubbornness: and yet he declares not himself to be pleased with them, but
rather calls them to repentance. And if any object, Objection.
that the Lord sings unto deaf men so long as he does not inwardly touch
the heart: it is to be aunsweared, that nothing can be blamed here but our
prauitie. Moreover, Answer.
in the words of Paul I had rather say, he leads, then he inuiteth:
because that is more significant. And yet notwithstanding I do not take it for
to drive or force, but for to lead by the hand.

5 But thou after thine hardness etc. When we are once hardened against the
admonitions of the Lord, impenitencie does follow: and those which have no
care to repent, do manifestlye tempt the Lord. This is a notable place: where
we are to learn, as I touched before, Eue^ those things which by their own
nature are good, serve to the destrucion of the wicked.
that the wicked do not only, so long as they live here, daily more and
more heap up the wrath of God against them, but also, that it shall serve to
their condemnation, whatsoever of the gifts of God they use continually. For
they shall give accounte of all: And then shall appear, that it shall be
imputed unto them, for extreme wickedness, that through the bountifulness of
GOD whereby they should have been bettered, they were made worse. Let us
therefore take heed least by the unlawful abuse of good things, we lay
vype for our selves this unhappy treasure, In the day of wrath. So it is
word for word: But for Eis Hemeran against the day, or into the day. For
the godless now gather against themselves the indignation of God, The day of
judgment is the day of wrath to the wicked; but the day of redemption to the
godly.
the force whereof shall then power it self upon their head: they heap up
secret destruction, which then shall be taken out of the treasures of God.
The day of the last judgment is called the day of wrath, so long as the speech
concerns the wicked: for to the faithful it is the day of redemption. So
likewise are all other visitations of the Lord always set forth in
horrible and fearful manner against the wicked: but on the contrary, sweet
and pleasant to the Godly.

Therefore as often as the Scripture makes mention of the nearenesse of the
Lord, it bids the Godly rejoice and be glad: and whiles it respects
the reprobate, it does nothing else but smite with terror and fear. That
day says Sophonye, Soph. 1.15.
shall be a day of wrath, a day of tribulation, and anguishe, a day of
obscurity and darkness, a day of clouds and blackenesse. Joel 2.2.
The like you have in Joel. And Amos also cries out, woe unto you that desire
the day of the Lord: Amos 5.18.
what have you to do with it? That day of the Lord is darkness and not
light. More over, when Paul adds the word declaration, he gives to
understand what day of wrath that is, namely when the Lord shall make his
judgment known: of which judgment albeeyt he daily give certain tokens,
The clear manifestation of Gods judgment reserved til the last day.
yet he conserueth and keeps the clear, and full declaration thereof unto
that day. For then shall the books be open (...) ^n shall the Lambs be
separated from the goats, and (...) ^ll the corn be purged from the tares,

6 Who shall give to every man. etc. Because he has to do with blind saints,
who think the wickedness of the heart to be well covered, so that it be spread
over with certain (I know not what) shows of vain works, he sets down
true righteousness of works, which shall have place before God, least they
should think it were sufficient to please him, if they brought words and
trifles only or leaves. God in co^demning the reprobate pays them that they
have deserved.
Moreover, there is no such difficulty in this sentence, as commonly there is
thought to be. For if God by just reuengement shall punish the wickedness of
the reprobate, he shall recompense them that they have deserved. Again,
because he sanctifies them whom in time to come he purposes to glorify: in
them also he will crown good works but not according to merit. Good works
crowned, but not according to merit. For merit is not proved by the reward.
For that cannot be proved by this sentence, which sentence although it show
what reward good works shall have, yet notwithstanding it shows not what
they merit, are worth, or deserve, nor yet what reward is due unto them. It
is a foolish sequel to prove merit by the reward.

7 To them truly which according to perseueraunce, word for word it is,
patience, by which word there is somewhat more expressed. For perseverance
is, when one constantly abides in well doing without weariness: patience also
is required in the Saints, whereby, although they are oppressed with diverse
tentations, yet they faint not. Satan interrupteth ye course of godliness.
For Satan suffers them not with free passage to come unto the Lord: but
labors by innumerable offenses to hinder them, and turn them out of the
right way. And whereas he says that the faithful by persisting in good
works, do seek glory and honor: his meaning is not that they aspire any
whither then unto the Lord, or to seek any thing above him or more excellent
then he: but they can not seek him, but also they must contend to come unto
the blessedness of his kingdom: The Lord gives eternal life unto them who
by well doing meditate upon immortality.
a description whereof is contained under the circumlocution of these words.
The meaning therefore is, that the Lord will give unto those eternal life,
who studying to do good works, meditate upon immortality.

8 But to those are contentious. The speech is somewhat confused. First,
because the tenor, form, or fashion of the talk is broken. For the course of
speech required yt the second part of comparison should cleave unto the first
after this sort, the Lord will give eternal life to those, which by
perseverance in good works seek glory, honor, and immortality: but to the
contentious and disobedient eternal death. Then should be added the illation
or conclusion, namely that there is prepared for those, glory, honor, and
incorruption: but for these there is laid up wrath and affliction. Secondly,
because these words: indignation, wrath, tribulation, and anguishe, are
applied unto two diverse members: In ye scriptures we must seek for spiritual
wisdom, and not for eloquence
yet this troubles not the sense of the speech, which ought to suffice us in
the writings of the Apostles. For out of others we must seek for eloquence:
here is spiritual wisdom to be sought for, under a base and simple style of
words. Contention here is put for rebellion, and stiffeneckednesse: because
Paul has to do with hypocrites who through gross and rechlesse cockering,
make a mockery of God. Under the name of truth, is simply understood the
rule of Gods will, which is the only lantern of truth. For this is a common
thing to all the wicked, that they had rather subject the^ selves in service to
iniquity, then take upon the^ ye yoke of God. And what obedience so ever they
pretend, yet they cease not stubburnely to murmr, and strive against the
word of God. For as they which are openly wicked, Between the service of God
and sin there is no mean: so that if we serve not God, then do we serve
sin.
scoff at this truth, so the hypocrites doubt not to oppose their
counterfeite seruinges and worshippinges against it. Moreover, the Apostle
hereby puts in mind, that such stubburne people do serve iniquity: For
there is no mean, whereby they should not presently fall into the servitude
of sin, who will not be ruled by the law of the Lord. And this also is a
just reward of frantic licenciousnesse, that they are made the bondslaues of
sin, who thought it much to obey God. Indignation and wrath. The property of
the words has caused me to turn it thus: For Thumos with the Grecians
signifies that, which Cicero teaches Excandescentiam to note with the
latins: ^usc. 4.
namely, a sudden inflammation of wrath. In the others I follow Erasmus. And
note, that of the four which are reconed, the two latter are as it were
effects of the former. For they which perceive or feel God to be against
them, and angry with them, forthwith are confounded. Nevertheless when he
might briefly in two words have showed as well the blessedness of the godly,
as the destruction of the reprobate, he amplyfieth them both in many words:
To the end he might better and more effectually move men with the fear of
Gods wrath, and stir up the desire of obtaining grace by Christ. For we never
fear the judgment of God sufficiently, unless it be by a lively
description, as it were set before our eyes. Neither do we seriously burn
with the desire of the life to come, except we be stirred up by many
prouokements.

9 To the Jew first. I doubt not, but he simply opposes the Gentile to the
Jew. For, whom he now calls Grecians straight ways he calls the same
Gentiles. And the Jews are first in the action of this cause, for that they
specially had the promises and threatenings of the law: as if he should say,
this is the universal law of Gods judgment, which shall begin at the Jews,
and comprehend the whole world.

11 For there is no respect of persons with God. 12 Whosoever have sinned
without law, shall also perish without law: and who so have sinned in the
law shall be judged by the law. 13 For not the hearers of the law, are
righteous before God: but the doers of the law shall be justified. 11 For there
is no respect of persons. Hitherto he has drawn all men generally, guilty
unto judgment: now he begins here to reprove the Jews by themselves, and
the Gentiles by themselves: And withal he teaches that that diversity or
difference which separateth the one from the other lets not, but both of
them without difference may be subject to eternal death. The Gentiles
pretended excuse by ignorance: the Jews gloried in the title of the Law,
from the Gentiles he takes all excuse and hafting, and the Jews he spoyleth
of their false and vain boasting. It is therefore a certain division or
distribution of all mankind into two members. For God had severed the Jews
from other nations: and as for all other nations they were in one and the like
case. Now he shows that that diversity hinders nothing, whereby they
should not both be entangled and wrapped in the same giltinesse. But the
word person is used in the Scripture, By person is meant whatsoever external
thing the world esteems.
for all external things, which are wont to be had in any price or
estimation. When thou read therefore that God is no accepter of persons,
understand, that he respects the purity and inward innocence of the
heart: and regards not those things, Deuteronomy. 10.17.
which men make great reckoning of: Namely, kindred, country, dignity, riches,
and such like: so yt acception is here taken for an election, or separation of
one nation from another, or between nation and nation. And if any hereupon do
cavil, that the election of God therefore is not free: It may be answered,
that there is a two fold acception of man before God. The first, A twofoulde
acception of man before God.
whereby of his mere goodness he chooses us, being called from nothing: seeing
there is nothing in our nature that might be liked of him. The second, whereby
when he has regenerate us, he also embraces us with his gifts that are in
us: and loves that image of his son, which he does acknowledge in us.

12 Whosoever have sinned without law. In the former part of his division he
sets upon the Gentiles: to whom albeit there was no Moses given which might
publish unto the^ the Law from the Lord, yet he denies that to hinder any
whitte, whereby they might not by sinning bring upon them selves the just
judgment of death: as if he should say, the knowledge of the written law is
not necessary to the just condemnation of a sinner. The knowledge of the
written law is not necessary to the just condemnation of a sinner.
See therefore, what kind of supportation, maintenance or bearing out they
have taken upon them, who through preposterous pity, under ye pretense of
ignorance go about to exempt the Gentiles, deprived of the light of the
Gospel, from the judgment of God. Who so have sinned in the Law. As the
Gentiles, whiles they are carried with the errors of their own sense, run
headlong in perdition: so the Jews have the law at hand, whereby they are
judged. For the sentence was pronounced long ago, Deuteronomy. 27.26.
cursed are all those which abide not in all the precepts thereof. Therefore
the sinful Jews are in worse case, whose damnation is already in their law.

13 For not the hearers of the law. This is a preoccupation whereby he
preuenteth that exception which the Jews might allege. Because they heard
that the law was the rule of righteousness, they were proud of the bare
knowledge thereof. Which fallacy or deception that he might refell, he
denies that the hearing or knowledge of the law has any such weight, that
any should pretend righteousness thereby: but the works must be brought
forth, according to that saying: He that does these things shall live in
them. Deuteronomy. 4.1.
Therefore this present sentence avails thus much, if righteousness be
sought for by the law, then must needs the law be fulfilled: because the
righteousness of the law consists in the perfection of the works. They with
abuse this place to build or maintain the justification of works, are worthy
to be laughed to scorn of children: They only are justified by the law which
fulfill the law: but none, etc. therefore none are justified by the law.
therefore it were to no purpose, and also besides the matter, here to thrust
in a long discourse of justification, for the unfolding of so friuelous a
cauillation. For the Apostle only urges that upon the Jews, which he had
mentioned before, namely, the iugdement of the law: that they could not be
justified by the law, except they fulfilled the law. If they transgressed it:
then was the curse already prepared for them.

We deny not, but perfect righteousness is prescribed in the law: but
because all men are convicted of transgression, we say that righteousness
must be sought else where: rather we argue out of this place, that no man is
justified by works. For if they only which fulfill the law, be justified by
the law, it follows that none is justified, because that none is found that
can boast of the fulfilling of the law.

14 For when the Gentiles which have not the law, do by nature the things
contained in the law, they having not the law, are a law unto themselves, 15
Which show the effect of the law written in their hearts, their conscience
also bearing witness, and their thoughts accusing one another, or excusing. 16
At the day when God shall judge the secrets of men by Jesus Christ, according
to my Gospel. 14 For when the Gentiles. Now he repeateth the proof of the
former member. For he thought it not sufficient to condemn us by word, and
to pronounce the just judgment of God against us: but he goes about by
reasons to convince the same unto us, to the end he might the more stir us
unto the desire and love of Christ. For he proves that ignorance is in vain
pretended of the Gentiles, seeing by their deeds, they declared them selves to
have no small rule of righteousness. There is ingraffed naturally in the minds
of all men a certain conception of justice.
For no people did ever at any time so abhor from humanity, that they kept
not them selves within some laws. In as much therefore as all the Gentiles
voluntarily and of them selves are inclined to make laws unto themselves: it
is out of all question that there are naturally graffed in the minds of all
men certain conceptions of justice, and vprightnes, which the Grecians
Prolepseis. Cogitations, or devises. They have therefore a law without the
law: because howesoeuer they have not the written law of Moses, yet they are
not altogether void of the knowledge of right and equity. For otherwise they
could not discern between vice and virtue: the one whereof they restrained
by punishments, the other they commended, and being approved of them, they
honored with rewards. He has opposed nature to the written Law. Meaning
that there appeared in the Gentiles a natural light of justice, which did
supply the place of the law, whereby the Jews were taught, so that they were
a Law unto themselves.

15 Which show the effect of the law. etc. That is to say, they testify that
there is graven in their hearts a certain discretion and judgment, whereby
they discern between right and wrong, honest and dishonest. For he means
not that it was printed in their will that they should couette, and studiously
seek after it: but because they were so overcome of the virtue of truth that
they could not, but needs they must approve it. For why should they institute
religions, but because they judge that God is to be worshipped? why should
they be ashamed of adultery and theft, but that they think them both evil?
unadvisedly therefore is the power of our will drawn out of this place: Paul
speaks not of the keeping but of the knowledge of the law. Heart, for the
intelect or understanding.
as though Paul should say, the observation of the law were subject to our
power: seeing he speaks not of the power of fulfilling the Law, but of
knowledge. Neither is this word heart taken for the seat of the affections,
but for the intellect only, or understanding: as Deuteronomy. The Lord has not
given thee a heart to understand. Also in an other place, Deuteronomy. 29.4.
O foolish men and slow of heart to believe. Furthermore, Luke 24.25.
neither is it hereby to be gathered, that there is in men a full knowledge of
the Law, Imperfect knowledge in the Gentiles.
but only that there are certain seeds of justice abiding in their wit:
such as these be, that all Gentiles in differently institute religions, by
laws punish adultery, theftes, and murder: that they commend a good faith in
bargains and contractes. For so they declare how they are not ignorant that
God is to be worshipped: adultery, theft, and murder, are evil: and honesty
is commendable. Neither is it meteriall what kind of god they imagine to be, or
how many gods they make: it is sufficient that they understand there is a God,
and that the same is to be honored and worshipped. It forces not whether they
permit the concupiscence of another man's wife and possession, or any other
thing: whether they can bridle the affections of wrath and hatred: For that
which they knew was evil for them to do, the same was not lawful for them
to couette. Their own conscience bearing witness, and their thoughts. etc.
He could not have urged them more straightly then with the testimony of their
own conscience, which is in steed of a thousand witnesses. By the conscience
of good deeds men support and comfort themselves: they who in their conscience
know they have done evil, are tormented and troubled in themselves. As there
is nothing more comfortable then ye testimony of a good conscience: so on the
contrary, nothing more horrible then the testimony of an evil conscience.
Whence these speeches of the Ethnickes came, a good conscience is a large and
noble theater: but an evil is a most vile tormenter, and more cruelly drives
the wicked from post to pillar, then any fury of hell. There is therefore a
certain natural knowledge of the law which shows this to be good, and to
be followed after, and that to be abhorred. And mark how notably he
discribeth the conscience, when he says the reasons come into our mind
whereby we defend that is well done: again which accuse and reprove us of
those things are evil done. And these reasons of accusing and defending he
deferreth unto the day of the Lord: not as though they shall then first
appear, for they do continually even in this life urge us, and exercise their
office: but because they shall then also prevail, least any should conte^ne
them as friuelous, and such as did vanish away. And he has put, in the day,
for unto the day: as he did before.

16 Wherein God shall judge the secrets of men. It is a very apt description
of the judgment, serving for the present place: that they might know, which
willingly hide themselves in the darkness of insensibleness, or dullness of
mind, that those inward cogitations, which now are altogether hid in the
depth of their hearts, shall then come forth into light. As in an other place
whiles he will show unto the Corinthians, of how small force man's judgment is,
which consists in external shows: he bids them tarry till the Lord
come, who will lighten the secrets of darkness, and open the hidden things of
the heart. Which thing when we hear, 1. Cor. 4.5.
let us remember that we are admonished, if we will be in deed approved of
our judge, that then we study to come unto that synceritie of mind.

He adds according to my Gospel, signifiyng that he pronounces such
doctrine, as even man's reason naturally graffed in him does yield unto. How
the gospel is called the Gospel of Paul
And he calls it his Gospel in respect of his ministry. For otherwise God
only has authority to give the Gospel: only the dispensation is committed
to the Apostles. Moreover it is no marvel though part of the Gospel be
called the messenger and solemn publishing of the judgment to come. For if the
effect and accomplishment of those things he promises be differed until the
full declaration of the celestial kingdom: it must needs be conjoined with
the last judgment. Again, Christ can not be preached, but to the rising of
some, and the fall of other some: both which apperteyne unto the day of
judgment. Concerning this parcel by Jesus Christ, although it seem
otherwise to some, yet I refer it unto the judgment, God will execute his
judgment by Christ.
after this manner, that the Lord shall execute his judgment by Christ. For
he is appointed of the Father to be judge of the quick, and the dead. Which
the apostles always count amongst the chiefest points of the Gospel: and so
the sentence shall be more perfect, which otherwise should be lame.

17 Behold, thou art called a Jew, and restest in the law, and gloriest in
God. 18 And know his will, and allowest the things that are excellent, in
that thou art instructed by the law: 19 And perswadest thy self that thou art
a guide of the blind, a light of them which are in darkness, 20 An instructor of
them which lack discretion, a teacher of the unlearned, which have the form
of knowledge, and of the truth of the law. 21 Thou therefore which teach
another, teach thou not thy self? thou that preachest a man should not
steal, do thou steal? 22 Thou that say a man should not commit
adultery, do thou commit adultery? thou that abhorrest idols, committest
thou sacrilege? 23 Thou that gloriest in the law, through breaking the law
dishonourest thou God? 24 For the name of God is blasphemed among the Gentiles
through you, as it is written. 17 Behold thou art a Jew. In certain old
copies is read Eide, if verily: which if it were so much received, should be
more allowed of me. But because the greatest part of books is against it, and
the sense may stand otherwise, I keep the old reading, especially seeing it
is but a small matter of one particle. Now therefore having dispatched the
cause of the Gentiles, he returns unto the Jews: and to the end he might
more vehemently beat down all their vanity, he grants unto them all those
things, wherewithal they were proud and puffed up. Secondly, he shows how
little they serve to vain glory: yea, rather how greatly they serve to their
reproach. Under the name of Jew, he comprehends all the prerogatives of
that nation, which being taken from the law and the Prophets, they did
falsely pretend, and so he understands all the Israelites, who were at yt time
all of the^ indifferently called Jews.

Furthermore it is uncertain when that name first began: But that
undoubtedly it began after the dispersion. Antiquit. 11.
Josephus thinks that it was taken up of Judas Machabeus: by whose conducts
and dispositions the liberty and dignity of the people, when it had been a
long time fallen, and almost buried, revived again. Albeit I see this sentence
is probable, yet if there be any whom it satisfies not, I will bring also of
my self another conjecture. It seems verily unto me to be like, that when
they were so wasted and scattered, they could not conserve any certain
distinction of tribes. For neither could the cessing, valuing or mustering of
the people be done in season: neither did the policy or decent form of
governing their common wealth stand, (which was necessary for conseruing
such order) they both dwelt, spearced, and scattered out of order: and also
being worn with adversities: When and whence the Israelites were called Jews.
they were not so careful for the reckoning of their kindred. But howesoeuer
you will not grant these things unto me, yet you can not deny but there was
likelihood of such danger, in such disturbance of things. Whither therefore
they would foresee that was to come, or they would salve the present evil, I
think they altogether went unto the name of that tribe, wherein purity of
religion had abidden longest, which tribe by singular prerogative excelled all
the rest, and out of the which they looked for the redeemer to come. For this
was their refuge in extremities, to comfort themselves with looking for the
Messiah. Howsoever it be, under the name of Jews they professed themselves to
be the heirs of the covenant which GOD made with Abraham and his seed. And
restest in the Law, The Jews gloried not in the keeping of the law, but in
this only, that the law was committed to them.
and gloriest in GOD. He means not that they rested in the study of the law,
as though they applied their mind to the keeping of it: but rather he
vpbraydeth them, that they not considering to what end the Law was given,
having left the care of keeping it, were proud of this one thing, because they
were persuaded that the Oracles of GOD apperteined to them. Likewise they
gloried of GOD, not as the Lord commands by the Prophet Jeremy, that being
humbled in our selves, we should seek our glory in him only: Ier. 9.24,
but without any knowledge of his goodness, for vain ostentation sake they
made him peculiarly theirs before men, and boasted themselves for this people
of whom inwardely they were altogether void. This is not the glorying of the
heart, but the bragging of the tongue.

18 Thou know his will, and approuest the things are excellent. Now he
grants unto them the knowledge of the will of God, and the approbation or
allowing of things profitable, which knowledge and allowing of things they
had obtained by the doctrine of the Law. A twofolde approbation of things.
There is a twofould approbation or allowing of things: one of election, when
we embrace that we have approved and allowed for good: another of judgment,
whereby verily we discern good from evil, but with industry or study we
do not follow after it. The Jews therefore were so learned in the law, that
they could judge of manners and correct them: but they had small care to try or
prove their own life according to the same censure.

Moreover, seeing Paul reprooueth their hyprocrisie, we may gather by the
contrary (if so that our judgment prooceede from a sincere affection) that
profitable things are then truly proved when God is hearkened unto: Then we
judge aright when we judge according to the word of God.
for his will as it is reueiled in the law, is set down here for the guide
and Mistress of true probation.

19 And perswadest thy self. He grants yet more unto them: as though they
had not only enough to serve their own turn, but also where withal they
might enrich others: He grants (I say,) that they had such store of
knowledge, as might also have ouerflowed unto others. That which follows,
namely. having the form of knowledge. I understand causatiuely: that it may
be resolved thus, because thou have the form of knowledge. For hence came it
that they professed themselves to be the teachers of others, because they were
thought to carry about all the secrets of the law in their breast. The word
form, is not put for an example: because Paul has set down the word
Morphosin, and not Tupon: but I think he would note the glorious pomp or
show of doctrine, which is commonly called, appearaunce. And it is most
certain that they had not that knowledge, which they pretended: True knowledge
to be sought for in the Law.
How be it Paul by the way checking the corrupted abuse of the Law, on the
other part shows, that true knowledge is to be sought for out of the Law,
that truth may be firm and immovable.

21 Thou therefore that teach another. Although those praises of the Jews
which he has hitherto reckoned, were such as might worthily have garnished
and set them forth, if they had not wanted the truer ornaments: yet because
they contained such indifferent gifts, as both might be in the godless, and
be corrupted by wicked abuse, they are not sufficient unto true glory. Paul
also not thinking it enough to refute, and taunte their arrogancy that they
trusted only in those things, Look by how much any is more honorably
garnished with ornaments from god, by so much he is the more infamous if he be
not answerable to them.
does also return even those again upon them to their reproach. For he
deserves great reproach and infamy, who makes the gifts of God which
otherwise are noble and excellent, not only unprofitable, but also by his
prauitie does contaminate, and defile them. And he is a perverse counsailour,
who not providing for himself, is wise only to the profit of others: he
shows therefore how that was their dishonor, which they take to be their
praise. Thou that preachest a man should not steal. He seems to have
respect unto the place in the psalm. God said unto the wicked, wherefore
do thou preach my statutes and take my testament into thy mouth? Psalm.
50.16.
seeing thou hate discipline, and have cast my words behind thee: if thou
do see a thief thou consentest with him, and take part with the
adulterours. Which obiurgation or chiding as it agreed unto the Jews in old
time, who trusting to the bare knowledge of the law, lived never a whitte the
better, then if they had had no law at all: so we must beware least at this
day it be turned against us. And surely it is too true in a great many, who
whiles they boast themselves to have a certain singular knowledge, as though
the Gospel were not a rule of life, they are given over unto all kind of
uncleanness. Let us not therefore dally so securely with the Lord, let us
remember what judgment hangs over such pratlers, who show forth the word of
God only in iangling.

22 Thou which abhorrest idols. Very aptely he opposes sacrilege to
idolatry, as a thing of the same kind. For sacrilege, Sacrilege what it is.
simply is a profanation of the divine majesty. Which sin was not unknown
unto the heathen Poets. For this cause Ouide charge Lycurgus with sacrilege,
Metamorph. 3.
For contemning the solemn feasts of Bacchus: and in Fastis, he calls those
Sacrilegas manus, id est, Wicked hands which violated the majesty of Venus.
But seeing the Gentises gave the majesty of their gods unto idols, they
counted that only for sacrilege, if any did steal that was dedicated to their
Temples, wherein they thought all religion consisted. So at this day where
superstition reigns in stead of the word of God, they acknowledge no other
sacrilege, then the stealing of the riches of temples: because with them there
is no God but in idols, no religion but in riot, and pomp. And here we are
admonished, first, that we flatter not our selves, when we have observed some
part of the Law, and contemn the residewe.

Two things to be noted.
Secondly, that we glory not so for external idolatry removed, that in the
mean while we have no care to banishe and expel from us that impiety lies
hid in our minds.

23 Thou which gloriest in the law. etc. Although every transgressour puts
God to reproach (seeing all men are borne to this end that they should
woorshippe him in righteousness and holiness) yet he does justly charge the
Jews herein with a special fault. They in a special sort dishonor God, who
pretend his name and keep not his law.
For whiles they preached God to be their Lawgiuer, and had no care to order
their lives according to his rule, they declared that the majesty of their
God, (which they so easily contemned) was of no great count with them. After
which sort at this day those defame Christ by the transgression of the
Gospel, who vainly talk of his doctrine, which in the mean while by their
licentious, and lustful life they tread under foot.

24 For the name of God. Ezech. 36.23^ Esaias. 52.5,
I think this testimony ratther to be taken out of Ezech. then out of Esaias,
seeing with Esaias there are no vpbraidings against the people, whereof all that
Chapter of Ezechiel is full. Some think it is an argument taken from the less
to the greater, to this sense, if the Prophet not without cause reproved the
Jews of his time, that for their captivity, the glory and power of God, was
despised amongst the Gentiles, as though God had not been able to conserve the
people which he had taken into his protection: much more are you a reproach
and dishonor unto God, by whose manners his religion being estimated, it is
evil spoken of. Which sentence as I do not disprove, The reproaches of men
fall upon the name of God whom they profess.
so I wish rather to have one more sincere: as though it were said, we see
that all the reproaches of the people of Israel, do fall upon the name of God:
because, seeing they are counted and called the people of God, they bear the
name of God graven as it were in their foreheade: whereby it must needs come
to pass amongst men, that that God, in whose name they boast them selves,
should be after a sort defamed by their filthiness.

And this is a marvelous unworthy thing, that they which have their glory
from GOD, should be a reproach unto his sacred name: for at the least they
ought to requite him otherwise.

25 Circumcision verily profits, if thou do keep the Law: but if thou
shall be a transgressour of the Law, thy circumcision is turned into
uncircumcision. 26 If therefore uncircumcision shall keep the righteousness of
the Law, shall not his uncircumcision be reckoned for circumcision? 27 And the
uncircumcision which is by nature (if it keep the law) shall judge thee, which
by the letter and circumcision art a transgressour of the Law? 28 For he is
not a Jew that is one openly: neither is that circumcision which is outward
in the flesh. 29 But he is a Jew which is one within, and the circumcision is
of the heart in the spirit, not in the letter, whose praise is not of men, but
of God. 25 Circumcision verily profits. By a preoccupation he remoueth those
things which the Jews on the contrary might take again for the defense of
their cause. For if circumcision were a seal of the covenant of the Lord,
whereby the Lord chose Abraham and his seed, for a peculiar people unto him
self: they were thought to glory therein not in vain: but because the truth
of the sign being omitted, they aboade in the external form: he answers
that there is no cause why they should arrogate any thing unto them selves of
the bare sign:

Wherein the verity of circumcision consisted.
The verity of circumcision did consist in the spiritual promise, which
required faith. The Jews neglected both, as well the promise as faith.
Foolish therefore was their confidence. Whereby it comes to pass that he
omitteth here the principal use of circumcision, namely whiles he applies
his talk unto their gross error, as he does with the Galathians. And that
is diligently to be noted. For if he should entreat of the whole nature,
and property of circumcision, it were absurd that there should be no mention
of grace and free promise. But in both places he speaks according to the
circumsta^ce of the cause he handles: Paul speaks here of circumcision
according to their opinion
therefore he touches only that part which was in controversy. They thought
that circumcision of it self was a work sufficient unto the obteyning of
righteousness. Therefore that he might speak according to their opinion, he
answers, that if the work be respected in circumcision, this is the
condition of it, that he which is circumcised, give himself to worship God
wholly, and perfectly: the work therefore of circumsion is perfection. And thus
we may speak of our baptism. If any trusting in the only confidence of the
water of baptism, does think himself to be justified, as though he had
now gotten holiness by that work: the end of baptism is to be objected:
namely that by that the Lord does call us unto holiness of life. Here
should the promise and grace, which baptism does testify, and seal unto
us, be passed over in silence: because we are to deal with those, who being
content with the vain shadow of baptism, they care not, nor consider not
that which is the principal in it. And this verily you are to note in Paul,
when he speaks of signs or Sacraments to the faithful, and not by
contention or concrouersie, that his manner is to conioyne them with the
efficacy, and accomplishmente of their promises: when he has to deal with
overthwart and foolish interpreters of ye signs or sacraments, then omitting
to me^tio^ the proper and true nature of ye signs or sacraments, he directs
his whole style against their corrupt interpretation. And many because they see
Paul brings circumcision rather then any other work of the law, do think
that he takes away righteousness from the ceremonies only. But it is far
otherwise. For this thing is wont always to follow, that they which dare set
their merits against the righteousness of God, glory more in external
observations, then in sound virtues For who so is truly touched and moved
with the fear of God: dare never lift up his eyes to heaven, for the more he
shall strive unto true righteousness, the better he shall see how far he
is from it. As for the Pharisees, who think it enough to shadow their
holiness with external hypocrisy, it is no marvel though they so easily
flatter themselves. Therefore Paul when he had left the Jews nothing but
this poor shift, that they should boast them themselves to be justified by
circumcision, he now also takes from them this vain visour.

26 If therefore uncircumcision, etc. This is a most strong argument. Every
thing is inferior to his end, and is set under it. Circumcision has respect
unto the law: therefore it ought to be inferior to it. It is more therefore
to keep the law then circumcision, which for the cause thereof was ordained.
Whereupon it follows that the uncircumcised if he keep the law, does far
excel the Jew being a transgressour of the law, with his barraine and
unprofitable circumcision. And so albeit by nature he is polluted, yet by the
observation or keeping of the law, he shall be sanctified, that his
uncircumcision may be imputed unto him in steed of circumcision. This word
uncircumcision, in the second place is to be understood properly in his
proper signification. In the first place improperly for the gentiles, the thing
for the person. Paul speaks here by supposition.
Furthermore, here no man ought curiously to trouble himself with searching
of what keepers of the law this may be constered which Paul says, seeing none
such can be found. For simply he had this in his mind by the way of
supposition, or supposing, if there were found any Gentile which did observe
the law, that his righteousness in uncircumcision is of more value, then the
circumcision of the Jew without righteousness. Therefore I refer that which
follows, (he which by nature is uncircumcised, shall judge the circumcised)
not unto the persons, Mat. 12.41.42 Luke. 11.31.
but unto the example: as that. The Queen of the South shall come etc. Ite^
the men of Niniuie shall rise in judgment, etc. For even the words of Paul
lead us unto this sense. The Gentile (quoth he) being a keeper of the law
shall judge thee being a transgressour: although he is uncircumcised, and thou
have the literal circumcision.

Hypallage is when words are understood contrariwise.
27 The letter and circumcision. By the figure hypallage, for circumcision
literal. Neither means he that they therefore violate the law, because they
have the letter of circumcision: but because together with that their external
ceremony they cease not to pollute the spiritual worship of God, namely
piety, righteousness, judgment, and verity, which things notwithstanding,
are the principal things of the law.

28 For he is not a Jew, etc. The meaning is that a true Jew is not to be
judged either by ye progeny of the flesh, or title of profession, A true Jew
and true circumcision is internal.
or by the the external Sacrament or sign. Neither does that circumcision
which makes a Jew consist only in outward figure or show, but both of them
are internal or inward. That which he adds of true circumcision is taken
from diverse places of Scripture, yea from their common doctrine: because the
people are every where commanded to circumcise their heart, and the Lord
promises, that he will do it. For the foreskinne was cut off, not as a little
corruption of one part, but as the corruption of the whole nature. Therefore
circumcision is the mortification of the whole flesh. Letter signifies the
external observation: Spirit the end of the ceremony.
Whereas he adds, that it is in the spirit, and not in the letter,
Understand it thus: he calls the external observation without pie^ie, ye
letter: by the spirit he means the end of the ceremony, which is
spiritual. For seeing the whole weight or substance of signs and rites depend
upon their end: the end being taken away, the letter only remains, which
by it self is unprofitable. And this is the reason of the speech: because
where the word of God is preached, whatsoever it commands, except it be
received of men with a sincere affection of the heart, it abides in the
letter, that is in the cold or faint letter: but if it pearse into the mind,
it is in a manner transformed into the spirit. He alludeth unto the difference
of ye old and new testament which Jeremy notes, Ier. 31.33.
where the Lord pronounces that his covenant shall be firm, and stable,
after that it is graven in their inward parts. Paul also in another place had
respect heereunto, where he comparing the law with the Gospel, calls the
law the letter, which is not only dead, but also kills, 1. Cor. 3.6.
but the Gospel he adorneth with the title spirit. Furthermore too gross
has the foolishness of those been which have made of the letter a two fold
sense, and of the spirit Allegories.

29 Whose praise is not of men. Because the eyes of men only behold the
things are apparent: he deneieth it to be suffient to be commendable in man's
opinion, which often is deceived by the external show: but the eyes of God
must be satisfied, which behold ye very deepest secrets of the heart. So he
draws hypocrites again (which smooth themselves with false persuasions) unto
the tribunal seat of God.

CHAP. 3.
1 WHat is therefore the prerogative of the Jew, or what is the profit of
circumcision? 2 Much every way, and first of all because the oracles of God
were committed unto them.
ALthough Paul has notably proved, that bare circumcision does profit the
Jews nothing, yet in as much as he could not deny but there was some
difference between the Gentiles and the Jews, which was pointed out or sealed
of the Lord by that Sacrament: and it was an absurd thing to make that
difference, or diversity, void and of none effect whereof the Lord was the
author: it remained therefore he should unfold this objection also. Truly
it was apparent, that that was a foolish glory, which the Jews had therein.
Notwithstanding this doubt yet remained, to what end circumcision was
instituted of the Lord, except it were notably profitable for some thing.
Therefore by the way of exception or subjection, he demands wherein the Jew
excels the Gentile. And by another interrogation he adds the reason of the
question, when he says, What profit is there of circumcision? Ephe. 2.4.
For that did distinguishe the Jews from the vulgar sort of men: as Paul
calls the ceremonies the partition wall, which separated the one from the
other,

2 Much every way, that is much altogether, much thoroughly or utterly. Here he
begins to give unto the Sacrament his praise: yet he will not grant unto
the Jews that they should be proud therefore. In what respect the Jews
excelled others.
For when he says, they were marked with the seal of circumcision, that they
might be reckoned the sons of God: he does not acknowledge them to have
excelled others by any merry of theirs, or dignity of their own, but by the
benefits of God. If the men therefore be considered, he shows they are like
unto others: but if the benefits of god be considered, he declares, that
therein they have, whereby they excel other people.

First, because the Oracles of God, were committed unto them, Many think it to
be the figure Anapodotum: Anapodotum is a fault in speaking or writing when
that follows not which might answer that went before as here is first, and
there follows not second.
because he propounds more then he expounds afterward. Yet this word
first, seems unto me not to be a note of order, but simply to signify,
specially, or chiefly, in this sense, if there had been no more but this: that
they had the oracles of God committed unto them: it ought to be sufficient unto
their dignity. And it is worthy the noting, that the profit of circumcision
is not placed in the bare sign, but is to be esteemed by the word: Here verily
Paul demands what the Sacrament did profit the Jews. He answers,
because God committed unto them the treasure of his celestial wisdom:
Whereupon it follows, that the word being taken away, there remains no
more prerogative. By oracles he means the covenant which first was revealed
to Abraham and his posterity, afterward was confirmed, and interpreted by the
law and the prophets. And the oracles of God were committed unto them, that
they might conserve them with them, so long as it pleased the Lord to contain
his glory amongst them: afterward, in the time of dispensation, they should
publish them throughout the whole world: To what end the oracles of God were
committed to the Jews.
First, they were keepers of ye oracles of god: Secondly, they were stewardes
or disposers. And if this benefit be so greatly to be esteemed, whiles the
Lord does vouchsafe to make any people partaker of his word: we can never
sufficiently detest our ingratitude, which receive the same so negligently,
carelessly, that I say not contumeliously.

3 What if some were incredulous? shall their incredulity make the faith of
God void? 4 Let it not be so: but let God be true and every man a liar: as it
is written, that thou may be justified in thy sayings, and overcome when
thou art judged. 3 For what if some, etc. As before, whiles he respected the
Jews, glorying in the bare sign yt he did not grant unto them so much as a
spark of glory: so now whiles he considers the nature of the sign, he
testifies that the virtue thereof is not abolished, no not through their
vanity. Because therefore he seemed above to import, that if there were any
grace in the sign of circumcision, it were all perished through the
unthankfulness of the Jews.

Now again, by the way of exception or subjection, he demands what is to
be thought thereof. And here is a kind of silence or concealing: because he
expresses less then he would have to be understood: for he might truly
have said, yt a great part of the people had cast from the^ the covenant of
the Lord: but because yt had been marvelous bitter in the ears of the
Jews, that he might mittigate the roughness thereof, he only names some.
Shall their incredulity, etc. Catargein, properly is to make void, and of
none effect: which signification is most apt for this present sentence. For
Paul entreats not only whether the incredulity of men can let the verity
of God, that it should not remain firm and stable in it self: but whether
it can hinder the effect and accomplishemente thereof amongst men. The meaning
therefore is, seeing the most of the Jews were covenant breakers, whether
through their unfaithfulness the covenant of God be so abrogated, that it
should show forth no fruit amongst them? he answers, that it cannot
come to pass through the prauitie of men, that the verity or truth of God
should not have his constancy.

Therefore howesoeuer the greatest part has broken the covenant, and troade it
under foot, yet notwithstanding it reteineth his efficacy, There were always
some among the people of the Jews in whom the covenant of God was effectual.
and exercises his force: though not in every one, yet at the least in the
same nation. And efficacy, or force is this, that the grace and blessing of
the Lord might be of strength amongst them unto eternal salvation.

And that cannot be but where the promise is received by faith, for so the
mutual covenant is confirmed on both sides. Therefore he signifies, that
there were always some in that nation who abiding in the faith of the promise,
did not fall from that prerogative.

But let God be true. Howsoever others think, I take it to be an argument from
the necessary sequel of the contrary, whereby Paul dissolueth the former
objection For if these two stand together, (yea do necessarily agree) that
God is true, and man a liar: it follows, that the truth of God is not let
through the lie of men. For except he did now oppose one of these principles
against the other, in vain, and to no purpose is he straightwayes so serious
in refuting this inconvenience, namely, how God may be righteous, if he set
forth his righteousness by our unrighteousness. Wherefore the meaning is
plain, that the faith of God is so far from being destroyed or overthrown
by the unfaithfulness and default of men, that it appears more clear or
excellent. He calls God true, How God is true.
not only because he is ready to stand faithfully unto his promises, but
also because whatsoever he says in word he fulfilleth the same indeed, for
he so speaks that his commandment is straight brought into act. On the
contrary, manne is called a Liar, not only because he oftentimes breaks his
promise but because by nature he coueteth leasing, How man is a liar.
and flees the truth. The former member is a special Maxim of Christian
Phylosophie. The later is taken out of the Psalms, where David confesses,
Psalm. 116.11.
there neither comes any certainetye from manne, neither is there any in
him.

This place is notable, and conteyneth very necessary consolation: for such
is the peruersitie of men in refusing or contemning the word of GOD, that
the certainty thereof should often come into question, except it came to our
remembrance that the truth of God depends not upon man's veritye. But how
agrees this with that was said immediatelye before, namelye, that the faith
of men which may receive the promise, Objection.
is required that the promise of GOD might be effectual? For faith is
contrary unto lyinge. It seems to be an hard question, yet it is easily
resolved: to wit, that the Lord by the lies of men, (which otherwise are
hynderaunces unto his truth) will yet find unto him self a way where there
is no way, that he may overcome, Answer.
by correcting in his elect that incredulity is graffed in our nature, and by
subiecting into his obedience such as do seem to be unruly. Finally now
the disputation is of the corruption of nature, and nor of the grace of God,
which is the remedy of the said corruption. That thou might be justified.
The meaning is, it is so far off that the truth of God should be destroyed by
our lie and unfaithfulness, Psalm. 51.^.
that thereby it is made more apparent and manifest, As David testifies
saying, that therefore because he was a sinner, God was always a just, and
righteous judge, what soever he decreed against him: and that he should
overcome all the reproaches of the wicked, which would murmr against his
righteousness. By sayings are meant judgments.
By the sayings of God. David understands judgments which he brings
forth against us. For whereas they commonly expound it of the promises, that
is too much wrested. Therefore this particle that, is not only final, neither
notes a consequence far fetched, but is of as much value as an illation,
Inferring or bringing in, to this sense: I have sinned against thee, therefore
thou may by right punish me. And that Paul has alleged the place of David
in his proper and natural sense the objection added a little after does prove,
how shall the righteousness of God abide perfect, if our iniquity set it
forth? For in vain (as I have partly showed a little before) and out of
season should Paul stay the readers upon this doubt, except David did
understand that God by his wonderful providence does get praise unto his
righteousness, Though the iniquities of men by their own nature serve to the
dishonor of God and subversion of his truth: Yet by his wonderful providence
he gets unto himself glory thence, and thereby establishes his truth.
even out of the iniquities of men. The second member after the Hebrew is thus,
and thou in judging pure, which speech imports nothing else, then that God is
worthy of praise in all his judgments, howsoever the wicked exclayme, and
odiously go about by their complayninges to ouerwhelme his glory. But Paul
followed the Greek translation which served better for the present purpose.
For we know the Apostles in recyting the words of the Scripture to be more
frank, free, or bold: because they counted it sufficient if they applied them
unto the matter. Wherefore they stood not so much upon the words. Unto the
present place therefore this shall be the application, if all the sins of
mortal men must serve to the setting forth of the glory of the Lord: and he
is specially glorified by his truth: it follows that the vanity of men
serves rather to the establishing, then subuerting of his truth: And albeit
this word Crinesthai may be taken as well actiuely as passiuely: yet I doubt
not but the Grecians have translated it passiuelye besides the meaning of the
Prophet.

5 Now if our unrighteousness commend the righteousness of God, what shall
we say? is God unrighteous, which adds wrath (I speak as a man,) 6 Let it
not be so. For now shall GOD judge the world? 7 For if the verity of God
has more abou^ded through my lie unto his glory, why am I yet condemned as a
sinner? 8 And not rather (as we are blamed, and as some affirm that we say)
let us do evil that good may come? whose damnation is just. 5 Now if our
unrighteousness. Although this is a digression from the principal cause: yet
was it necessary the Apostle should add it: This objection is answered in
the latter end of the 6. very.
least he should seem to have given unto the wicked that occasion of
speaking evil, which he knew to be voluntarilye sought for of them. For seeing
they were ready to take every occasion that might make to the diffamation of
the Gospel, they had in the testimony of David, which they might catch to
the framing of their false detraction. If God seek nothing else at the hands
of men then to be glorified of them: Wherefore does he punish them when they
offend, seeing by their offense they glorify him? Undoubtedly he is angry
without cause, if he take occasion at that to be angry whereby he is
glorified. Neither is it to be doubted but this surmised accusation was
vulgar, and very common, Paul speaks not here his own persuasion, but
takes on him the person of the wicked.
as shall straightwayes be said again. Therefore Paul might not pass it
over obscurely. And least any should think he speaks here according to
the persuasion or censure of his own mind, he^ first shows how he takes
on him the person of the wicked. And withal he nippeth or sharply reproves
man's reason, whose property he notes to be, always to chat and prate
against the wisdom of God. For he says not, I speak as the wicked, but I
speak as a man. And it is certainly so, seeing all the mysteries of God are
strange or absurd unto the flesh: it is so bold, that it doubts not to
rise up against the^ and which of them it cannot conceive, those it wantonly
pursues. Whereby we are admonished, if we will become capable of the
mysteries of God, first of all we must labor that our own sense or sensual
judgment being laid aparte, we may yield and give our selves wholly over
into the obedience of the word. This word, wrath, which is used for
judgment, here has respect unto the punishment: as if he had said, is god
unrighteous in punishing iniquities, which set forth his righteousness?

6 Let it not be so. In staunching this blasphemy, he answers not
directly unto the objection: But first begins at the abhorring thereof,
least Christian religion should seem to bring so great absurdities with it.
And that is some what more, then if he had simply refuted it. For he gives
to understand thereby that this wicked saying is worthy to be abhorred and
not to be heard. Straightwayes he adds, but (as they call it) an indirect
refutation: for he does not absolutely take away the obloquie, but only
answers, that that is absurd which is objected.

Furthermore, he takes an argument from the office of God, whereby he proves
that to be impossible, God shall judge this world, Therefore he cannot be
unjust, which argument is not taken (as a man would say) from the bare power
of God: But from his actual power, which shines in the whole course and order
of his works: as if it were said thus, the office of God is to judge the
world: that is, by his righteousness to compose and bring into good order,
whatsoever is disordered in the same. Therefore he can do nothing unjustly:
and he seems to allude unto the place of Moses, Genesis 18.25.
where, whiles Abraham prays God that he would not utterly destroy Sodom,
it is not meet (quoth he) that thou which shall judge the earth, should
destroy the just with the unjust. Neither is that thy part, neither can it be
said of thee. Job. 34.17.
In Job there is the like saying, shall he that hates judgment govern? For
in that there are often found wicked Judges amongst men, that is either
because they use their authority against law and right, or else because they
are unadvisedly lift up thither, or else because they degenerate from
themselves. In God there is no such matter. Seeing therefore, he is a Judge by
nature, he must needs be just, because he cannot deny himself. Paul
therefore reasons from that is impossible, proving GOD (to whom it is
proper, or rather essential to govern the world righteously) to be wrongfully
charged with unrighteousness. And although this doctrine of Paul be extended
unto the general regiment of God, yet I deny not but it has special
respect unto the last judgment: because then at the length shall the sound
renewing of the right order appear. If thou do desire a direct refutation,
Apply this aunfwere unto the o^^ectio^ in the beginning of the 5. verse
whereby such blasphemous speeches may be quenched, understand it thus, that
this comes not to pass through the nature of unrighteousness, that the
righteousness of GOD should appear the more thereby: But our wickedness is
so overcome of the goodness of God, that it is rather converted into another
end, then it does tend unto.

7 For if the truth of God by my lie, etc. I doubt not but this objection also
is pronounced in the person of the wicked. For it is an exposition of that went
before: and should have been joined, but that the Apostle being moved with
the heynousnesse, or uncomeliness of the thing, did break of his speech in
the midst. The meaning is, if by our lie the truth of GOD be made more
clear, and after a sort established, whence also more glory redoundeth unto
him: it is not meet that he should be punished for a sinner, who is the
minister of the glory of God.

8 And not rather as, etc. This a defective speech, wherein there must
somewhat be understood: it shall be perfect if thou do resolve it thus,
and why is it not rather said, (as we are blamed) that evil must be done
that good may come? The Apostle verily vouchsafes not to answer this ungodly
cauillation: which nevertheless it shall be lawful by good reason to repress.
For thus much only it pretends, if God be glorified by our iniquity* and
nothing better beseems a man to do in his life: Objection.
then to procure the glory of God: then to his glory we must sin. Answer.
But this may easilye be answered, that evil by it self can bring forth
nothing but evil.

Whereas therefore the glory of God is made clear by our sin, that is not
the work of man, but of God: who as a wonderful workman, knows to subdue
our wickedness and to conueigh it to another end, that besides that end it
is appointed unto of us, he conuerteth it to increase his glory. GOD has
prescribed unto us a manner how he will be glorified of us: namely, piety,
which consists in the obedience of his word. He that passes these bounds
does not go about to honor God but rather to dishonor him. In that it
falls out otherwise, that is to be ascribed unto the providence of God, and
not unto the wickedness of man, which lets nothing but the Majesty of God
may be utterly overthrown, much less lets it that the same should not
be violated. As we are blamed: Seeing Paul entreated so reverently of the
secret judgments of God, it is marvelous that the enemies fell to such
waywardness, Let the servants of God deal as circumspectly as may be in the
mysteries of god yet will the wicked speak evil.
to calumniate him: but there was never yet so great religion and sobriety in
the servants of GOD, which could bridle impure, and poysonable tongues. It is
not therefore a new example, that the adversaries at this day do charge us
with false accusations, and make our doctrine odious (which both we our
selves know, and all, both angels and faithful men witness with us, that it
is the pure Gospel of Christ.) Nothing can be imagined more monstrous, then
that we read here to have been laid to the charge of Paul: and all to the
end his preaching might be made odious or contemptible to the ignorant. Let us
therefore bear it, that the wicked by malicious detractions do deprave the
truth which we preach, and let us not therefore cease to defend the simple
confession thereof: seeing it has in it self sufficient virtue to overcome
and vanquish their lies. Nevertheless, by the example of the Apostle, let us
as much as in us lies, resist their malicious subtilities, least ungracious
and naughty Wretches should freely blaspheme the Creator. Whose judgment is
just. some take this actiuelie, only that Paul should agree unto them, that
yt was absurd which they objected, least the doctrine of the Gospel should
be thought to be joined with such strange and absurd things. But I like
better of the Passive signification. For it were not meet simply to agree unto
so great lewdness, which meriteth rather to be sharply reproved, which thing
Paul seems unto me to do. Their peruersitie therefore is two ways
damnable. First, in yt this impiety could come into their mind even unto the
consenting thereto: Secondly, that in slaundering the Gospel, they durst take
their malicious detraction hence.

9 What then? are we more excellent? no, in no wise: for we have already
alleged or promised to prove that all, both Jews and gentiles are under
sin. 9 What then? From his digression he returns unto his purpose. For
least the Jews perhaps should take it, that they were spoiled of their right,
when he reckoned these title of dignity, whereby they advanced themselves
above the Gentiles: now at the length he unfolds the question, whether they
excel the gentiles or no in any thing. And albeit this answer in show may
seem to be much contrary to the former (because he now takes from them all
pre-eminence to whom he gave much before) yet there is no variance. For those
privileges whereby he confessed them to excel, consisted out of themselves,
in the goodness of god and not in their own merit. And here he demands after
their dignity, whether they could glory of any thing in them selves. Therefore
these two answers agree so, Whatsoever preeminence was in the Jew, it was of
the goodness of God toward them and not of their own dignity.
that this proceeds out of the other. For when he extolled their prerogatives
including them in the only benefits of God, he declared them to have nothing
of their own, whereupon that which he now answers, might forthwith be
inferred. For if their principal pre-eminence he, that the Oracles of God were
committed to them, and they have it not by their merit, there is nothing
therefore left unto them, whereby they might be proud in the sight of God.
And note the sacred workmanship or cunning, that when he gave unto them
excellency or pre-eminence he spoke in the third person. Now when he will
take all from them, he puts himself in the number that he might avoid
offense. For we have already alleged or promised to prove. The Greek
verb Atiastai, which Paul uses here, is a word apperteining to
judgment: therefore it has pleased us to translate it, We have alleged,
determined, or purposed to prove. For the accusor in his action is said to
allege the crime which he is ready to prove by other testimonies and
proofs. And the Apostle had cited all mankind generally before the tribunal
seat of God: that he might include all under the same condemnation. And in
vain is it for any man to object, that the Apostle does not only accuse here,
but rather prove: for no accusation is true but that, which is grounded upon
firm and sure proofs: as Cicero in a certain place distinguishes between an
accusation and a reproach. Moreover, to be under sin, What it is to be under
sin.
is as much as to be condemned for sinners justly before God, or to be holden
under the curse which is due unto sin. For as righteousness brings with it
absolution, so condemnation follows sin.

10 As it is written, that there is none righteous, no not one. 11 There is
none that understands: there is none that seeks God. 12 They have all gone
out of the way: they have been made altogether unprofitable: there is none
that does good no not one. 13 Their throat is an open sepulcher: they have
used their tongues to deceit: the poison of Aspes is under their lips. 14
Whose mouth is full of cursing and bitterness. 15 Their feet are swift to
shed blood. 16 Contrition and calamity are in their ways. 17 And the way of
peace have they not known. 18 There is no fear of God before their eyes. 10.
As it is written, Hitherto he has used reasons to convince men of their
iniquity. Now he begins to argue from authority: which is the surest
kind of proof with Christians, so that the authority be given unto the
only God. The duty of Ecclesiastical persons.
And here let Ecclesiastical persons learn what is their office. For if Paul
here affirm no doctrine which he also confirms not by certain testimony
of Scripture: much less is this thing to be attempted of them, whose whole
charge is this, to preach that Gospel which they have received by the hands
of Paul and others. There is none righteous. Seeing the Apostle alleges
rather the sense then the words absolutely, before he would descend unto the
particulers, he seems first to have put down in general, what is the sum
of those things which are noted by the Prophet to be in man: namely, Psalm.
14.^.
that none is just, and afterward to reckon up particularly the fruits of this
unrighteousness. And the first is, that there is none that understands. And
this foolishness is straightwayes reproved, because they seek not God. Psalm.
53.3. All knowledge without the knowledge of god is vain.
For vain is that man in whom the knowledge of God is not, what knowledge
soever he have besides. Yea, the sciences and faculties themselves, which in
them selves are good, yet are made but vain in us, if they want this
foundation.

It follows, There is none that does good: whereby is meant that they have
put off all sense of humanity. For as the best bond of mutual conjunction
amongst us, consists in the knowledge of God (because as he is father unto
all, he does notably reconcile us: and out of him there is nothing but mere
dissipation) so for the most part inhumanitie follows the ignorance of him,
whiles every man, other men being contemned, loves and seeks himself.
Contrariwise it is added, their throat is an open sepulcher: Psalm. 5.10.
Outrageous cruelty described.
that is to say, a goulfe to destroy men. And it is more then if he had said,
deuourers, or eaters of men. Because it is a note of outrageous cruelty, that
the throat of man should be such a goulfe, that it should serve to the
swallowing, and supping up of whole men. Heereunto apperteiueth that also is
said, Their tongues are deceitful, Psalm. 140.4.
and lips smeered with poison. It follows, their mouth is full of cursing
and bitterness. Psalm. 10.7
Which vice is contrary to the former: but the meaning is, they are every way
full of mischief, for if they speak fair, they deceive, and under fair
speeches they proferre poison: But if they broach that they have in their
mind, thence comes bitterness and cursing. It is a notable kind of speech,
which is added out of Esaias, Contrition and calamity are in their ways. Esaias
59.7.
For it is a singular demonstration, or description of barbarous cruelty,
which wheresoever it go or come, by destroying all things, it causes
solitariness and desolation: after which sort Pliny describes Domitian.

It follows, and the way of peace they have not known: because they are so
accustomed with robberies, violences, injuries, Where the fear of God is
wanting, no good can be present.
security and cruelty, that they know not to do any thing lovingly, and
courteously. Lastly, in the conclusion that is repeated again under another
word, which we speak of at the first: namely, that out of the contempt of GOD
comes all wickedness. For seeing the fear of GOD is the fountain of
wisdom, when we are once departed from that, there abides nothing right or
sincere.

Finally, as it is a bridle to restrain our naughtiness: so if it be wanting,
we are loosed unto all kind of licentious wickedness. The alleged places
particularly examined. Psalm. 14.1
And least any should think these testimonies were vnfu^y wrested: let us
consider every one of them according to the circumstances of the places whence
they are taken. David says, there was so great peruersitie or naughtiness of
nature in men, that God having beholden them all in order, he could not find
one just. It follows therefore that this mischief went over all mankind,
seeing nothing is hid from the sight of God. He speaks verily in the end of
the Psalm of the redemption of Israel: But straightwayes we shall show in
what manner holy men, and how farrefoorth they are exempted from this
condition. In the other Psalms he complains of the wickedness of his
enemies, where under himself and his, he portraieth a certain type of the
kingdom of Christ: wherefore under his adversaries all those are represented
unto us which being estraunged from Christ, are not lead by his spirit. Esaias
does expressly note Israel: Therefore his accusation does ye more agree unto ye
gentiles. What then? There is no question, but ye nature of me^ is described
under these terms: that thereby we might see, what man is, being left unto
him self: in as much as Scripture testifies all to be such, which are not
regenerate by the grace of God. How the godly are exempted from the common
condition of me^


The condition of holy men were nothing better, but that the same prauitie or
naughtiness is corrected in them. Yet to the end they might remember, how
they differ nothing from others by nature: in the relics of their flesh
(wherewith they are still compassed) they feel the seeds of those things,
which would continually bring forth fruit in them except mortification did
let them: which they ought to ascribe unto the mercy of the Lord, and not
unto their nature. And finally, whereas all the faults are here reckoned, do
not appear in every one, this lets not but they may rightly and truly be
contained or compacted under the nature of man, as we have already noted. Chap.
1.26.


19 We know that whatsoever the Law says, it says it to them which are
under the Law, that every mouth might be stopped and all the world be
culpable before God. 20 Therefore by the works of the Law shall no flesh be
justified in his sight: for by the law, comes the knowledge of sin. 19 We
know. Having left the Gentiles he does precisely apply those speeches unto
the Jews: in subduing of whom there was much more a do: because they being no
less void of righteousness then the Gentiles, did cover themselves with the
cloak of the covenant of God, as though this were sufficient holiness for
them, that they were distinguished from the residue of the world, by the
election of God. And truly he brings forth those euasions, which he knew
well the Jews had at hand. For whatsoever was spoken sinisterly in the Law
against all mankind, they were wont to return it upon the Gentiles: as though
they were exempted from the common sort. And surely so they were, but that they
fell from their degree. Therefore least some false imagination of their own
private worthynesse should hinder them, and (...) they should restrain those
things unto the Gentiles (...) which do no less appertain unto themselves:
Paul heer^ preuenteth that, and by an argument taken from the end of the
Scripture, he shows that they are not only in the same condition with the
common sort of men, but that that judgment is peculiarly denounced of them. And
hereby we see the diligence of the Apostle in refelling objections. Paul
applies the former testimonies of scripture against the Jews.
For to whom is the law given, or to whose instruction ought it to serve if
not to the Jews? In that therefore it makes mention of others, that it does
(as it were) by the way, or (as they say) lightly: but to his own scholars it
does principally apply his doctrine. In the law. He says the Jews are
those to whom the Law was appointed: whereby it follows that it does
properly appertain unto them: and under the law he understands also the
Prophets: and so comprehends the whole old Testament.

That every mouth might be stopped. That is, that all evasion, and power of
excusing might be taken away. How man's mouth is said to stopped.
It is a Metaphore taken from judgments, where he that is guilty, if he
have any thing that may serve justly to his defense, asks leave to speak
that he might clear him self of those things are laid against him: but if
his own conscience condemn him, he holds his peace, and saying nothing
expects his condemnation, being even now by his silence condemned. The same
sense has that saying of Job: Job. 39.37.
I will lay my hand upon my mouth. For he says, although he wanted not
some kind of excuse, yet not going about to justify him self, he would
yield unto the sentence of God. The next clause conteyneth an exposition. For
his mouth is stopped who is so holden wrapped in judgment, that he can no way
escape: otherwise to be silent before the face of God, is to be afraid of his
majesty, and as it were astonished with his brightness, to become even
speechles.

20 Because by the works of the law. It is a great question, yea even amongst
the learned, what works be called the works of the law, whiles some extend
them unto the observation of the whole law, other some restrain them unto the
ceremonies only. The annexing of this word law, did move Chrysostom,
Origin, and Hierome to be of the first opinion, for in that addition they
thought there was^ peculier aduisement that the speech should not be
understood of all works generally. But this doubt is easily loosed. For
seeing works are so far forth just in the sight of the Lord, as we do
study by them to give unto him woorshippe and obedience: to the end he might
more precisely take from all works the force, virtue, or strength of
justification, he has named those works which specially might justify, if
there were any that could justify. Works of the law are named by a kind of
excellency, as who should say, if they justify not then no works justify.
For it is the law that has the promises, without the which our works are
of no valewe before God. Thou see therefore the cause why Paul expressed the
works of the law: Namely, because by the law there is a reward appointed
unto works. Neither were the very Scholemen ignorant hereof: amongst whom
it is an old and common saying, that works are not meritorious in respect of
any internal or real worthiness, but for the covenant. And although they are
deceived, for that they see not our works always to be defiled with vices,
which do take from them merit: yet that principle is true, namely, that the
reward of works depends upon the voluntary promise of the law.

Therefore Paul wisely and very well does not dispute of bare works: but
precisely and namely he alleges the keeping of the law, of the which
properly the question was. As for those things which are brought in of other
learned men for the defense of that sentence, they are weaker then were meet.

By the naming of circumcision, they think an example to be propounded, which
proves that it appertains unto the ceremonies only. But we have already
declared why Paul has named circumcision. For neither do any other swell
with the confidence of works then hypocrites. And we know how they glory
only in eternal shows. Secondely, circumcision in their judgment was a
certain entrance unto the righteousness of the law: therefore it seemed
also to be a work of great dignity. And whereas they fight out of the
Epistle to the Galathians: where, when Paul handles the same cause, yet he
directs his style unto ceremonies only: that also is not firm enough to
obtain that they would. Sure it is, Paul had to do with such as did insence
the people with a false believe or confidence of ceremonies. That he might
remove or take this away he does not contain him self within the compass
of ceremonies, neither disputes he specially of what valewe they are: but he
comprehends the whole law, as may appear by the places which are all of
them derived from that fountain. Paul speaks here of works without
exception.
Such also was the state of that disputation which was holden at Jerusalem
amongst the disciples. And it is not without cause we labor to prove Paul in
this place without exception to speak of the whole law. For the very style
and manner of disputation which he has hither to followed and does still
prosecute, does sufficiently favor us: and many places do not suffer us to
think otherwise. It is therefore a sentence notable amongst the chiefest, that
no man shall be justified by the keeping of the law. He has showed the
reason before, and repeateth it again straightwayes: because all men together
being convicted of transgression, are reproved of unrighteousness by the
law. Flesh without some special restraint signifies man.
These two are contrary one to the other (as we shall see more at large in the
process) to be thought righteous by works, and to be guilty of
transgression. This word flesh without any special consideration betokens
men: but that it seems after a sort to pretend a more general
signification. After which manner more is expressed when one says all mortal
men, or all mortal creatures, then if he should name all men, as you may see
with or at Gellius. For by the Law. He reasons from the contrary, that we
have not righteousness by the Law, because it conuinceth us of sin and
damnation: seeing life and death proceed not forth of the same fountain. And
whereas he reasons from the contrary effect of the law, that we can not be
justified by it: we must understand, his argument proceeds or holds not,
except we keep this as an inseparable, Though the law be the rule of
righteousness, yet it profits nothing, by reason of our corrupcion.
and perpetual accident, that the law revealing to man his sin, takes from
him the hope of salvation that way. The Law truly by it self, because it
instructs unto righteousness, is the way to salvation: but our prauitie and
corruption lets that this way it profits nothing.

Now this must needs be added in the second place, whosoever, is found to
be a sinner, he is spoiled of righteousness. For it is friuelous to faigne
with Sophisters an half righteousness, that works should partly justify:
But nothing is gotten on this behalf, for the corruption of man.

21 But now is the righteousness of God, made manifest without the law,
having witness of the law and the prophets. 22 To wit, the righteousness of
GOD, by the faith of Jesus Christ, unto all, and upon all, that do beeleeue.
21 But now is the righteousness etc. It is doubted in what sense he calls
that the righteousness of God which we obtain by faith: whither therefore,
because it only consists or stands in the sight of GOD: or for that the
Lord does give the same unto us of his mercy. Because both interpretations
agree well: we will contend on neither part. What righteousness is called the
righteousness of God, and how the same is reueiled with out the law: id est
works.
He says therefore that that righteousness, which God both communicates unto
man, and also embraces only and acknowledges for righteousness, is reueiled
without the law, that is, without the aid, help, or supportation of the
law: so that by the law is meant works. For it may not be referred unto
doctrine, which straightwayes he cites for the witness of free
righteousness by faith. Where as some restrain it unto ceremonies, shortly
after I shall show that to be vain and cold. It remains therefore that we
know the merit of works to be excluded. Where also we see how he mixeth
not works with the mercy of God: But all opinion of works being removed
and abolished, he establishes the only mercy of God. Neither am I ignorant
that Augustine does expound it otherwise: for he takes the righteousness of
God for the grace of regeneration: and he confesses this grace to be free,
because the Lord renews us, being unworthy, with his spirit. And from this
he excludes the works of the law, that is, whereby men go about, without
renouation, of them selves in deserve God. And I know well enough, that
certain new beholders and vewers of matters do arrogantly pronounce this
doctrine, as though it were at this day reueiled unto them. But it shall
appear plainly by the text how the Apostle without exception comprehends
all works, All works excluded from justification, yea even those god works
in us.
yea those which the Lord woorketh in his. For surely Abraham was regenerate,
and was led by the spirit of God, at such time as he denies him to be
justified by works. Therefore he excludes from the justification of man, not
only those works which are morrally good (as commonly they term them) and
which are done by the instinct of nature, but also what works so ever the
faithful can have.

Secondly, if that be the definition of the righteousness of faith, blessed
are they whose iniquities are forgiven: the question is not of this or that
kind of works: but the merit of works being done away, only remission of
sins is put down for the cause of righteousness. They think these two
agree well, man to be justified by faith by the grace of Christ: and yet
notwithstanding to be justified by works which do proceed from spirtuall
regeneration: because both God does freely renew, and by faith we receive
his gift. But Paul takes a far other principle: namely, that the
consciences of men are never quiet, till they lean or rest upon the only
mercy of God. ^. Cor. 5.19.
Therefore in another place after he has taught, GOD to have been in Christ,
that he might justify men, he does also show the manner: saying, in not
imputing to them their sins. Gal. 3.12.
Likewise to the Gallathians he therefore makes the law contrary to faith,
in respect of the effect of iustifiing, because the law promises life to
those do that it commands. But the law commands not an external show
of works only, but the sincere love of God. Therefore it follows no merit
of works can be admitted in the righteousness of faith. Whereby appears it
is but a friuelous cavil that we are justified in Christ, because we are
renewed by the spirit as we are the members of Christ: that we are justified
by faith, because by faith we are graffed into the body of Christ: that we
are justified freely, because GOD does find nothing in us but sin.

For therefore are we justified in Christ, because out of our selves:
therefore by faith, because we must needs depend upon his mercy and free
promises: therefore freely, because GOD does reconcile us unto him self by
buriyng our sins. Righteousness by the remission of sins is not to be tied
to the beginning of righteousness.
Neither can that be tied unto the beginning of righteousness as they dream.
For that definition, Blessed are they whose iniquities are forgiven, had place
in David, when he had long exercised him self in the woorshippe of GOD: and
Abraham thirty years after he was called, although he were a singular
example of holiness, yet had he no works wherein to glory with GOD: and
therefore it is imputed unto him for righteousness that he believed the
promise. And when Paul says GOD justifies men by not imputing their sins,
he recites that Sermon which ought daily to be rehearsed in the Church.

And that part of the conscience which is troubled in respect of works, is
not of the continuance of one day, but ought to last the whole life: whereby
it follows, No beginning proceeding, or perfection of righteousness but in
Christ only.
we are not otherwise justified, even until the day of death: but because we
have respect unto Christ only, in whom GOD has adopted us, and now
holds us acceptable. Hereby also their cavil is refelled, who charge us of
falsehood, because we affirm it to be had out of the Scripture, that we
are justified by faith only, when as the particle exclusive is no where extant
in Scripture. But if justification be both without the law, and without us:
why shall it not be imputed unto mercy only? if it be of mercy only? then
of faith only.

This particle now may simply be taken aduersatiuely, that it be not
referred unto time: as we often say now for but yet. If you had rather
refer it unto time (which I do willingly admit, least he should seem
to seek any evasion) yet notwithstanding the only abrogation of ceremonies
shall not be understood: because the purpose of the Apostle, is only by
comparison to illustrate the grace, wherein we excel the fathers. Therefore
the sense shall be, after Christ was exhibited in the flesh, the
righteousness of faith was reueiled by the preaching of the Gospel. Whereby
yet it follows not that it lay hid before the coming of Christ. A twofold
manifestation of the grace of God.
For a twofolde manifestation is here to be considered: the former, is of the
old Testament, which consisted in the word and sacraments: the second of
the new Testament, which besides the ceremonies and promises contains the
fullness or filling up in Christ: whereinto also is added a more absolute
clearenesse by the Gospel. having witness. He adds this, least in the
dispensation of free righteousness, the Gospel should seem to be contrary
to the law. Therefore as he denied the righteousness of faith to stand in
need of the help of the law: The law gives testimony unto the righteousness
of faith.
so now he affirms it to be confirmed by the testimony of the Law. And
if the law bear witness unto free righteousness: it is apparaunt the law
was not given therefore, that it might teach men to get unto them selves
righteousness by works. Then they pervert the law, who wrest it unto that
end. Moreover, if thou do desire the proof of this sentence, prosecute in
order the sum of Moses doctrine, and thou shall find, how man at the
beginning being cast from the kingdom of God, had no other restitution then in
the Evangelical promises touching the blessed seed, wherein the breaking of
the Serpents head is forspoken: And wherein a blessing is promised or
denounced to all nations. In the commandments thou shall find the
demonstration of thine iniquity: by the sacrifices and oblations thou shall
learn how the satisfaction and purgation thereof is in Christ only. If you
come unto the Prophets, in them you shall find most plentiful promises of
free grace: Concerning which matter see our institutions. I say the
righteousness of God. What manner of righteousness the righteousness of faith
is.
In few words he declares what manner of righteousness this is, namely,
that it rests or abides in Christ, and is apprehended by faith. Although
whiles he infers again the name of God, he seems to make God the author
and not only an approuer of that righteousness of the which he entreats: as
though he should say it comes from him only, or it has his original from
heaven, and is made manifest to us in Christ. Therefore when we reason of this
righteousness, we must proceed this way. First, the cause of our righteousness
must not be referred unto the judgment of men, but unto the tribunal of
God, where no righteousness is accounted of, but the perfect and absolute
obedience of the law: which thing may easily appear by the promises and
threatninges. And if that no man can be found, that has attained unto such
exact holiness: it follows all are void of righteousness in them selves.
Then must Christ needs help: who as he is only just, Righteousness is a real
virtue in Christ, and apprehended of us by faith.

Gods mercy ye efficient cause, Christ the material cause, and faith the
instrumental cause of our righteousness.


so by transferring his righteousness unto us he makes us righteous. Now
thou see how the righteousness of faith, is the righteousness of Christ.
That we may therefore be justified, the efficient cause is the mercy of God:
Christ is the matter or material cause: the word and faith is the instrument
or isntrumental cause. Wherefore, faith is said to justify: because it is the
instrument to receive Christ, in whom righteousness is communicated unto us.
After that we are made partakers of Christ, not only we our selves are just,
but our works are reputed just before God: namely because whatsoever
imperfection is in them it is abolished or taken away by the blood of Christ.
The promises which are conditional, by the same grace also are fulfilled unto
us, in as much as God does reward our works as perfect, because the deffect
or imperfection of them is covered through free pardon.

To all, and upon all. For amplification sake he has repeated the same thing
by diverse forms of speaking: to the end he might the rather express that we
have heard, namely, that both sole faith is required here, and that the
faithful are not disstinguished by temporal or external notes: so it
mattereth not whether they be Gentiles or Jews.

23 For there is no difference. All have sinned, and are deprived of the glory
of God. 24 And are justified freely by his grace, through the redemption is in
Christ Jesus. 25 Whom God has set forth to be a reconciliation through faith
in his blood, to declare his righteousness, by the forgiveness of the sins that
are passed through the patience of God. 26 To show at this time his
righteousness: that he might be just, and a iustifier of him which is of the
faith of Jesus. 23 For there is no difference. He inioyneth unto all without
exception the necessitye of seeking righteousness in Christ: as if he should
say, there is no other way to obtain righteousness by, neither are some
justified this way, and other some that way, But all together by faith, because
all are sinners: and therefore they have not whereon to glory with God. And he
takes it for a thing granted, that when men are come unto the tribunal of
God, whosoever is guiltye of sin in his own conscience, he lies
confounded, and so overthrown under his own ignominy: that no sinner can
abide the face of God, as we see in the example of Adam. Again he fights
with an argument taken from the contrary: where we must mark what follows.
Because all men are sinners, Paul infers, that they want or are deprived
of the praise of righteousness. All glory of righteousness taken from men,
because they are sinners.
Therefore according to his doctrine there is no righteousness but that is
perfect and absolute. For if there were any half righteousness, then should
not he is a sinner be altogether spoiled of all glory. Whereby that fable of
righteousness in part (as they call it) is sufficiently refelled. For if it
were true, that we are partly justified by works, and partly by the grace of
God: This argument of Paul should be of no force, Where sin is there is no
righteousness, until Christ have taken away the curse. Gal. 3.10.
namely, that all are therefore deprived of the glory of God, because they are
sinners. It is therefore out of all controversy, there is no righteousness
there, where sin is, till Christ have put away the curse. And that is it, is
said to the Galathians: As many as are under the law, are subject to the
curse: but we are delivered from this by the benefit of Christ. By the glory
of God, he understands that glory which has place before God, Ioh. 12.43.
as it is said with John, they have loved more the glory of men, then the
glory of God. And so he calls us from the delight of humane judgment unto
the celestial judgment seat.

And are justified freely. The Participle after the manner of the Grecians is
put in steed of the verb. The meaning is, because there remains nothing else
unto men in themselves, but that they being smitten through by the just
judgment of God should perish: therefore they are justified freelye by his
mercy. For Christ helps this misery, and does communicate himself to the
faithful, that in him only they may find all things which are wanting
unto them. As it falls out, there is no place in all the Scripture more
notable to set forth the power of this righteousness. The efficient
material, formal, and final cause of our justification.
For it shows the mercy of God to be the efficient cause: Christ with his
blood to be the matter or material cause: Faith conceived by the word, to be
the formal or isntrumental cause: Lastly, the glory both of the justice and
goodness of God to be the final cause. Concerning the efficient cause, he
says we are justified freely, and that verily by his grace. Therefore by
this he shows how all is of God and nothing of our selves. It might have
been sufficient to have opposed grace unto merits: but least we should
imagine an half righteousness, having added a repetition he does more
clearelye show forth his mind: and has ascribed the true effect of
righteousness to the only mercy of God, which righteousness the Sophisters
rent in pieces and mayme, least they should be constrained to confess their
own poverty.

By the redemption. The matter of our righteousness or justification is, that
Christ by his obedyence has satisfied the judgment of the Father, and by
taking our person upon him, has delivered us from the tyranny of death,
wherewith we were holden captive. For by the satisfaction of that sacrifice
which he offered, our guiltines is taken away. Whereby also the imagination of
those is notably refelled, Righteousness is not a quality in us.
which will have righteousness to be a quality in us. For if we be therefore
reputed righteous before God, because we are bought or redeemed by a price:
then surely we borowe that else where, which is not in our selves. And
straight ways Paul declares of what power this redemption is, and whereunto
it serves, namely, that we might be reconciled to God. For he calls Christ
the propitiation or rather (which likes us better, that we might allude unto
the old figure) the propitiatory. And what else signifies that, but that we
are just, so far forth as Christ reconcileth the father to us? But now it
behooves to consider the words.

Whom God foreappoynted. etc. Because the Greek word Protithenai, sometime
signifies to determine or appoint before, sometime to bring forth into light:
if the first signification be taken, Paul refers it unto the free mercy of
God, that Christ was foreordayned a mediator, which should reconcile the
father to us by the sacrifice of his death. And this is an excellent
commendation of grace, that God did willingly of him self seek out a mean,
whereby he might take away our curse. And certainly this place seems to agree
with that of John: God so loved the world that he gave his only begotten
son. Howbeit if we embrace the other sense, the same reason shall stand: that
God in his time made him manifest, whom he had decreed with himself to be the
mediator. In the word propitiatory I think there is an allusion (as I said)
unto ye old propiciatory. For he teaches how yt is exhibited in Christ
indeed, which was figured there. Yet because the other opinion cannot be
disproued, if any had rather understand it more simply, I will leave it to
their election. The meaning of Paul in this place may surely be gathered out
of his words, Without Christ God is always angry with us.
namely, that God without Christ is always angry with us: and that we are
reconciled by him, whiles by his righteousness we are accepted. For God does
not detest in us his own workmanship: but our uncleanness, which has
extinguished ye light of his image: which uncleanness when the washing or
rinsing of Christ has done away, he loves and imbraceth us as his own pure
workmanship. A Propitiatory or reconciliation through his blood. So I had
rather word for word to keep that Paul has: When the blood of Christ is
only named, the other parts of our redemption be not excluded but understood
by the figure Synecdoche, which is when by a part the whole is understood.
for verily he seems unto me by a continual style without interruption to
say, God is reconciled unto us, so soon as we have our confidence reposed in
the blood of Christ: because through faith we come into the possession of his
benefit. Whiles he names blood only, he excludes not the other parts of our
redemption: But rather under a part he comprehends the whole sum: And
named the blood, wherein we have our washing. So by the figure Synecdoche the
whole cleansing is noted. For whereas he said of late that God was pleased with
us in Christ, now he adds, that the same is brought to pass by faith: and
also what our faith ought chiefly respect in Christ. For the forgiveness of
sins. The preposition causall is as much in value, as if he had said, for
forgiveness sake, or to this end that he might do away sins. And this
definition or exposition does confirm again that which I have now already
sundry times warned, namely, that men are not justified because they are such
indeed, but by imputation. Only he uses he uses diverse words that he
might more evidently declare, there is no merit of ours in this
righteousness. For if we obtain it by the remission of sins, we gather, it
is out of our selves. Secondly, if the remission of sins be of the mere
liberalitye of God, all merit falls to the ground. Yet here aryseth a
question, why he restrayneth pardon or forgiveness to the sins are passed.
Although this place be diversely expounded: It seems probable to me, that
Paul had regard unto the cleansinges or washinges of the law. Which were
only testimonies of the satisfaction to come. For they could not please God.
There is the like place to the Hebrews, Heb. 9.15.
that through Christ came the redemption of sins that were in the former
Testament. And yet thou may not understand it, that no transgressions but
those of the former time are done away by the death of Christ. Which dotage
or folly, some certain mad men have drawn from this place being indecently
wrested. There never was, is, nor shall be, any other satisfaction for sin
then the blood of Christ.
For Paul only shows, that until the death of Christ there was no price to
please God, and that the same was not accomplished or fulfilled by the figures
of the law: Wherefore the veritye until the fullness of time, was in
suspense. Moreover, the same reason is of those sins do daily make us
guyltye: for there is one only satisfaction for all. Some, that they might
avoid that inconvenience, have said the former sins were forgiven, least a
liberty of sinning afterward should seem to be granted. And true it is, there
is no remission given but to sins committed. Not that the fruit of
redemption does fall away or perish, if afterward we sin, as Nouatus with
his sect did dream: Christ's death not only auayleable for sins past, but
also if hereafter we fall.
but because this is the dispensation of the Gospel, to set before him is
about to sin, the judgment and wrath of GOD, and before him has sinned,
mercy. How (...) that is the pro^^^ sense which I brought.

Whereas he adds, this remission to have been in patience or long sufferance.
They simply understand it for meeknes, myldnes or gentleness which stayed the
judgment of God, neither suffered it to burst forth to our destruction,
until at the length he received us into favor. But rather it seems to be a
secret Preoccupation or preventing of an objection. Least any should object,
that it was long ere this mercy appeared, Paul shows it was an argument of
patience.

26 To show etc. The repetition of this member is not without an Emphasis or
force, which repetition Paul did purposely seek after, because it was very
necessary: seeing man is persuaded unto nothing more hardly, then that he
disabling him self in all things, should acknowledge them to be received of
God: How the righteousness of God, which was at al times, and had effect in all
ages is said to be revealed at this time.
although this new demonstration be mentioned of purpose, that the Jews might
open their eyes to behold. At this time, he refers that unto the day or
time when Christ was exhibited, which has been at all times. And not
unworthily, for ye which in old time was known obscurely under shadows. God
has manifested openly in his son. So the coming of Christ was the time of
his good pleasure, and the day of salvation. God verily in all ages gave some
testimony of his righteousness: But when the son of righteousness shyned, it
appeared far more bright. The comparing therefore of the old and new
Testament is to be noted: because then at the last was the righteousness of
God manifestly revealed, when Christ was exhibited. That he might be just. It
is a definition of that righteousness, which he said was then revealed when
Christ was given: as in the first Chapter he taught to be declared in the
Gospel. And he affirms it to consist of two members. The righteousness of God,
revealed in the Gospel conteyneth two branches. One, that he is absolutely
righteous in himself, another that he communicates the sin unto men.
The first is, that God is just, not as one amongst many, but as one who only
conteyneth in himself all the fullness of righteousness. For otherwise
perfect and true praise, such as is due unto him can not be given unto him,
then whiles he only obteyneth the name and honor of just, all mankind being
condemned of unrighteousness. He sets ye second member in the communication
of righteousness, namely, whiles God does not keep his riches hid up in
himself, but powers them out upon men. Therefore ye righteousness of God
appears in us, so far forth, as he justifies us by the faith of Christ.
For in vain were Christ given unto righteousness, except there followed a
fruitio^ of him by faith. Whereby it follows that al men were unjust and damned
in themselves, til a remedy was offered from heaven.

27 Where then is the glorying? It is excluded. By what law? Of works? Nay.
But by the law of faith. 28 We determine therefore, that a man is justified
by faith without the works of the law. 27 Where then is the glorying? After
that the Apostle has sufficiently by firm reasons beaten men down from the
confidence of works, he now taunteth their vanity. This exclamation or
acclamation to the thing already declared and proved was necessary: for in
this cause it did not suffice to teach except by greater vehemence of the holy
Ghost, he should lighten and thunder against our pride to overthrow it. And
undoubtedly he says that glorying is excluded, because we can bring nothing
of our own, which is worthy to be approved, or commended of God. If merit be
the matter of glorying, whether you term it de congruo, which is, apt, fit,
or convenient, That is called merit de congruo when a man of his own good
motion proceeding naturally from him, meriteth the first grace, which they
call grace preventing: Merit de condigno, when man being helped by the first
grace, does make himself worthy of eternal life.
or whether you call it, de condigno, that is, worthy, whereby man reco^cileth
God unto himself: here thou see they are both overthrown. For here he
speaks of no diminishing, or moderating: but Paul verily leaves no drop
of merit. Moreover, if the glorying of works be so taken away by faith, ye
faith cannot purely be preached, but in giving all unto the mercy of God, man
must needs be spoiled of all praise: it follows then, that we are not
helped by any works to the obteyning of righteousness. Of works? How does
the Apostle here deny our merits to be excluded by the law, seeing before he
proved our damnation out of the law? For if the law make us subject to
death, what glory shall we get out of it? Or rather does it not cover us,
being deprived of all glory, with shame or reproach? But then he showed,
how our sin is laid open by the detection of the Law, because we are all
fallen from the observation of it. And here he means, if righteousness
were in the law of works, our glorying were not excluded: but because it is
of faith only, therefore we cann^ challenge nothing to our selves: for faith
receives all from God, it brings nothing but a humble confession of need or
want. And the Antithesis or contrarietye of faith and works is to be noted:
wherein without addition works are put universally. Therefore, he neither
entreats of ceremonies only, nor yet of the external show of works: but
comprehends all the merits of works which can be imagined. The name Law
is given unto faith improperly: but yet this darkeneth not the sense of the
Apostle. For his meaning is, that when we are once come unto the rule of
faith, then all the glory of works is overthrown: as if he should say,
the righteousness of works verily is commended in the law, but faith has a
law of his own, which leaves no righteousness in works whatsoever they be.

28 We have determined therefore. Now he gathers the principal proposition,
as though it were now out of all controversy, adding also an explication. For
justification by faith is made very clear, whiles works are excluded by
name. Therefore our adversaries at this day labor nothing more, then that
faith might be entangled with the merit of works. They confess a man is
justified by faith: but not by sole faith. Yea in very deed they place the
power of justification in charity, howsoever in words they give it unto faith.
But Paul in this place does make justification so free, that he makes it
evident how in no sort it can stand with any merit of works. I have showed
before why he names the works of the law: and also I have declared those to
be ridiculous which restrain it unto ceremonies. Their imagination also is
childish which take the works of the law for external or literal works,
which are done without the spirit of Christ But rather the Epitheton is as
much of value as if he had called them meritorious: How S. James says a man is
not justified by faith only.
because he has regard unto the roward promised in the law. Whereas James
says a man is not justified by faith only, but by works: it is nothing
contrary to the former sentence. The reconciliation depends chiefly upon the
state of that argument of the which James entreats in that place. For in that
place the question is not how men get unto them righteousness before God:
but how they approve themselves to be just. For he refuteth Hypocrites who
glory vainly in the title of faith. It is therefore a gross fallacy: not to
observe how the word justify or justifying, is otherwise taken with James then
with Paul: as they entreat of diverse things. And also the word faith most
certainly appears to be equiuocal id est of ambiguous and doubtful
signification. This twofolde ambiguity or doubtfulnesse ought is have been noted
It may be gathered out of the text, that James would nothing else, then yt a man
is not made, or approved just by a dead faith, except he confirm his
righteousness by works. Of which matter see our institutions.

29 Is God the God of the Jews only? and not of the Gentiles also? Yea even of
the Gentiles also. 30 Seeing there is but one God, who shall justify the
circumcision by faith and the uncircumcision by faith. 29 Is God the God of the
etc. The second proposition shows, how that righteousness does no more
appertain unto the Jews, then unto the Gentiles. And it was very necessary yt
should be urged to the end place might be made for the kingdom of Christ
through the whole world. He does not therefore ask simply or precisely
whither God be the maker of the Gentiles, which was known to be out of all
controversy: but whether he would show himself a Savior to them also or no.
For after he has matched all mankind together, and has brought them all
under the same condition: if there be any difference amongst them, it is of God
and not of themselves, The righteousness of God in Christ is not tied to one
nation.
which have all things like or equal amongst them. So that if it be true, God
would have all the people of the earth to be partakers of his mercy the^
salvation, and righteousness which is necessary to salvation is extended unto
all. Wherefore under the name of God here is an insinuation of that mutual
relation, which often comes to our sight in Scripture: Iere. 30.22.
I will be your God and you shall be my people. For, yt God for a time did choose
unto himself a peculiar people, yt takes not away the beginning of nature,
namely, that all me^ were made according to the image of God, and brought up in
this world unto the hope of blessed eternity.

30 Who justifies. When he says some are justified by faith, other some of
faith, he seems to be delighted with the variety of speech in declaring the
same matter, that he might by the way gyrde the folly of the Jews, who imagine
a difference between them and the Gentiles: In the cause of justification
there is no difference between the Jews and Gentiles.
when as in the cause of justification there is no difference at al. For if men
be made partakers of this grace by faith only: and there is one faith in them
both: it is childishness to make a variance or diversity, where there is so
great a likelinesse. Therefore I suppose an irrision to be in these words, as
though he should say, if any will have a difference of the Gentile from the
Jew, let him take this, that the Gentile obteyneth righteousness by faith,
and the Jew of faith. Unless perhaps you had rather distinguish thus, the
Jews are justified of faith, because they are borne ye heirs of grace, whiles
the right of adoption was given over to them of their fathers: and the Gentiles
by faith, because the covenant came unto them in another sort.

31 Do we therefore make the law void by faith? God forbid: but we establish
the law. 31 Do we therefore etc. As soon as the law is opposed unto faith,
the flesh straight ways thereby catches some suspicion of repugnancie, as
though one were contrary to the other. And especially this false imagination
takes place in those who being endued with a preposterous knowledge of the
law, and having left the promises, seek nothing else in it, then the
righteousness of works. And for this cause not only Paul, but also the Lord
himself was evil spoken of amongst the Jews: as though by his whole
preaching he labored the abrogation of the law. Whence proceeded that
protestation: I came not to destroy the law, Mat. 5.17.
but to fulfill it. And this suspicion appertayned as well unto that part of the
law concerns manners, as that concerns ceremonies. For because the Gospel
makes the ceremonies of Moses to cease, it is thought to tend unto ye
subversion of the ministry of Moses.

Moreover, because the Gospel takes away all righteousness of works, it is
thought to be contrary to so many testimonies of the law, where the Lord
affirms, that he has prescribed in the law the way of righteousness and
salvation. Wherefore I neither understand this excuse of Paul, The whole law
established and fulfilled in Christ, and not made void.
of that ceremonies only, neither of the moral precepts only: but in
general of the whole law. For the moral law is truly confirmed and
established by faith in Christ: seeing it was given to this end, that having
taught man his iniquity, it might lead him unto Christ: without whom the law
it self is not performed, and in vain it preaches what is meet to be done:
neither came ^^e any thing, but stir up the lust or concupiscence more, to
the end at ye length it might bring upon man a greater damnation. But when we
are once come unto Christ, first, there is found in him the exact righteousness
of the law, which is also ours by imputation, Secondly, sanctification, whereby
our hearts are ^^amed to the observation of the law, namely that observation,
which though it be imperfect, yet aymeth to the mark. The like reason is of
ceremonies, which verily cease and vanish by the coming of Christ: but in so
doing they are truly confirmed. For if they be esteemed by themselves, they
are vain shadows and shows easily done away: and then they are found to have
some firmness when they respect^ better end. Herein therefore is their
chiefest confirmation, when (...) is taught, that they have obtained their
verity in Christ. Let us therefore remember also to preach the Gospel so, that
by our manner of teaching the law may be established: but yet propped vp^^ with
no other stay, then faith in Christ.

CHAP. 4.
1 What shall we say then, that our father Abraham has found concerning the
flesh. 2 For if Abraham were justified by works, he has wherein to rejoice, but
not with God. 3 For what says the Scripture? Abraham believed God, and it was
counted to him for righteousness.
Why the example of Abraham (...) be^ common rule.
WHat shall we say then. This is a confirmation taken from an example, which is
strong enough, because all things are like as well in ye matter as in the
person. For both he is the father of the faithful, to whom all ought to be
conformed: and also there is but one, not many ways for all men to obtain
righteousnessse by. In many other things an example should not serve to make a
common rule: but because in the person of Abraham there was proposed a mirror
or pattern of righteousness which appertains to the whole church: ^^orthe
^^herefore does Paul apply that unto the whole body of the Church, which was
written of him only. And also hereby he restrayneth the Jews, to whom nothing
was more plausible to glory of, the^ to boast themselves to be the sons of
Abraham. They never durst ascribe unto themselves more sanctity or holiness
then unto the holy Patriarche. Now seeing it is apparent he was justified
freely, his posterity which do arrogate unto themselves their own proper
righteousness out of the law, must hee^es for shame hold their peace. According
to the flesh. Because in the text of Paul ye verb Eurckenai id est has found
is put between this particle and the name father. After this manner, what shall
we say Abraham our father has found according to ye flesh? Some interpreters
think here to be demanded, what Abraham has gotten according to the flesh.
Which exposition if it be liked, the^ this saying according to the flesh,
shall be as much as naturally, or of himself. Nevertheless, it is like that it
is joined unto this (...) father in steed of an Epithe. For besides that we are
woo^te to be more moved with domestical examples: the dignity of pe^egrie
wherein the Jews glorified too much is precisely noted again. Many think it
to be added by the way of contempt: in which sense in another place they are
called the carnal sons of Abraham, which are not spiritual nor at all
lawful: I verily suppose it was expressed for the Jews sake only: because
it was more excellent to be the sons of Abraham by nature and descent of
flesh, so that they were faithful also, then to have been by adoption
only. The bond of natural coniunctio^ should move us the rather to embrace
the truth.
He grants therefore unto the Jews a nearer bond of conjunction, but yet
to this end only, that he might the rather move them, that they should not
depart from the example of their father.

2 For if Abraham. It is an Epicheirema. That is, an imperfect argument, which
ought to be gathered into this form, if Abraham be justified by works, he
may glory of his merit: But he has not wherein to glory with God: A
Sillogisme.
therefore he is not justified by works. So that member, but not with God, is
the minor proposition of the Sillogisme. Hereunto ought to be added the
conclusion which I have put down, although it is not expressed of Paul. He
calls that glorying when we may pretend something of our own, What it is to
glory before God.
whereunto a reward is due in the sight of God. Which seeing he takes away from
Abraham, who of us, shall challenge to himself the least drop of merit?

3 For what says the Scripture? This is the probation of yt minor or second
proposition in the former argument, where he denied Abraham to have any matter
of glorying. For if Abraham were therefore justified, because he embraced the
goodness of God by faith: it follows he had nothing to glory of, because he
brought nothing of his own, but an acknowledging of his misery, which sought
for mercy. For he takes it as a thing confessed, that the righteousness of
faith is the refuge and as it were the privilege place for a sinner that is
distitute of works. For if there were any righteousness of the law or
works, it should remain really in men them selves: but faith borrows that
else where which it has not in it self: therefore the righteousness of faith
is fitly called Imputatiua, That is, such as is by imputation.

Furthermore, the place which is cited, Genesis 15.6. The faith of Abraham had
respect unto the whole covenant of grace, and not only unto the particular
promise of posterity.
is taken forth of Genesis, where the word believe or the word believing,
Ought not to be restrained unto any one particular thing there spoken of, but
unto the whole covenant of salvation, and grace of adoption, which Abraham is
said to have apprehended by faith. The promise indeed of seed or posterity to
come is there rehearsed, but yet which was grounded upon the free adoption. And
we are to note yt neither salvation is promised without the grace of God, nor
yet the grace of God without salvation. Again, we are neither called into the
grace of God, nor into the hope of salvation, but righteousness is also offered
This being set down, we may see they hold not the principles of divinity,
which think the testimony of Moses to be violently wrested of Paul. For
because there is there a particular promise, they understand Abraham to have
done right and well, in that he believed it, and that he was so far forth
approved of God. But therein they are deceived, first in that they mark not,
how that word believe, is extended unto the whole content: wherefore it ought
not to be restrained unto one member. And the chiefest error is, that they
begin not at the testimony of the grace of God. But this does God that he
might assure Abraham both of his adoption, and fatherly favor: under which,
eternal salvation by Christ is contained. Wherefore Abraham in believing
imbraceth nothing but grace offered unto him, that his faith should not be
void. If this be imputed unto him for righteousness, it follows he was
justified no otherwise, but because he trusting in the goodness of God, durst
hope for all things from him. Neither does Moses say what men thought of him:
but how he was accounted before the judgment seat of God. Abraham therefore
apprehended the grace of God offered unto him in the promise, wherein he felt
righteousness to be communicated to him. It is necessary for the establishing
of righteousness to know this relation between the promise and faith: for
there is here the same reason between God and us, There is a mutual respect
between faith and ye promise, such as is between the giver and receiver.
that is with ye Lawers between the giver and him to whom the thing is given.
For we do not otherwise obtain righteousness, but because as it is offered
unto us in the promise of the Gospel, so we do by faith as it were, see the
possession of it. How the place of James which seems to be much contrary
unto this, is to be reconciled, I have already showed. And there (meaning the
Epistle of James) I shall (by the leave of God) declare it more at large. They
only are justified to who^ righteousness is imputed.
Only let us note, that they to whom righteousness is imputed are justified:

Seeing these two are put of Paul, as words of one signification. Whereby we
gather the question is not what men are in themselves, but what God does
account of them not that purity of conscience; and integrity of life is
separated from the free feuour of God: but, for that, when the cause is
demanded why God does love us, and acknowledge us for just, Christ must
needs come forth, who may cloth us with his righteousness.

4 For to him verily that woorketh, reward is imputed not of grace or favor,
but of debt. 5 But to him that works not, but believes in him that
justifies the ungodly, his faith is counted for righteousness. 4 For to him
that works. He calls him a worker, not every one that is addicted unto good
works, which study ought to floorish in all the sons of God: Who is
called a worker, and who a non worker.
but him that deserves some thing by his merits: likewise he counts him a
non worker, or one that woorketh not, to whom nothing is due by the merit of
works. Neither is his meaning that he would have the faithful vprofitable,
or idle Loyterers: but he forbids them only to be hirelinges, who
whatsoever they ask of God, they crave it as of right due unto them. And we
have already admonished, how the question is not here, after what sort we
should frame our life, but the question is of the cause of salvation. And he
reasons from the contrary, that God does not pay unto us righteousness as of
debt: but does frankly give it unto us, that we might ascribe it to him. And I
truly am of Bucers mind, who shows the form of reasoning, not to be drawn
from one word, but from an whole sentence, after this manner, if there be any
that meriteth any thing by his work, the thing merited is not imputed unto him
of grace: but is paid unto him as of debt or duty. Faith is counted unto
righteousness, not as though it brought any merit from us, How faith is
counted for righteousness.
but because it apprehends the goodness of God. Therefore is righteousness
no debt unto us, but given us freely. For because Christ at our prayer or suit
does justify us by faith, Paul does always therein consider our euacuation
or emptiness. For what do we believe, but Christ to be the satisfaction for
our sins, that he might reconcile us to God? The same, though in other words,
Galat. 3.11.
is in ye Epistle to the Galath. that no man is justified by the law it is
evident, for the just by faith shall live. But the law is not of faith: but he
that shall do these, shall live in them. For because the law promises wages
unto works, thereupon he concludes the righteousness of faith which is free,
not to agree with ye of works. Which cannot hold if faith do justify in
respect of works. These comparisons are diligently to be observed wherein al
merit is utterly done away.

5 But believes in him. This is a circumlocution very significant: wherein
he expresses the substance and nature of faith and righteousness, for he
concludes plainly that faith does justify us not as though it were a
meritorious virtue, but so far forth as it obteineth for us the grace of God.
Neither does he only pronounce God the giver of righteousness, but also
condemns us of unrighteousness, yt the liberality of God might help our
necessity To be brief, Faith adorneth us with ye righteousness of Christ, which
it beggeth of God.
none shall come unto the righteousness of faith, but he that is a sinner in
himself. For this circumlocution is to be applied unto the circumstaunce of
the place, that faith does adorn us with the righteousness of another, which
righteousness it beggeth of God. And here again God is said to justify us,
whiles he does freely pardon us being sinners, and does love us, with whom he
might justly be angrye, namely, whiles by his mercy he does away our
unrighteousness.

6 Even as David declares the blessedness of man, unto whom God imputes
righteousness without works: saying, 7 Blessed are they whose iniquities are
forgiven, and whose sins are covered. 8 Blessed is the man, to whom the Lord
imputes not sin. 6 As David etc. Here we may see they do but cauil which
would hemme in the works of the law, with in the compass of ceremonies.
Seeing he now calls them simply and without any addition works, As works are
here taken indefinitely for all works, so in the whole disputation.
which he called before ye works of the law. If no man can deny, but a simple
and unlimited speech such as we have now in hand, is indifferently to be
understood of every work: the same must always hold in the whole disputation.
For there is nothing less reasonable, then to take the power or force of
justification away from ceremonies only, seeing Paul does indefinitely
exclude works. Heereunto apperteyneth the contrary member, that God does
justify men by not imputing their sin. In which words also we are
taught, that righteousness, with Paul is nothing else then the remission of
sins. Lastly that this remission is free, because it is imputed without
works: which the very name of remission shows. For that creditoure or
lendour which is paid does not remitte: but he which willingly of mere
liberality does cancel or raze out the debte. Away now with those teach us
to redeem pardon of our sins by satisfactions: from which remission of
sins Paul fetches an argument to establishe the free gift of righteousness.
For how is it possible they should agree with Paul? they say, by works we
must satisfy the justice of God, that we may obtain pardon of our sins. On
the contrary Paul reasons, that the righteousness of faith is free and
without works: because it depends upon the remission of sins. This were
undoubtedly a false argument, if in the remission of sins there were any
regard or respect unto works at all. In like sort by the same words of the
prophet, the folly of the Schole men is refuted touching half remission.
They babble that the fault being remitted, the punishment is retained of God:
but the Prophet he cries that our sins are not only covered, that is,
taken away in the sight of God: but also he adds they are not imputed.

How shall God take punishment of those sins he does not impute? therefore
there remains sound unto us, God forgiueth not only the fault, but also the
punishment.
this most excellent sentence, he is justified by faith, who is purged or
cleansed before God by the free remission of his sins. Moreover hence may be
gathered the perpetual continuance of free righteousness or justification
through the whole life. For when David being weried with the continual sting
of his conscience, burst forth into this saying, he spoke surely by his own
experience. And now also he had served God many years. Therefore after great
proceedings, or goings forward, at the length he proved it by experience true,
that all they are miserable which are cited before the judgment state of God:
crying out there is none other way to obtain blessedness, then if the Lord
receive us into favor by not imputing our sins. Whereby the imagination of
those is very well refuted, which dream that the righteousness of faith, is
but the entrance, so that the faithful by works retain the possession of
righteousness, Righteousness not only begun but also continued by faith.
which righteousness they did not obtain by any merits. Where as some times
works are said to be imputed unto righteousness, and also other beatitudes are
reckoned, that does nothing prejudice the sentence of Paul. The psalm.. 106.30.
Psa. 106.30.
says it was imputed for righteousness unto Phinees the priest of the Lord,
that in taking punishment upon the adulterer and the harlot, he took away the
reproach of Israel. In deed we hear in this place how a man did a good
work: but we know a man is not justified for one deed. For there is
required a perfect and most absolute obedience, as the promise says: He that
shall do these shall live in them. Leuit. 18.5.
How then is this punishment of Phinees imputed unto him for rigteousnesse?
surely it must needs be, he was justified before by the grace of God. For
they which have put on the righteousness of Christ, have God not only
favorable to them selves, How righteousness is sometime given unto works.
but also to their works: whose spots and moles are covered with ye purity of
Christ, that they come not into judgment: whereby works being infected with
no corruptions are counted just: and that no work of man can any otherwise
then by this favor please God, it is evident. And if the righteousness of faith
be the only cause why our works are counted just: see then how sottishly they
reason, because righteousness is given to works, it is not of faith only. But
I oppose an invincible argument against them, namely, that all works are
condemned for unrighteous, except a man be justified by sole faith. The like is
to be understood of blessedness: they are denounced blessed which fear the
Lord, Psalm. 128.1. Psalm. 1.2.
and walk in his ways. Which meditate in his law day and night: but because
no man does that, in such perfection as were meet, that the commandment of
God might be fully satisfied, al such blessedness is void, and of none effect,
until that we being purified and cleansed by the remission of sins, be made
blessed: and so are made capable of that blessedness, which the Lord promises
for his servants for the study of the Law and good works. Therefore both
righteousness of works, is an effect of the righteousness of faith: and the
blessedness comes of works, an effect of ye blessedness with consists in ye
remission of sins. If the cause neither ought, neither can be destroyed of
his effect, they go ill fauouredly to work, if any go about to overthrow
the righteousness of faith by works. But why may not a man (will some say) by
those testimonies contend to prove a man to be justified and also made blessed
through works? Objection.
for the words of the Scripture say no more that a man is justified by faith,
and made blessed by the mercy of God, then by works. Verily here as well the
order of causes, as the dispensation of the grace of God is to be considered.
Answer.
For because what so ever is spoken either of the righteousness or blessedness of
works, it takes no place, unless this sole righteousness of faith go before,
and only fulfill all parts: this must be reared up and established, that the
other as fruit from a tree may grow and come forth of it.

9 Came this blessedness then upon the circumcision only, or upon the
uncircumcision also? for we say that faith was imputed unto Abraham for
righteousness. 10 How was it then imputed? when he was circumcised, or
uncircumcised? not when he was circumcised, but when he was uncircumcised.
Because there is mention made of circumcision and uncircumcision only, some
foolishly gather, there is nothing else in question, then, that righteousness
is not obtained by the ceremonies of the law. But we are to note with what
sort of men Paul has to deal. For we know that hypocrites, whiles in
general they boast their meritorious works, yet they pretend a color in
external works. The Jews also which through the gross abuse of the law
were alienated from true and perfect righteousness, had their peculier reason.
Paul said no man is blessed but he whom God by his free mercy reconcileth to
himself: whereby it follows all they are cursed whose works come into
judgment. Now this principle is holden, that me^ are not justified by their
worthiness, but by ye mercy of God. But yet that is not enough, except remission
of sins go before al works, of the which circumcision is the first, whereby
the people of the Jews were ingraffed into the obedience of God. Wherefore he
goes on in showing that also. We are always to bear this one thing in
mind, that circumcision is reckoned here as the inceptiue work (if I may so
term it) of the legal righteousness. How the Jews gloried in circumcision.
For the Jews did not glory in it, as in the pledge or seal of the grace of
God, but as in a meritorious observation or keeping of the law. Therefore they
preferred themselves before others, as though they were more excellent then
others in the sight of God. Now we see the controversy is not of one rite:
but under one kind are all the works of the law, that is, all works to the
which wages can be due, comprehended. And for this cause chiefly is
circumcision named, because it was the foundation of legal righteousness. But
Paul disputes from the contrary, if the righteousness of Abraham be the
remission of sins (which he bodily takes for a thing granted) and the same
remission of sins came unto Abraham before circumcision: then it follows,
the remission of sins was not given in regard of merits going before. Thou
see it is an argument drawn from the order of the causes and the effects.
For the cause is ever before his effect. But righteousness was in Abraham
before circumcision.

11 After he received the sign of circumcision, the seal of the
righteousness of faith, which was in the uncircumcision: that he might be
the father of all them do beeleeue by uncircumcision, wherein righteousness
is also imputed unto them. 12 And the father of circumcision, not unto them
only which are of the circumcision, but unto them also that walk in the
steps of the faith of our father Abraham, which he had when he was
uncircumcised. 11 After he received the sign. By the way of anticipation or
preventing he declares, Though circumcision justified not, yet was it not in
vain.
that though circumcision justified not, yet was it not in vain or
superfluous: seeing it had another and the same a very excellent use, namely,
whose office was to seal ye righteousness of faith, and as it were to make it
sure. And yet in ye mean while, from the end it self he insinuates unto us,
that it is not the cause of righteousness. For it tends unto the
confirmation of the righteousness of faith, yea and of that verily which was
had in uncircumcision: therefore it derogateth or takes nothing from it.

Moreover, here we have a notable place, concerning the common use of
Sacraments: The common use of Sacraments.
for they are (as Paul witnesses) seals, whereby both the promises of GOD
are after a sort sealed in our hearts, and the certitude of the grace of GOD
established. And although they profit nothing by them selves, yet GOD who
would have them to be instruments of his grace, does make that they want
not a secret grace, and profit in the elect. And although they are unto the
reprobate only dead and unprofitable figures, yet they always retain their
virtue and nature: for albeit our incredulity deprive us of their effect, yet
it shakes not, neither extinguisheth the truth of God. Wherefore let us
stand sure, that the holy Sacraments are testimonies, wherewithal God
seals his grace in our hearts. Touching the Sacrament of circumcision this
is to be said in particular, therein was a twofoulde grace represented. GOD
promised to Abraham a blessed seed, wherein both he and all the world should
hope for health. Heerevpon depended that promise: I will be thy GOD. Genesis 17.7.
Therefore the free reconciliation in GOD was included in that sign: and the
analogy or proportion served, that the faithful might respect the promised
seed. Again, God required integrity and holiness of life: by the Sacrament
he declared how it might be come unto: namely, if in man that be cut off,
whatsoever comes of the flesh, because the whole nature of man is corrupted.
By the external sign therefore he admonished Abraham, that he should
spiritually circumcise the corruption of his flesh, whereunto also Moses
alluded. Deuteronomy. 10.16.
And that he might show it was not the work of man but of God: he would have
tender infants circumcised, who for want of years cold not as yet execute that
commandment. For, that spiritual circumcision is an effect or work of the
celestial power, Moses has spoken, as you have in Deuteronomy: Deuteronomy. 30.6.
The Lord shall circumcise thy heart. The Prophets also afterward declared
the very same more clearly.

Finally, as at this day baptism, so in old time circumcision consisted of
two parts: namely, that therein was testified as well newness of life, As
circumcision in old time, so baptism at this day, is a sign of a twofold
grace, namely, of the remission of sins and sanctification.
as the remission of sins: but where as in the person of Abraham circumcision
was after righteousness, that houldeth not always in the Sacraments: as it
appears in Isaac and his posterite: but GOD would once at the beginning
show forth such an example, least any should tie salvation unto the
external signs. That he might be the father. Note how the circumcision of
Abraham confirms our faith concerning free righteousness: for it is a
sealing of the righteousness of faith, that to us also which do believe,
righteousness might be imputed. And so, very artificially Paul returns
those things upon the adversaries, which might be objected of them. For if
the truth and virtue of circumcision, be found in uncircumcision: there is
no cause why the Jews should so greatly advance them selves above the
Gentiles.

But seeing a doubt might arise, whether we also after the example of Abraham
are not to confirm the same righteousness by the seal of circumcision?
Objection.
why did the Apostle omit it? Answer.
Namely, because he thought the question to have been sufficiently answered
by his words. For seeing this sentence is admitted, that circumcision serves
only to seal the grace of GOD: it follows that at this day it were
superfluous for us, who have another Sacrament ordained of the Lord in place
thereof. Because therefore where baptism is, there is no use now of
circumcision, he would not to no purpose dispute of that, whereof was no
question at all, to wit, why the righteousness of faith should not be
sealed in the Gentiles by circumcision, if they should be like unto Abraham.

To believe by uncircumcision. Is, that the Gentiles being content with their
estate, are not to interpose the seal of circumcision. And so this preposition
dia, by, is put in stead of en, in.

12 Not to them which are. etc. This word are or be in this place is taken
for to be reckoned or counted. For he checketh the carnal sons of Abraham,
who having nothing but external circumcision, did boldelye glory in it. As
for the other, which is the principal, they neglected it, namely, that they
should imitate the faith of Abraham, by which only he obtained health. The
circumcised Jews were not otherwise justified then as they believed the
promise of grace.
Hereby may appear how seriously he discerns faith from the Sacrament: not
only least any should content him self with this, without the other, meaning
with the Sacrament without faith, as though it were sufficient to
justification: but also that the same faith only might fulfill all parts. For
whiles he confesses the Jews which are circumcised to be justified, he does
precisely except, so that they after the example of Abraham abide in faith
only. For what should be the meaning of faith in uncircumcision, but that he
might show, faith only without any help elsewhere to be sufficient? It is
therefore to be taken heed of least any man by dividing or parting in halfes,
mixte together two causes of justification. By the same argument the school
divinity is convicted, touching the difference of the Sacraments of the old
and new testament: for from those they take away the power of iustifiyng, to
these they give it. But if Paul reason orderly, whiles he proves that
circumcision justifies not, because Abraham was justified by faith: the same
reason is also of strength with us: that we may deny men to be justified by
baptism, seeing they are justified by the same faith, by the which Abraham
was justified.

13 For the promise that he should be the heir of the world: was not given
to Abraham and his seed by the law: but by the righteousness of faith. 13 For
the promise, etc. Now he does more clearly repeat that antithesin or
contrariety of the law and faith, with he touched before, with also is diligently
to be noted: because if faith borrow nothing of the Law yt it might justify,
thence we understand, it has rsepect unto nothing but the mercy of God.

Furthermore the imagination of those, which would have this to be spoken of
ceremonies, is easily refuted: because if works brought any thing unto
justification, then he should rather have said not by the written law, but
by the law of nature.

But Paul does not oppose spiritual holiness of life against ceremonies, but
faith and his righteousness. The sum therefore is, the inheritance was
promised to Abraham, not because he had deserved it by keeping the law, but
because by faith he had obtained righteousness. And surely (as Paul
straightwayes declares) then do the consciences of men inioye perfect peace,
when they feel that to be freely given them, which is not due unto the^ by
right. Salvation in Christ apperteyneth no less unto ye Gentiles then unto the
Jews.
Hereuppon also it follows, that the benefit is no less common to the
Gentiles then to the Jews, the cause of which benefit does equally appertain
unto both. For if men's salvation be founded upon the only goodness of God,
they restrain and hinder the course thereof as much as in them lies, who
exclude the Gentiles from it. That he might be the heir of the world.
Seeing eternal salvation is now in hand, the Apostle seems out of season to
carry the readers unto the world. But generally under this word he
comprehends, the instauration or restoring which was looked for in Christ.
What is meant by the word world.
Indeed restitution of life was the principal: yet it behooued that the
decayed state of the whole world should be repaired. Therefore the Apostle
calls Christ the heir of all the goods of God. Heb. 1.2.
Because the adoption which we obtain through his grace, has restored unto us
the possession of that inheritance, from the which we fell in Adam. And
because under the type of the land of Chanaan, not only the hope of eternal
life was proposed unto Abraham, but also the full and perfect blessing of God:
the Apostle very aptly teaches that the dominion of the world was promised
unto him. The godly in this present life have a certain taste hereof: because
howsoever they are at diverse times pynched with pouertye, yet, for that with a
quiet conscience they participate those things which God has created to their
use, Poverty lets not, but the faithful may be called ye heirs of the
world.
and with his favor and will inioye the earthly blessings, as pledges and
earnest pennyes of eternal life, poverty is no let unto them, wherefore they
should not acknowledge heaven, earth, and the Sea to belong unto them.

The wicked albeit they heap up the riches of the world, they can call
nothing theirs: but rather they get them by stealth, because they use them with
the curse of God. And it is great comfort to the godly in their poverty, that
though they live poorly, yet they steal nothing from any: but they receive
their lawful commons or allowaunce at the hand of their heavenly father,
until they see the full possession of their inheritance, when all creatures
shall serve for their glory. For to this end both earth and heaven shall be
renewed, that according to their measure they might partly serve to illustrate
the kingdom of God.

14 For if they which are of the law be heirs, faith is made void, and the
promise is made of none effect. 15 For the Law causes wrath: for where no
law is, there is no transgression. 14 For if they which are of the law. By
an argument taken from that is impossible or absurd, he proves that that
grace which Abraham obtained of God, was not promised unto him in regard of
the Legal part, or in respect of works: for if this condition had been
interposed, that God would vouchsafe to adopt those only which deserve it,
or which keep the law, no man should have durst to believe that it
apperteineth unto him. For what man finds such perfection in himself, that
he dare resolve himself, the inheritance is due unto him by righteousness
of the law? Then were faith made void: because an impossible condition does
not only hold the minds of men in suspense, and makes them doubtful, but
also does smite them with fear and trembling. So the effect of the promises
should vanishe away, because they profit nothing except they be received by
faith. If our adversaries had ears to hearken to this one reason, If salvation
were grounded upon the keeping of the law then neither should men's consciences
be at peace, neither the promise have effect.
then should the controversy between them and us easily come to an end. The
Apostle takes it for a thing out of all question, that the promises of God can
not be effectual, except we receive them with sure affiaunce of mind. And
what should come to pass if the salvation of man were grounded upon the
keeping of the law? the consciences should have no certaynetie, but being
vexed with a perpetual unquietness at length shall fall to desperation. The
promise also whose performance depends upon an impossible thing, should
vanishe away without fruit. Let them go now which teach the wretched
people, to save themselves by works: seeing Paul does plainly pronounce, that
the promise is made of none effect, if it depend upon works. But that is very
necessary to be known, faith is made void, if it stand upon works. For
thereby we both learn what faith is, and what kind of righteousness, that
righteousness of works ought to be, whereunto men may boldly trust. The
Apostle teaches that faith does perish, unless the soul rest securely in
the goodness of God: faith then, is not either a naked knowledge of God or of
his truth, What faith is.
neither a simple persuasion that God is, that his word is truth it self:
but a sure knowledge of the mercy of God conceived by the Gospel, which sure
knowledge brings the peace and rest of conscience toward God. The sum
therefore is, that if salvation rested in the observation of the law, the mind
of man could have no certainty thereof: yea what promises soever were offered
us of God, they should be void and of none effect. So miserable and wretched
are we, if we be turned over unto works, whiles the cause and certainty of
salvation is to be sought for.

15 For the law etc. This is a confirmation of the former sentence, taken from
the contrary effect of the law. For seeing the law begets nothing but
vengeance, it cannot bring grace. To those were good and perfect it would show
the way of righteousness: The law by reason of our corruption begets
nothing but vengeance.
but in as much as it commands those are sinful and corrupt, what they
ought to do, and ministers not strength to perform the same, it proves them
guilty before the judgment seat of God. For such is the corruption of our
nature, that the more we are taught what is just and right, the more plainly
is our iniquity discovered, Wrath for judgment.
and chiefly our disobedience: and so the greater judgment of God is procured.
By wrath understand the judgment of God, in which signification it is often
used. They which understand it, that the wrath of the sinner is inflamed by
the law, because he hates and curses the Lawgiuer, whom he sees to be
aduersant to his lusts: They say that wittily, but yet unfitly in respect of
the present place. For, that Paul would not any thing else but show, how
nothing except condemnation comes unto us all by the law, both the common
use of the word, and also the reason which he adds straightwayes does
declare. Where there is no law. The second proof whereby he confirms that
which he said. For otherwise it would have been obscure how the wrath of God
should be kindled against us by the law, unless the reason were more
apparent. And that is, because we having tasted the knowledge of the justice of
God by the law, The more knowledge men have the more heinous is their
transgression.
offend so much the more grievously against God, as there remains less
excuse unto us. For they are worthy to sustain more grievous punishment,
which despise the known will of God, then they sin of ignorance. The
Apostle speaks not of the simple transgression of righteousness, from the
which no man is exempted: but he calls that transgression, when a man's
mind, being taught what does please or displease God, does wittingly and
willingly burst the bounds prescribed unto him by the word of God. And that I
may speak in a word, transgression here does not signify a simple offense,
but a purposed stubbornes in violating justice. I take this particle ou
aduerbially, to wit, for where. Others turn it, whereof, as though it were a
pronowne relative: but the first reading agrees best, which is also most
received. Whether reading soever you follow, the same sense abides: namely,
that he who is not instructed by the written Law, if he offend, is not
guilty of so great transgression, as he who stubbornely infringeth and
breaks the Law of God.

16 Therefore it is by faith, that it might come by grace, and the promise
might be sure to all the seed, not to that only which is of the Law: but
also to that which is of the faith of Abraham, who is the father of us all.
(as it is written, 17 I have made thee a father of many nations) even before
God. Whom he believed, Gee. 17. 4.
who quickens the dead, and calls those things which be not, as though
they were. 16 Therefore it is of faith. This is the windyng up of the
argument, so that you may gather the whole into this sum. If the inheritance
of salvation come unto us by works, then shall the faith thereof fall, the
promise of it shall be of none effect: but both these must be sure. Therefore it
comes unto us by faith, that the firmness thereof being founded upon the
only goodness of God, it might have a sure effect. See how the Apostle
esteeming faith by firm, True faith excludes wavering and doubting
and stable certainty, does counct doubting, and wavering for incredulity,
whereby, both faith is abolished, and the promise abrogated. And yet this is
that doubting, which the School men term Moral conjecture: and, (if it please
God) they put it in steed of faith.

That it might come by grace. Here first the Apostle shows, that nothing is
set before faith, but mere grace: and this is as they commonly term it, The
grace of god is the object of faith.
his object. For if it respected merits, wrongfully should the Apostle infer,
that that is of free grace whatsoever faith obteineth for us of God. I will
repeat it again in other words, if it be of grace, whatsoever we obtein by
faith, then all respect of works does lie dead. But that which follows
next, does more clearly remove all ambiguitie or doubtfulnesse: namely, that
the promise then stands firm, when it leans upon grace. For by this word
Paul confirms, that so long as men depend upon works they are in suspense
or doubt: because they deprive themselves of the fruit of the promises. Here
also we may easily gather, that grace is not (as some imagine) taken for the
gift of regeneration, but for free mercy or favor: for as regeneration is
never perfect, so should it never suffice to appeace the consciences, neither
by it self should it make the promise firm. Not to that only which is of
the law. Whereas this clause else where does signify those, Those Jews who
being brought up in the law, renounce their own righteousness and cleave unto
Christ, are delivered: the residue abide under the curse.
who being preposterously zealous of the law, tie themselves to the yoke
thereof, and glory in confidence of it: here it signifies simply the nation
of the Jews, to whom the law of the Lord was delivered. For whosoever abide
under the power of the law, Paul in another place teaches, they are subject
to the curse. And therefore it is certain, they are excluded from the
participation of grace: he means not then the servants of the law, who being
addicted to the righteousness of works, renounce Christ: but the Jews who
being brought up in the law, gave their name to Christ. But that this
sentence may be more clear, resolve it thus. Not to them only which are of
the law, but to all those which follow the faith of Abraham, although they had
no law before. Who is the father of us all. The relative has the force of a
causall particle. For thereby he goes about to prove, the Gentiles to be
partakers of this grace, because by the same Oracle wherein the inheritance was
given to Abraham and his seed, the Gentiles were received into his steed. For
it is said, he is ordained to be the father, not of one, but of many nations:
wherein was prefigured the dispensation, of the grace to come, which then was
contained in Israel only. For unless the promised blessinge were extended
unto them, they could not be reckoned amongst the seed of Abraham. The
pretertence of the verb according to the common use of the Scripture, notes
the certainty of the counsel of God. For although nothing appeared then
less: yet because God had so ordained, How Abraham is the father of many
nations.
he is truly said to be appointed the father of many nations. Let the
testimony of Moses be included in a parenthesis, yt this sentence may be
joined, Who is the father of us all before God etc. For it was necesary also to
show what was the form of that consanguinitie or kindred: least the Jews
should glory to much in their carnal generation. He says therefore Abraham
is our. father before God, which is as much as if he should call him a
spiritual father. For he has that privilege not from his own flesh, but
from the promise of God.

17 Whom he believed, who quickens the dead. In this circumlocution the
very substance of Abraham's faith is declared: that from his example he might
pass unto the Gentiles. The substance of Abrhams faith.
For Abraham was to come unto that promise which he had heard from the mouth
of God, by a wonderful way, seeing there appeared as yet no token thereof.
Seed was promised to him, as unto one that had been lusty and lively: but
he was dead. Therefore it lay upon him to have his cogitation erected, unto
that power of God, whereby he quickens those that are dead. Now there is no
absurdity if ye Gentiles which otherwise are barren and dead, be incorporate
into the society. For he which therefore denies them to be capable of grace,
does injury unto Abraham, whose faith did lean upon this cogitation, that it
mattereth not though he be dead which is called of the Lord unto life: who can
easily by his word through his power raise the dead.

Moreover, here we have a type and example of our universal calling. Whiles the
Lo. calls us unto life, there is no sparkle of goodness in us, we are as a
dead and dried tree. But this is no matter with God, who can easily raise the
dead.
Wherein our original or rising is set before our eyes, not that original or
rising, whereby we grow up to the first nativity, but whereby we grow up
into the hope of the life to come: namely, that whiles we are called of the
Lord, we arise up out of nothing. For whatsoever we seem to be, yet have we
not any sparkle of goodness, whereby we might be made apt for the kingdom
of God. For that we may be rather meet to hear the calling of the Lord, we
must utterly die unto our selves.

This is the condition of calling, that they which are dead in themselves might
be raised up of the Lord: they which are nothing, by his virtue may begin to
be something. The word calling ought not to be restrained unto preaching, but
according to the usual manner of the scripture, it is taken for to raise up:
and the rather to set forth the power of God, who by a beck only, can raise
up whom he will.

18 Who above hope, believed under hope, that he should be the father of
many nations, according to that which was spoken to him, so shall thy seed
be. 18 Who besides hope. If it be read so, the sense shall be, when there
was no argument, yea, when all things were contrary, yet ceased he not to
believe. And surely there is no greater enemy unto faith, then to tie our
minds to our eyes, that from their sight we might take the matter of hoping.

It may also be read, above hope, and perhaps more fitly: as though he said
that Abraham by his faith did far exceed, or go beyond whatsoever he
could conceive. For unless faith by celestial wings fly up, that it
might despise all the senses of the flesh, it shall always stick in the
claye of the world. And where as Paul uses the word hope, twice in the
same sentence: in the first place it signifies that argument of hopyng, Hope
put for the matter of hoping.
which may be taken from nature, and the reason of the flesh: in the second
place it signifies faith given of God, in this sense, when there was no matter
of hoping, Hope put for trust in Gods promise.
yet through hope he depended upon the promise of God: and to hope, he
thought it sufficient, that the Lord had promised, howsoever the thing was in
it self incredible.

according to that was said. I thought good to turn it so, that it might be
referred unto the time of Abraham. For the meaning of Paul is, that Abraham
when many temptations would have driven him unto desperation, least he
should fainte, converted his mind unto that was promised to him, Thy seed
shall be like the stars of heaven, and sands of the Sea. For purposely he
alleged this testimony but in part, that he might stir them to the
reading of the scripture. For the Apostles every where in citing holy scripture
have a religious care, to provoke us to the dilligent reading thereof.

19 And he not weak in the faith, considered not his own body, which was
now dead, being almost an hundredth year old: neither the deadness of
Saraes womb. 20 Neither did he doubt of the promise of God through
unbelief, but was strengthened in the faith, and gave glory to God. 21 Being
full assured that he which had promised, was also able to do it. 22 Therefore
was it imputed to him for righteousness. 19 And he not weak in faith. If you
had rather, one of the negatiues being left out, you may declare it thus, and
he not weak in faith considered his own body, but this makes nothing for
the sense. Now he shows more nearely what might have hindered, What things
might have hindered the faith of Abraham.
yea, what might have utterly turned Abraham from receiving the promise. Seed
was promised to him, when by nature neither he was fit for generation, nor Sara
for conception. Whatsoever he could see in him self or about himself, it
was against the effect of the promise. Therefore that he might give place unto
the truth of God, as though he had forgot himself, he withdraws his mind
from those things were in his sight. Yet you are not to understand it, as
though he had no respect at all to his barraine or dead body: Seeing the
Scripture testifies he reasomed thus with himself, shall a child be borne to
a man that is an hundredth year old? and shall Sara which is nienetie bear a
child? But because, that consideretion being laid apart, he resigned his
whole sense over to the Lord: the Apostle says he considered not. And surely
it was an argument of greater constancy, to draw his cogitation from that
thing which did voluntary offer it self to his eyes, then if no such thing
had come into his mind. And that the body of Abraham for age was past fruit,
before the blessing of the Lord, It may plainly be proved both hear, and
also out of the seventeen and eighteen chapters of Genesis. Gee. 17. and. 18
So that the opinion of Augustine is in no wise to be admitted, who in a
certain place, thinks that the cause was only in Sara. Neither ought the
absurdity of the objection move us, which drove him unto that resolution. He
thinks it very ridiculous, yt Abraham at an hundredth years should be called
barraine, who sometime after had many children. For thereby the Lord made his
power more notable, that he which before was like a withered and dry post,
when through the blessing of God he floorished, he was not only sufficient for
the procreation of Isaac: But as one restored unto a flourishing age, he had
strength afterward to beget others. But some will say, it is not besides the
order of nature, that a man should beget a child at that age. That I may
grant it is not a wonder, yet it differs little from a miracle. Consider
also with what labors, molestations, peregrinations, and extremities that good
man was exercised all his life: and then you must needs confess he was no
more broken with age, then he was worn and wasted with labors.

Lastly, his body is not simply, but by the way of comparison called barren or
fruitless. For it was not like, that he which in the flower, and strength of
age was unfit for procreation, should then begin when he was void of strength.
Whereas he says, he was not weak in faith, understand it thus, he did not
shake or waver as we are wont to do in doubtful things. For there is a
twofold weakness of faith, one, A twofold weakness of faith.
which by yielding to temptations of adversity, does make us fall from the
power of God: another which arises verily of imperfection, yet does it not
extinguishe faith. For the intellect is never so illuminated, but there remain
many relics of ignorance: the mind is never so stablished, but there abides
much doubting. The faithful therefore have a continual conflicte with those
vices of the flesh, namely, ignorance and doubting: in which conflict their
faith is often times grievously assaulted, and put in hazard, yet at the length
it overcomes: so that they may be called firm, even in infirmity.

20 Neither did he doubt of the promise of God. Although I follow not the old
interpreter and Erasmus, yet my translation has his reason. For it seems ye
Apostle would say, that Abraham examined not in the balance of incredulity,
whether ye Lord could perform yt he promised. To make inquisition of a thing
is properly, when we sift it with mistrust: neither will we admit it before it
be thoroughly examined, where it appears credible. Indeed he demanded how
it might come to pass: Abraham asked how it might come to pass, not because
he doubted, but because he woondered.
but that was an interrogation of one wondering: as the Virgin Mary, when she
demanded of the Angel how that might come to pass, which he showed unto
her: and such like. The godly therefore, whiles a message is brought unto them
of the works of God, whose greatness exceeds their capacity, they burst
forth into admiration, but from ye admiration they pass straight ways to the
consideration of the power of God: the wicked, whiles they demand, they scoff
and ride, and reiecte it as a fable. As you may see in the Jews, whiles they
ask Christ how he could give his flesh to be eaten.

Therefore Abraham is not reprehended for that he laughed, and demanded how a
son should be borne to a man of an hundredth, and a woman of nienetie year
old: because in his admiration, he nevertheless gave place to the power of ye
word of God. On the contrary the like laughter and question is reproved in
Sara, because she charged the promise of God with vanity. If these things be
applied to the present cause, it shall appear there was no other original of
Abraham's justification, then there is of the Gentiles. That we may believe the
promises of God, we must turn our eyes from our selves to consider the power
and truth of God.
The Jews then are contumelious against their father, if they gainsaye the
calling of the Gentiles, as though it were absurd.

Let us also remember, how all of us are in the same predicament with Abraham.
The things are about us, are all aduersaunte to the promises of God. He
promises immortality: and we are clothed with mortality and corruption. He
pronounces that he accounts us for just: we are covered with sins. He
testifies that he is merciful and beneuolent to us: his external judgments
threaten his wrath. What shall we do then? With closed eyes we must pass over
our selves and all that is ours, that nothing hinder or let us, wherefore we
should not believe that God is true. But he was strong. This is opposed
against that sentence went before, where it was said, he was not weak in
faith: as if he should have said, through constancy and firmness of faith
he overcame incredulity. For none shall go a Conqueror out of this field,
but he, which shall borrow weapons and strength out of the word of God. Whereas
he adds, No greater honor to God, then to subscribe his truth.
that he gave glory to God, therein we are to note, there ca^ no greater honor
be given unto God, the^ whiles by faith we subscribe his truth: as again
there is no greater contumely can be done against him, then whiles the grace he
offers is refused, or authority is taken from his word. Wherefore this is ye
chiefest point of his worship, obediently to embrace his promises: and true
religion begins at faith.

21 He which had promised, was also able to perform. Because all men
acknowledge the power of God, Paul seems to say no excellent thing of the
faith of Abraham: but experience teaches there is nothing more rare or
difficulte, then to give the honor which is due to the power of God. For there
is no let or hinderaunce so small or light, whereby flesh and blood
imagines not that the hand of GOD may be driven from his work. Here upon it
comes that in the least temptations whatsoever, the promises of GOD slide
from us. Out of controversy no man denies, GOD can do all: yet as soon as
any thing is objected which may hinder the course of Gods promises, we
throw down the power of God from his state. Wherefore, to the end it might
obtain his right, and honor amongst us, when we happen upon some
comparison, we must needs determine thus: that the power of God is no less
sufficent to overcome all impedimentes, or hindrances, then the shine of the
Sun is of force to disperse the clouds. We are wont to excuse that we
derogate nothing from the power of God, as often as we doubt of his promises:
namely, By comparison is meant the appliyng or letting of the power of God
against all his impediments.
because this imagination, to wit, (that God has promised more in his word
then he is able to perform, which were open peruersitie and blasphemy
against god) is not the cause of doubting, but that same defect which we feel
in our selves. But we do not sufficiently advance the power of God, unless
we think the same, to be greater then our weakness. Faith therefore ought
not to consider our own imbecilitie, misery* and defect: but wholly to intend
upon the only power of God. For if righteousness should depend upon our
worthinsse, it would never scale unto the consideration of the power of God.
And this is ye examination of incredulity, of the which he spoke lately: when
we measure the power of the Lord by our own foot. Neither does faith so
imagine God to be able to do whatsoever he will, that in the mean while it
leaves him sitting idly: but rather does place his power in continual
action. And specially it applies the same power unto the effect of his word,
that the hand of God might be always ready to execute whatsoever he has
uttered by his mouth. I marvel why the relative masculine did please Erasmus:
for although the sense be not thereby altered, yet had I rather come near unto
the Greek words of Paul. I know the verb is passive: but the asperitie was
to be mollified, by a little digression.

22 Therefore was it imputed. Here now appears more clearly, why, and how
faith brought righteousness to Abraham: namely, because he leaning to the
word of God, did not refuse the promised grace. And this relation between
faith and the word is diligently to be retained, Faith brings us no more,
the^ it has received from the word.
and committed to memory. For faith can bring us no more, then he has
received from the word. Wherefore he is not straightwayes righteous, who
being endued with a general and confused knowledge, grants God is true,
except he rest in the promise of grace.

23 Now it was not written for him only, that it was imputed to him for
righteousness. 24 But also for us, to whom it shall be imputed for
righteousness, which believe in him that raised up Jesus our Lord from the
dead. 25 Who was delivered to death for our sins, and is risen again for our
justification. 23 Now it was not written. Because a proof taken from an
example (as we have admonished above) is not always firm, least that should
come into question, Paul affirms plainly that in the person of Abraham was
showed an example of that common righteousness, which indifferently
apperteineth unto all. In this place we are admonished of making our profit of
examples in the scriptures. The Heathen have truly called an history the
mistres of life: but as it comes from them, no man can safely profit in it:
the scripture only does by right challenge that pre-eminence. For first it
prescribes general rules, whereunto we may bring every history for trial,
that it may serve to our profit, Secondly, it clearly discerns what deeds
are to be followed, and what are to be eschewed. And as for doctrine, wherein
it is chiefly conversant, it has that peculier to it self: as namely, it
shows the providence of the Lord, his justice and goodness toward his, and
his judgments toward the reprobate. That therefore, which is said of
Abraham, Paul denies it to have been written for his cause only. For it is
not a thing which pertains to the special calling of some one and certain
person, but the manner of obteining righteousness is described, which is one
and perpetual amongst all: and this description is made in him that is the
father of all the faithful, upon whom the eyes of all ought to intend.
Wherefore if we will handle the sacred histories purely and godly, How we
ought to be occupied in the scripture.
we must remember they are so to be handeled, that we may reap thence the
fruit of sound doctrine. And partly they instruct us to frame our lives,
partly to confirm our faith, partly to stir up the fear of the Lord. For
the framing of our lives, the imitatio^ of holy fathers shall help, if we
learn of them sobriety, chastity, love, patience, modesty, contempt of the
world, and other virtues. For the confirmation of our faith, the help of God
makes, which was always present to them, his protection and fatherly care which
he always had over them, shall minister consolation in adversity: the
judgments and punishments of God executed upon the wicked, shall help us, if
they put into us a fear, which may replenishe our hearts with reverence and
piety. And whereas he says: not for him only, thereby he seems to
insinuate, that it was partly written for his sake: whereby some understand,
that to the praise of Abraham it is said what he obtained by faith: because
the Lord will have his servants committed to eternal remembrance: Pro. 10.7.
as Solomon says, Their name is blessed. But what if you take it more simply,
The example of Abraham as all other examples are written for our instruction.
(as though it were some special privilege which might not be drawn into an
example) but yt it also apperteineth to our instruction, who must be justified
by the same manner? this shall be the fitter sense.

24 Which believe in him, etc. I have already admonished, what value these
circumlocutions be of: namely, Paul has inserted them, that according to the
circumstance of the places, they might diversely show the substance of faith:
concerning the which, the resurection of Christ is not the last part, which
resurrection is unto us the ground of ye life to come: If he had simply said,
that we believe in God, it had not been so easy to gather, what this did
make to the obteining of righteousness: but whiles Christ appears, and in
his resurrection does offer a sure pledge of life, it is evident from what
fountain the imputation of righteousness flows.

25 Which was delivered. He does prosecute and illustrate at large that
doctrine which I touched immediately before. For it stands us upon not only
to have our minds directed unto Christ, but also to have it distinctly opened
unto us, how he has purchased salvation for us. And albeit the Scripture when
it speaks of our salvation, stands only upon the death of Christ, yet
here now the Apostle goes further. For because his purpose was, to deliver
the cause of salvation more clearly, he reckons two branches thereof. And
first he says, our sins are done away by the death of Christ: Secondly,
that righteousness is purchased by his resurrection. The fruit of Christ's
death and resurrection is perfect righteousness.
The meaning is, when we hold the fruit of Christ's death and resurrection,
nothing is missing unto us, as concerning perfect righteousness. And there is
no doubt, but whiles he distinguishes the death of Christ from his
resurrection, he applies his talk to our capacity: for otherwise it is
true, the obedience of Christ which he showed in his death, was the
righteousness purchased for us: as he also will show in the Chapter following.
But because by rising from the dead Christ declared, how much he had prevailed
by his death, By the death of Christ our salvation is begun and by his
resurrection it is perfected.
this distinction serves to teach us, that by that sacrifice, wherein sins
are done away, our salvation was begun, and by his resurrection it was
perfected. For the beginning of righteousness, is that we be reconciled to
God: and the perfection is, that death being overcome, life might reign.
Paul therefore signifies how satisfaction for our sins was accomplished on
the cross. For that Christ might restore us again into the favor of the
father, it was meet our giltinesse were abolished by him: which could not be
unless he would suffer that punishment for us, which we were not able to
abide. For the chastisement of our peace was upon him, Esaias. 53.5.
says Esaias. and he choseth rather to say he was delivered, then dead: because
the satisfaction depends upon the eternal pleasure of God, who would be
pacified this way. And is risen again for our justification. Because it was
not sufficient for Christ to oppose himself to the ire and judgment of God,
and to take upon him the curse due to our sins, unless he should also go
forth the conqueror thereof, How justification is ascribed unto the
resurrection of Christ.
that being received into the celestial glory, by his intercession he might
reconcile God unto us. The virtue or power of justification is ascribed unto
the resurrection whereby death was overcome: not that the sacrifice of the
cross, whereby we are reconciled to God, did further our righteousness
nothing: but because in the new life the perfection of this grace does more
clearly appear. And yet I cannot consent unto those, who refer this second
member unto newness of life: For the Apostle as yet has not begun to speak
of the matter: secondly, it is sure that both members appertain to one end.
Wherefore if justification signify renouation, then to have died for our
sins, were to be understood in this sense, namely, that he died to
purchase for us the grace of mortifiyng the flesh: which thing none grants.
Therefore as he was said to die for our sins, because the price of sins
being paid by his death, he has delivered us from the calamity of death: So
now he is said to be risen for our justification, because by his
resurrection he has perfectly restored life unto us. For first he was
smitten by the hand of God, that in the person of a sinner he might sustain
the misery of sin: Secondly, he was exalted into the kingdom of life, that
he might indue his with righteousness and life. So then he speaks still of
justification by imputation: and that which follows in the next Chapter will
prove the same.

CHAP. 5
1 THen being justified by faith, we have peace with God, through our Lord
Jesus Christ: 2 By whom we have access through faith into this grace wherein
we stand, and glory under the hope of the glory of God.
THEN being justified. The Apostle begins to illustrate that, which he has
hitherto said of the righteousness of faith, by ye effects. Therefore this
whole chapter consists upon amplifications: which are of no less force to
explicate or make plain, then they are to confirm. For thee had said before,
that faith was made void, if righteousness were sought for by works:
Because a perpetual disquietnesse should trouble the miserable consciences,
which find nothing firm and sure in themselves. Now on the contrary, he
teaches, they are quieted and pacified, after we have by faith obtained
righteousness. We have peace. A singular fruit of the righteousness of
faith, for if any man go about to get the peace of conscience by works (which
is seen in profane and barbarous men) he goes about it in vain. For either
his heart is on sleep with the contempt or forgetfulness of Gods judgment,
or else full of trembling and fear, until he repose himself upon Christ. For
he only is our peace. Therefore the peace of conscience, signifies that
serenitie and quietness, What the peace of conscience signifies.
which rises hence, that a man feels God is reconciled to him. Neither the
Pharisee which swells with the false confidence of works, has this peace:
nor the secure sinner, who being drunk with the pleasure of vices, is not
disquited. For although neither of these seem to have open war, as he that
is smitten with the feeling of sin, yet because they come not truly to the
judgment of God, they have not peace with him. For insensibleness of
conscience is (as a man would say) a certain departing from God. Therefore
peace toward God is opposed against the drunken security of ye flesh:
because this is the first thing of al, that every one might awake himself to
give account of his life: and none can stand without fear before God, but he
which trusts to the free reconciliation: for as long as God is a Judge, all
men must needs be terrified and troubled, which is a strong argument, that our
adversaries do nothing but babble under a shadow, when they ascribe
righteousness to works. For this conclusion of Paul, depends upon that
principle, namely that the miserable consciences of men do always shake,
unless they rest in the grace of Christ.

2 By whom we have access. Our reconciliation with god stands upon Christ.
For he only is the beloved son: we all by nature are the sons of wrath.
But this grace is communicated to us by the Gospel, because it is the
ministry of reconciliation, through whose benefit we are after a sort
brought into the kingdom of GOD. Excellently therefore has Paul set before
our eyes a sure pledge of the favor of God in Christ, whereby he might the
better draw us from the confidence of works. And also teaching by the name
of access, We prevent not the mercy of God by our merits.
that the beginning of salvation is of Christ, he excludes those
preparations, whereby foolish men think they do prevent the mercy of God:
as though he said, Christ does not come unto us, and help us for our merits.
Straightwayes after he adds, that it is through the tenor of the same grace,
that salvation abides firm and sure unto us: whereby he signifies, that
perseverance stands not in our own virtue or industry, but in Christ.
Although also, when he says we stand, Perseverance is of Christ.
he shows how deep roots the Gospel ought to take in the hearts of the
godly: that they being strengthened by the verity thereof, may stand firm
against all the engines or devises of Satan and the flesh. And by this word
standing, he signifies that faith is not a wavering perswation, or that
continues for one day: but stedie, and deeply settled in the minds of men,
that it might persevere the whole life. He therefore that is driven by some
sudde^ motion to believe, has not faith so, yt he may be reckoned amongst the
faithful: but he which constantly and (that I may say so) with a firm foot
abides in that place which is ordained to him of the Lord, that he may always
cleave to Christ. And we glory under the hope. Hence the hope of life to
come, Whence, joy and hope of life to come arises.
both arises, and dares to rejoice, namely, that we lean upon the grace of
God as upon a foundation. For the meaning of Paul is, notwithstanding the
faithful are now strangers upon earth, yet by their faith they surmount the
heavens, that they may quietly nourishe in their bosom, the inheritance to
come. And so two pestilent doctrines of the Sophisters are utterly overthrown.
One, wherein they bid Christians in comprehending or understanding the grace
of God toward them to be content with a moral conjecture. Two pestilent
doctrines overthrown.
Another wherein they affirm all men to be uncertain of their final
perseverance. But unless there be both presently a certain knowledge, and
also in respect of that is to come a constant and firm perswation, who durst
be so bold as to glory? the hope of the glory of God has appeared to us by
the Gospel, which testifies that we are partakers of the heavenly nature. For
when we shall see God face to face, 2. Pet. 1.4. 1. Ioh. 3 2.
we shall be like unto him.

3 Neither that only, but we rejoice yea even in afflictions, knowing that
tribulation brings forth patience, 4 And patience trial or probation, and
trial or probation hope. 5 And hope makes not ashamed, because the love of
God is shed abroad in our hearts by the holy ghost, which is given unto us. 3
Neither that only. Least any should by the way of scoffing, object, that yet
nevertheless, christians with their glory or rejoicing, are marvelously vexed
and worn with miseries in this life, which condition is far from felicity:
He preuenteth that objection: And shows how the godly are not only, nothing
hindered by calamities, that they should not be blessed, but also that their
glory is thereby furthered. Afflictions do not only not hinder, but also they
further the glory of the godly.
To prove that he reasons from the effect: and he uses a notable
gradation, whereby at length he concludes, that all the miseries whatsoever
we suffer, turn to our health and profit. Where as he says the Saints
rejoice in tribulations, it is not so to be understood, as though they
neither feared, nor did shun adversities, or were not pinched with the
bitterness of them when they happen: (for there can be no patience where
there is no feeling of bitterness) but because in the midst of their sorrow
and mourning, they are not without great consolation, for seeing, what so ever
they suffer, they count it to be disposed by the hand of their most gracious
father to their profit, they are worthyly said to glory.

For wheresoever there is an aduauncing of health: there wants no matter of
glorying. Here then we are taught, what is the end of our tribulations if
we will show our selves the sons of God. For they ought to inure us unto
patience: and except they do so, the work of God through our corruption is
made void and of none effect. For whence proves he that adversities hinder
not the glory of the godly, but because in bearing them patiently, they feel
the help of God, which nourishes and confirms their hope? therefore it is
sure they profit but ill which learn not patience. Neither does it let, that
there are extant in the Scriptures certain complayntes of the godly full of
desperation. For God sometimes for a while does so urge and repress his, that
scarsely they can breath, or think upon consolation: but strayghtwayes he
brings again unto life, those whom he had almost overwhelmed in the miste
of death. So that is always fulfilled in them which Paul says. We are
afflicted on every side, 2. Cor. 4.8.
yet are we not in distress, in poverty, yet not overcome of poverty: we
are persecuted, but not forsaken. Cast down, but we perish not. Tribulation
patience. How tribulation brings forth patience.
That comes not of the nature of tribulation, whereby we see some men are
provoked to murmr against God, yea even to curse GOD. But when as the inward
meekness which be infused by the spirit of God, and consolation which is
suggested by the same spirit, has succeeded in the place of stubburnesse or
frowardness: tribulations are instruments to begette patience, which
tribulations can procure nothing in the obstinate but indignation and
murmuringe.

4 Patience trial. Jacob. 1.3.
James seems in the like gradation to follow a diverse course: because he
says trial or probation brings fourth patience. What trial signifies with
Paul.
But the diverse acception of the word being understood, will reconcile both
places. For Paul takes trial or probation for experience, which the faithful
take of the sure protection of God, whiles they trusting to his help, overcome
all extremities: namely, whiles through patient sufferaunce, they abide firm,
for so they prove what valewe the power of God is, which he has promised
should be always present with his. James uses the same word for tribulation
it self according to the common use of the Scripture: What trial signifies
with James.
because by them God proves and examineth his servants: whereupon they are
often called temptations. Therefore concerning this present place, then have we
profitted accordingly in patience or suffering, when we account ye same to have
co^sisted unto us by ye power of God, and so we gather hope that the grace of
God shall never hereafter fail us, which has always succored us our in
necessity. Wherefore he adds, that hope arises of trial or probation: for
we were unthankful if when we have received the benefits of God, with the
remembrance of them we did not afterward confirm our hope.

5 Hope makes not ashamed. That is to say, it has a most sure ishewe of
health. Whereby appears we are exercised of the Lord in adversities to this
end, that our salvation might be promoted by these degrees. Then can not
miseries which after a sort are helpers to blessedness, make us miserable. And
so is that proved he said, namely, that the godly have matter of glorying in
the midst of afflictions. Because the love of God. I do not refer this
only unto the word went last before, but unto the whole sentence: therefore I
say we are provoked or quickened by tribulations unto patience, and patience is
an experiment unto us of the help of God, whereby we are the rather
encouraged unto hope: for how so ever we be pressed, and seem such as
should straightwayes be overthrown: yet we cease not to feel the favor of
God toward us, which is a most fruitful consolation, and far more ample
then if all things happened prosperously. Gods favor is the welspring of all
goodness.
For, as when God is angry, that is misery it self, which in show seems
to be felicity: so when he is pleased, sure it is that even calamities shall
have a prosperous and happy success. Seeing all things must serve the will
of the creator: who according to his fatherly favor toward us (as Paul will
repeat again in the eight chapter) tempereth all the exercises of adversities
to our salvation. This knowledge of the love of God toward us is put into our
hearts by the spirit of God. For the good things which God has prepared
for his worshippers, are hidden both from the ears, and eyes, and minds of
men: it is the spirit only which can reueile them. And this participle,
shed abroad.

Has great emphasis: for it signifies the love of God toward us to be so
plentifully reueiled, that it might fill our hearts. And being so shed
abroad through all parts, it does not only mitigate sorrow in adversity:
but as a sweet sauce, it makes tribulations amiable.

Moreover, he says this spirit is given, namely, bestowed upon us by the free
goodness of God, and not rendered unto us for our merits. As Augustine notes
very well: Love here betokens that love wherewith God loves us, and not that
love wherewith we love him.
who notwithstanding is deceived in the exposition of the love of God: he says
we suffer adversity constantly, and are confirmed in hope, because we being
regenerate by the holy spirit do love God. This is verily a godly saying, but
it comes not near the mind of Paul. For love here is not taken actiuely,
but passiuely. And sure it is, nothing else is taught of Paul, then this to be
the true fountain of all love, that the faithful be persuaded they are loved
of God: neither are they lightly drenched with this perswation, but therewith
they have their minds altogether imbrued.

6 For Christ when we were yet weak according to the time, died for the
ungodly. 7 Doubtless one will scarce die for a righteousness man: but yet for a
good man it may be that one dare die. 8 But God confirms his love toward
us, seeing that while we were yet sinners, Christ died for us. 9 Much more
then, being now justified by his blood, we shall be saved from wrath through
him. 6 For Christ. In translating, I durst not take so much upon me, as to
turn it according to the time wherein we were weak, which sense
notwithstanding liked me rather. For here begins an argument from the
greater to the less, which he prosecuteth afterward at large. Albeit he
has not framed the course of his speech so distinct: but the disordered
composition of the speech shall trouble the sense nothing. If Christ (quoth
he) take pity upon the ungodly, if he reconciled his enemies to his father,
if he did this by the virtue of his death: now much more easily will he
save them being justified: being restored to favor, he will keep them in the
same: chiefly seeing the efficacy of his life is now added unto his death.
Some take the time of weakness for that time, wherein Christ began first
to be manifested to the world: and they suppose those men, who were under the
erudition of the law, to have been like unto children. But I refer it unto
every one of us: and say it notes the time, What time is called the time of
weakness.
that goes before every man's reconciliation to God. For as we are all borne
the sons of wrath, so are we holden under that curse, until we be made
partakers of Christ. And he calls those infirm or weak which have nothing
in them but it is corrupted. For he terms the same straightwayes after
ungodly. Neither is it any new thing that this word infirmity should be so
taken. So he calls the privy parts of the body, 1. Cor. 12.22, 2. Cor.
10.10.
feeble: And the presence of the body which has no majesty, weak. And this
signification a little after does often occur. Therefore, when we were
feeble, that is, neither worthy nor mete that God should respect us, at that
time Christ died for the wicked: because faith is the beginning of piety,
from the which they were all estraunged, for whom he died, which also takes
place in the old Fathers, who had obtained righteousness before this death. For
they had that benefit from his death that was to come.

7 For the just. Reason forced me to set down this particle gar, id est.
For, rather affirmatively, or by the way of declaration then causatiuely. This
is the meaning of the sentence, it is a very rare thing amongst men, that any
should die for a just man: although that may now and then happen. But let us
grannt that, No such example of love any where to be found, as was in Christ,
who died for the ungodly and his enemies.
yet can no man be found that will die for a wicked man: That did Christ. So
it is an amplification taken from a comparison, because no such example of
love is extant amongst men, as Christ showed toward us.

8 And God confirms. Seeing this verb sunist esi is of a doubtful
signification, it is more fit in this place to be taken for to confirm. For
the purpose of the Apostle is not to incitate us unto thankfulness, but to
establish the confidence and affiance of consciences.

He confirms. That is, he declares his sure and most constant love toward
us, in that for the ungodly sake he spared not Christ his son. For herein his
love appeared, yt not being provoked by love, of his own free will he first
loved us, as John says. They are here called sinners) as in many other places)
who are altogether corrupted, and addicted to sin: as John says, John 3.16.
God hears not sinners. That is such as are desperately, John 9.31.
and wholly given to wickedness. A woman that was a sinner, that is, of an
dishonest life. And that appears better by the Antithesis, which
straightwayes follows, being justified by his blood. For seeing he opposes
these two between themselves, Luke 7.37.
and faith they are justified who are delivered from the guiltiness of sin:
it is a consequent, they are sinners who for their evil wookes are condemned.
The sum is, if Christ by his death has purchased righteousness unto
sinners, Christ is no less able nor willing to defend then he was to redeem.
much more shall he defend them, being now justified, from destruction. And in
this last member he applies the comparison of the less and greater unto this
doctrine. For it were not enough that salvation was once purchased for us,
except Christ did conserve ye same safe and firm unto the end. And that is
it the Apostle goes about now, namely, that it is not to be feared least
Christ should break of the course of his grace in the middle raze. For since
he has reconciled us to ye father, such is our condition, that he will show
forth his favor more effectually toward us, and daily increase the same.

10 For if, when we were enemies, we were reconciled to God by the death of
his son: much more being reconciled, shall we be saved by his life. This is
an exposition of the former sentence with an amplification, taken from the
comparison of life and death. We were enemies (quoth he) when Christ took
upon him the mediation to reconcile the father. Now we are friends through
his reconciliation: if that could be brought to pass by his death, his life
shall be of greater power, and more effectual. So then we have notable
testimonies, which may confirm ye confidence of salvation in our hearts. His
meaning is, we were reconciled to GOD by the death of Christ, because it was
the sacrifice of reconciliation, whereby GOD was reconciled to the world, as I
have declared in the fourth Chapter. But here the Apostle seems to be
contrary unto himself. For if the death of Christ were the pledge of the love
of God toward us: Objection.
It follows that even then we were acceptable to him, Answer.
but now he says we were enemies: I aunsweare, because God hates sin, we
also are odious unto him, as we are sinners, but as in his secret counsel he
electeth us into the body of Christ, he cease to hate us. But the restoring
into favor is unknown unto us, until we perceive it by faith. Therefore in
respect of our selves, we are always enemies, until the death of Christ come
between to reconcile God. And this difference of a twofold respect is to be
noted. For otherwise we know not the free mercy of God, then if we be persuaded
that he spared not his only begotten son, because he loved us at such time
as there was enmity between him and us: Again we do not sufficiently feel
the benefit brought unto us by the death of Christ, except this be unto us
the beginning of our reconciliation with God, that we being persuaded, the
satisfaction being performed, he is now favorable to us, who before was
justly angry with us. So when acceptance into grace is ascribed to the death
of Christ, the meaning is, that then the guiltiness is taken away, whereunto
we are otherwise subject.

11 And not this only: but also we rejoice in God through our Lord Jesus
Christ: by whom we are now reconciled. 11 And not this only. Now he
scaleth unto the highest step of rejoicing. For whiles we glory that God is
ours, what so ever good thing may either be imagined or wished, does follow
and flow out of this fountain. For God is not only the chiefest of all good
things, but he contains the sum and every part in him self: God, in whom
all good things are included is made ours by faith.
and he is made ours by Christ. Hither then do we come by the benefit of
faith, that nothing be wanting unto us touching felicity. And it is not
without cause he so often repeateth reconciliation.

First, that we might learn to fix our eyes upon the death of Christ, as
often as we speak of our salvation.

Secondly, that we may know that our confidence is no where it is to be reposed,
then in the forgiveness of sins.

12 Wherefore as by one man sin entered into the world, and by sin death:
and so death went over all men: in as much as all have sinned. 13 (For unto the
law sin was in the world: but sin is not imputed, while there is no law.)
14 But death reigned from Adam unto Moses, even over them that sinned not after
the like manner of the transgression of Adam, which was the figure of him that
was to come. 12 Wherefore as. Now he begins to exaggerate the same doctrine
by a comparison taken from contraryes. For if Christ came therefore, that he
might deliver us from that calamity into the which Adam fell, and did
precipitate all his posterity with him: we can no way better see what we have
in Christ then when it is showed unto us what we lost in Adam: although all
things are not a like on both parts. Therefore Paul adds a correction,
which shall be seen in his place: and we also if there be any diversity
shall note it. It is a vice in writing when that is not put down which might
answer the former.
The (inconsequent) does somewhat darken the speech, because the second member
in the comparison is not expressed which might answer to the former. But we
will do our diligence to make both plain when we come unto the place. Sin
entered into the world. etc.

Mark here what order he uses. For he says sin was first: and of that
death followed. For there are some that go about to prove us to be so cast
away by the sin of Adam, as though we perished through no fault of our own,
but therefore only, as though he sinned for us. Yet Paul affirms plainly
that sin has entered into all which suffer the punishment of sin. And that
he urges more strickly, when a little after he sets down the reason why
all the posterity of Adam is subject to the power of death, namely (quoth he)
because we have all sinned. Furthermore, this fame, to sin, is to be corrupt
and faulty. Sin taken for corruption of nature.
For that natural prauitie which we bring out of our mothers womb, although
it do not so sone show fourth his fruits, yet nevertheless it is sin
before the Lord, and deserves his vengeance: And this is that sin they call
original. For as Adam by his first creation as well received for him self as
for his posterity the gifts of Gods grace: so he falling from the Lord
corrupted, viciated, defiled, and destroyed our nature in him self. For he
being put away from the similitude of God, could begette no seed but like unto
himself. How all are said to have sinned,
We have all therefore sinned, because we are all endued with natural
corruption: and so are become sinful and froward. For that imagination was
friuelous, whereby in old time the Pelagians went about to shift of the
words of Paul, saying, that sin has descended from Adam to all mankind by
imitation: for so Christ should be only an example of righteousness, and
not the cause. Here also it may easily be gathered, that the question is not of
actual sin: for if every one should work giltinesse to him self, to what
end should Paul compare Adam with Christ? it follows therefore that
ingraffed and natural corruption is noted.

13 Until the law. This parenthesis contains a preoccupation. For because
it seems not there is any transgression without the law: it might be
doubted whither there were any sin before the Law. That there was after the
law there is no doubt: only the question was of the time went before the
law. Therefore he answers, that albeit God had not as yet denounced sentence
by the written law, yet was mankind under the curse, yea and that from his
mothers womb: and therefore much less were they absolved from the
condemnation of sin, who lived wickedly before the publishing of the law.
For there was always a God to whom worship was due, If al men be sinners as
they come out of their mothers womb, much more are they which live wickedly.
and there was always some rule of righteousness. This interpretation is so
plain and clear, that it does sufficiently of it self refell all contrary
interpretations. But sin is not imputed. Without the reprehe^sion of the law
we are in a manner a sleep in our sins, And although we are not ignorant that we
do evil, yet as much as in us is, we ouerwhelme the knowledge of evil offering
it self: at the least we put it out through sudden forgetfulness, but whiles the
law reproves and checketh us, as it were pulling us by ye ear, it does awaken
us, so that now and then we return to think upon the judgment of God.
Therefore the Apostle notes how perverse men are, when they are not stirred up
by the law, namely the difference of good and evil for the most part being
driven away, securely and sweetly to pamper themselves as though there were no
judgment of God. Otherwise, that iniquities have bin imputed unto men of God,
the punishe^nt of Cain, the flood where in all the world was destroyed, ye
destruction of Sodom, ye plages fell upon Pharao and Abimelech for Abraham,
lastly, the evils came upon Egypt do prove, that men also amongst themselves
have charged one another with sin, it is manifest by so many complaints and
expostulations, wherein one accuses another of iniquity: again, by their
apologies wherein they studiously go about to clear their deeds. Finally yt
every man was gilty of evil and good in his own conscience, there be many
examples with prove. But for the most part they did so wincke at their evil
facts, yt they would impute nothing unto themselves for sin, but that they
were constrained. Therefore when he denies sin to be imputed without the law,
How sin is said, not to be imputed without the law.
he speaks by the way of comparison: namely, because when they are not
pricked by ye sting of the law, they bury themselves in slothfulnes.
Furthermore, Paul has inserted this sentence very wisely, yt ye jews might
thereby ye better learn, how great blame they should sustein, who^ the law did
openly condemn. For, if they were not free from punishment, who^ God never
so^moned gilty before his tribunal seat, what shall come unto the Jews to who^
the law like a crier shows their giltines? yea denou^ceth judgment? another
reason also may be brought, why he may plainly say, yt sin rained before ye
law, yet was not imputed: namely, Another reason why sin is said to have
reigned, but not to have bin imputed before the law.
yt we might know the cause of death not to come of the law, but to be showed
by the law. He says therefore yt all men were forthwt from the fall of Ada^
miserably cast away, albeit ye destruction was long after reueiled by ye law.
If you translate ye particle aduersatiue de although, albeit, the text shall run
better: for the meaning shall be, albeit men flatter the^ selves, yet they cannot
escape the judgment of God, yea whiles ye law does not reprove the^. Death
reigned from Ada^. He opens more clearly, how it profited men nothing, yt
from Adam until the publishing of ye law they lived licenciously, and securely,
the choice or difference of good and evil being rejected, and so without the
admonition of the law ye remembrance of sin was buried: because nevertheless
sin was of force unto condemnation. Wherefore then also death rained, because
ye cecitie and hardness of me^ cold not oppress ye judgment of God.

14 Yea even over them. Although this place be commonly understood of
infantes, who, not being guilty of any actual sin, dye through original
corruption: yet had I rather expound it generally of all those sinned without
law. This sentence must be annexed unto the words went before, where it was
said, that they which wanted the law did not impute sin unto themselves.
They therefore sinned not after the similitude of the transgression of Adam:
How they who sinned without law are said not to have sinned after the
similitude of Adam.
because they had not as he had, the will of God reueiled by a certan oracle.
For God had forbidden Adam to touch the fruit of knowledge of good and evil:
but to these he gave no commandment besides the witness of their conscience.
The meaning then of the Apostle is, secretly to insinuate, that through this
diversity between Adam and his posterity it comes not to pass, that they
are exempted from condemnation. In the mean while under the universal
catalogue infantes also are comprehended. Who is the figure of him that was to
come. This sentence is put instead of the other member. For we see one only
part of the comparison expressed, the other being by that vice in writing
called anacoluthon, that is a non sequel or consequent, omitted. A man may
therefore take it, as though it were written thus, as by one man sin entered
into the whole world, and by sin death: so by one man comes righteousness
and by righteousness life. And where as he says Ada^ was a figure of Christ,
How Adam is a figure of Christ.
it is no marvel: for even in things most contrary there appears always some
similitud. because therefore, as through ye sin of Ada^ we are al lost, so by ye
righteousness of christ we are restored: very aptly has he called Ada^ a tipe
of christ. And note ye Ada^ is not called a figure of sin: nor Christ of
righteousness, as though they went only before us by their example, but yt one
is compared with the other, least thou fall foully with Origin, and that into a
pernicious error. For he disputes Philosophically and profanely of the
corruptions of mankind, and does not only extenuate the grace of Christ, but
in a manner does wholly destroy it. Whereby Erasmus is by so much the less
excusable, who takes so great pains to excuse so gross a dotage.

15 But not as the offense, so also the gift, for if through the offense of one
many be dead, much more the grace of God, and gift of God in grace, which is by
one man Jesus Christ, has abounded unto many. 15 But not as the offense. Now
follow corrections of the late comparison: wherein notwithstanding the Apostle
does not curiously discuss whatsoever dissimilitude there is between Christ
and Adam, but he does occur those errors: whereinto men might otherwise
easily fall. And that is wanting to the exposition, we will add.

For albeit he oftentimes makes mention of the difference, yet makes he
mention thereof no where but there is a defecte, or at the least some eclipse,
which verily are faults in speech, yet such as are not prejudicial to the
majesty of the celestial wisdom is delivered unto us by the Apostle. But
rather it is brought to pass by the singular providence of God, that under a
base style, these high mysteries should be delivered unto us: that our faith
might not depend upon the power of humane eloquence, but upon the only
efficacy of the spirit.

And he does not here as yet precisely unfold that manner of correction:
but simply he teaches there is a greater measure of grace purchased by
Christ, then of condemnation contracted by the first man. Whereas some think
the Apostle disputes or frames an argument here, I know not whither all will
approve of it or no. In deed it might (and that not unaptly) be inferred, if ye
fall of Adam were of such force to the destruction of many, much more
effectual is the grace of God to the benefit of many: seeing it is granted,
yt Christ is of far greater power to save, then Adam to destroy. But because
they can not be refuted, if any will take it, without an illation or conclusion:
for me they shall choose whither sentence they will. Albeit yt which next
follows cannot be counted an illation or conclusion: and yet is it of ye same
nature. Whereby it is like, yt Paul does simply correct, or by exception
moderate ye, wc he said of ye similitud of Christ and Ada^. And note, yt here,
mo are not compared with many (for ye question is not of ye multitud of men) but
he resoneth thus, seeing ye sin of Ada^ did destroy many, ye righteousness of
Christ has no less power to save many. Where as he says we perished by ye
offense of one, understand it thus: because corruption is descended from him to
us. For we do not so perish through his fault, as though we were without fault
our selves: How we are said to perish through the fall of Adam.
but because his sin is ye cause of our sin, Paul ascribes our destruction to
him. I call yt our sin, is graffed in us, and wherewith we are borne. The grace
of God, and the gift of God in grace. Trace properly is opposed against
offense, What is meant by grace, and what by the gift of grace.
and the gift which proceeds from grace, against death. Therefore grace
signifies ye mere goodness of God, or his free love, whereof he gave a
testimony in Christ, yt he might help our misery. And ye gift is ye fruit of
mercy, which has come unto us, namely, reconciliation whereby we have
obtained life and health, righteousness, newnes of life, and whatsoever is like.
Whereby we see how sottishly the scholemen define grace, whiles they will have
it to be nothing else the^ a quality infused into the hearts of me^. For grace
properly is in God, the effect of grace is in us. And he says the same grace
was of one man Christ, because the father has made him the fountain, of whose
fulness all men must draw. And so he teaches, there can not one drop be found
out of Christ: neither is there any other remedy of our poverty, then that he
power into us of his abundance.

16 And not as by one which had sinned, so the gift. For judgment came of one
offense to condemnation, but the gift is of many offenses to justification. 16
This is a special reason of the correction, that by one offense the guiltines
was of force to the condemnation of us al: but grace or rather the free gift is
effectual to justification from many offenses. For it is a declaration of the
last sentence: because as yet he had not expressed, how, or in what part,
Christ excelled Adam. This difference being put down, it is apparent that they
have thought wickedly, who have taught yt we recover nothing else in Christ, but
that we should be delivered from original sin, or corruption drawn from Adam.
What be those many offenses are done away by the benefit of Christ.
Add, that those same many offenses, from the which he testifies we are
purged through the benefit of Christ, are not only to be understood of those,
which every one has committed before baptism, but also of those, by the which
the godly do daily draw guiltines upon them, and to ye condemnation whereof
they should worthily be subject, except this grace did help forthwith.
Judgment for tract justice. Gift signifies free pardon.
When to judgment he opposes gift, the first signifies rigor, as the other
signifies free pardon.

For of severity or rigor comes condemnation, of pardon comes absolution.
Or (which is all one) if God deal with us according to justice, we are all
undone: but he justifies us freely in Christ.

17 For if through the offense of one, death has rained by one: much more shall
they which have received the abu^da^ce of grace, and gift of righteousness,
reign in life by Jesus Christ. 17 For if through the offense of one. Again
he adds a general correction, wherein he persisteth ye rather, because his
purpose is not to prosecute every part, but to set down the special sum of
the matter. Before he said, the power of grace had ouermatched the power of
sin. Hereby he comfort, and confirms ye faithful, and withal he
provoke, and exhorts the^ to reverence ye bountifulnes of God. For this is
the meaning of so studious a repetitio^, yt the grace of God might be commended
according to ye dignity thereof, yt men might be drawn from trust in
themselves unto Christ: that we having obtained his grace, might enjoy full
assurance, whence at length springs thankfulness. The sum is because Christ
excels Adam, the righteousness of Christ overcomes the sin of Ada^: the
curse of Ada^ is overthrown by ye grace of Christ^ the death came of Adam, is
swallowed up of the life is come of Christ. But yet even the members of this
comparison do not answer one another. For he should have said, the benefit of
life reigns and florisheth more by the abundance of grace: in steed thereof
he says the faithful shall reign, which is as much in value: because the
kingdom of the faithful is in life, and also ye kingdom of life is in the
faithful. A twofold difference between Christ and Adam
Furthermore it is necessary to note here two differences between Christ and
Adam: which the Apostle has not therefore omitted, as though he thought them
meet to be neglected, but because concerning the present argument it was no
matter to reckon them.

The first is, that through the sin of Adam we are not condemned by sole
imputation, as though the punishment of another fault were exacted upon us:
but therefore sustain we the punishment of his sin, because we are also
guilty of his crime, Namely in as much as our nature being corrupted in him,
is holden guilty of iniquity before GOD. But by the righteousness of
Christ, we are restored in another sort unto salvation. For it is not
therefore imputed unto us as though it were within us: but because we possess
Christ himself with all his graces, given unto us by the bountifulnes of the
father. Therefore the gift of righteousness signifies not a quality where with
God indueth us (as some have very wickedly expounded) but the free imputation
of righteousness. For the Apostle declares what he meant by the word grace. The
second difference is, yt the benefit of Christ has not redounded unto all
men, as Adam has plonged al his progeny in comdemnation. And the reason is at
hand, for seeing this malediction or curse with we draw from Adam, is derived
unto us by nature: it is no maruayle though it comprehend the whole mass. But
verily that we may come into participation of the grace of Christ, we must be
graffed into him by faith. Therefore to obtain the miserable inheritance of
sin, it is enough to be a man for it abides in flesh and blood. But to
obtain the righteousness of Christ, thou must needs be a faithful man: because
that by faith his fellowship is obtained. It is communicated to infantes by a
special manner: for they have the privilege of adoption in the covenant,
whereby they pass into the society of Christ. I speak of the children of ye
godly, unto whom the promise of grace is directed, for others are not exempted
from the common estate.

18 Therefore as by the offense of one condemnation came upon all men: so by
the justification of one, justification of life is come upon all men. 18 This
is an imperfect speech, which may be made perfect if the words condemnation and
justification be read in the nominative case, as sure they must be resolved if
you will have the sense perfect. And it is the general conclusion of that
comparion which went before. For now, having omitted the mention of the
interposed correction, he knitteth up that similitude, as by the offense of one
we are made sinners: so the righteousness of Christ is effectual to justify us:
although he puts not dikaiosunen, That is, the righteousness of Christ, but
dikaioma, that is, the justification of Christ: that he might admonish, how
Christ is not just privately to himself, but that righteousness wherewithal
he was indewed does extend further, How the righteousness of christ is
common to al
namely, that be might inriche the faithful with the gift bestowed upon him.
He makes it a grace common to all, because it is offered to all, not that all
men are partakers of it indeed. For albeit Christ suffered for the sins of
the whole world, and be indifferently through the goodness of God offered
unto all, yet all do not receive him. And those two words which he used of
late may be repeated in this sense, as by the judgment of God it came to
pass, that the sin of one should redownd to the condemnation of many, so
shall grace be effectual to the justification of many. Justification of life (in
my judgment) is taken for absolution, which restores life unto us, as though
he called it a quickening justification. For thence comes the hope of
salvation, if God be merciful unto us: and of necessity we must be just,
that we may be acceptable to him. Therefore life comes of justification.

19 For as by the disobedience of one man, many were made sinners: so by the
obedience of one shall many be made just. This is no superfluous speech, but
a necessary declaration of the former sentence. For it shows that we are so
guilty by the offense of one man, that we are not innocent. He said before we
were damned: but least any man should attribute unto himself innocence, he
would also add, that every one is condemned, because he is a sinner.

Moreover, when he says we are justified by the obedience of Christ:
hereby we gather, Christ, in that he satisfied the father, to have
purchased righteousness for us. Righteousness is a quality in Christ, and is
made ours by imputation.
Whereupon it follows, the quality of righteousness is in Christ: but that
is imputed unto us, which is proper to him. And also he opens what kind of
righteousness the righteousness of Christ is, when he calls it obedience:
where let us note I pray you, what we must bring into the sight of God, if we
will be justified by works, namely, obedience of the law, not such as is
perfect in some one part or other, but which is every way perfect. For if ye
just man fall, all his former righteousness is not remembered. Here also we
are to learn, that they are peruersly ledd in pleasing God, who of themselves
devise, what they may thrust upon him. For then we worship him best, when we
follow that which he has commanded us, and give obedience to his word. Let
them go now who boldly claim unto themselves ye righteousness of works, which
is not otherwise then when the law is fully and perfectly kept. Likewise we
gather that they are deceived who brag before god those works they have
invented themselves, which he esteems no better then dounge. For obedience is
better then sacrifices.

20 Moreover the law entered that the offense should abound: for where sin
abounded, grace super abounded. 21 That as sin reigned by death, so might
grace also reign by righteousness unto eternal life through Jesus Christ our
Lord. 20 Moreover the law entered. This question depends of yt he said before:
namely, that sin was before the law were published: for that being once heard,
this followed straightwaies, to what end then was the law needful? Wherefore of
necessity this difficulty was to be vnfolden: but because then it was not
meet to make any longer digression, he differred it unto this place. And now
also by the way he does dispatch it, The law was partly given that men might
the better see their own destruction.
saying, the law entered, that sin might abound. He does not here show the whole
office and use of the law: but touches one only part, which served for the
present purpose. For he teaches, that to the end the grace of God might have
place, it was expedient men should better see their own destruction. They were
verily before the law castawaies: yet because they did seem unto themselves
to swim in their own destruction, they are thrust down into the deep, yt
their deliverance might be the more excellent, whiles beyond all man's judgment
they escape thence. Neither was it absurd that the law should partly be given
for this cause, that men already once condemned, it might twice condemn: for
there is nothing more just, then that men by all means might be brought, yea
being convicted might be drawn to feel their evils. That sin might abound.
It is known how some after Augustine are wont to expound this place: namely,
that concupiscence is so much ye more provoked, whiles it is restrained by ye
bars of the law: because it is natural unto man to strive after that is
forbidden. But I understand no other augme^tatio^ to be noted here, then of
knowledge and obstinacy. For by the law, sin is laid open before the eyes
of man, that he might be compelled to see comdemnation prepared for him. So sin
occupies the conscience, which otherwise being cast behind them, men made no
account of.

Moreover he which before did simply pass the bounds of justice, now a law
being given, is a despiser of the authority of GOD, since the time that the
will of God was known unto him, which he according to his lust has shamefully
conte^ned. How sin is increased by the law.
Whereupon it follows, that sin is increased by the law, because then the
authority and majesty of the lawmaker is despised. Grace also has
superabounded. After that sin had holden men, being overwhelmed therewith, then
grace did help. For this he teaches, that the greatness of grace was by so
much the more apparent, as yt when sin aboundede, it did power out it self so
abundantly, Why condemnation is set before us in the law.
that it did not only ouermatch that deluge of sin, but also swallow it up.
And here we are to learn, that condemnation is not therefore set before us in
the law, that we should abide in it: but yt our own misery being sufficiently
acknowledged, Esa. 61.1.
we might be lift up unto Christ, who is sent to be a Physician to the sick, a
deliverer of the captive, a co^forter of the afflicted, a savior of the
oppressed.

20 That as sin reigned in death: As sin is called the sting of death, because
death has no power against man, Death has no authority at all over man but by
sin, therefore sin executes his authority by death.
but for the cause of sin: so sin executes his power by death. Therefore is it
said to exercise his authority by death. In the latter part of this verse
there is ye figure Synchesis, that is when the order is every way confused,
and yet it is not superfluous. The antithesis had been simple, if he had said
thus, that righteousness might reign by Christ. But Paul not being content to
have opposed co^traries to contraries, adds grace: to the end he might print
more deeply in memory, that it is not of our merit, but wholly of the
bountifulness of God. Before he said that death reigned: Now he ascribes
the kingdom unto sin, but whose end and effect is death. And he says in the
pretertence it reigned: not that it has now ceased to reign in those that
are borne only of flesh and blood: but he distinguishes so between Christ,
and Adam, that he assigns to either of them his time. As sone therefore as
the grace of Christ begins to flourish in every one, ye kingdom of sin and
death cease.

CHAP. 6.
1 What shall we say then? shall we abide in sin, that grace may abound? 2
God forbid, for how shall we which are dead to sin, live any longer therein?
WHat shall we say then? In this whole Chapter the Apostle declares, that
they do wickedly rent Christ asunder, who imagine free righteousness to be
given of him unto us, without newnes of life. Although he goes further,
obiecting, that then it seems there is place given unto grace, if men be
plunged in sin. For we know there is nothing more ready, then that flesh
should every way flatter it self, and that Satan should devise reproaches,
wherewith he might slander the docrine of grace, which thing to do is no
hard matter for him. The dotrine of grace must not therefore be suppressed
because many take occasion of licentiousnes at it.
For seeing that is most strange unto man's reason, whatsoever is preached of
Christ, it ought to be no marvel, if the flesh, after it has hard the
justification of faith, do so often (as it were) dash upon diverse rocks.
Howbeit we must go on, for Christ is not therefore to be suppressed, because
he is unto many a stone of offense, and rock of stumbling. For look by what
way he shall be unto the ruin of the wicked, the same way again he shall be to
the rising of the godly. And yet notwithstanding we are always to occur
unreasonable questions, least the docrine of Christ should seem to draw with
it any absurdity.

Moreover, the Apostle now pursues that objection, which commonly is objected
against the doctrine of the grace of God: namely, if it be true, that the grace
of God does help us so much the more bountifully, and largely, as we have been
overwhelmed with a greater weight of sin, there is nothing more expedient for
us, then that we being drowned in the depth of sin, should oftentimes by
new offenses provoke the wrath of God: Objection.
For so at length we shall feel greater plenty of grace, then the which,
nothing is more to be wished for. As for the manner of refutation we shall see
it afterward.

2 God forbid. Some think that the Apostle does only by the way of a sharp
correction reprehende so unreasonable a madness: but by other places it does
appear how familier an answer this is with him, yea, in much disputation or
many arguments: as here also he will shortly with great diligence refute the
objected obloquie: yet first by this particle of one detesting he does reject
it, that he might admonish the readers, there is nothing more unlike, then
that the grace of Christ, the repayrer of our righteousness, should nourishe
our vices. The grace of Christ abolisheth sin, and therefore does not nourish
it.
Which are dead to sin. This is an argumen taken from the contrary, For it
is certain, that he which sins, lives to sin: but we are dead to sin
by the grace of Christ: therefore is it false, that that should nourishe
sin, which does abolish it. For thus the case stands, the faithful are
never reconciled unto God without the gift of sanctification: yea to this end
are we justified, that after ward we might worship God in holiness of life.
For Christ does not otherwise wash us with his blood, and by his satisfaction
reconcile God unto us, then whiles he makes us partakers of his spirit,
which renews us into an holy life. It were therefore too preposterous an
inuersion of the work of God, if by occasion of that grace which is offered us
in Christ, sin should gather any strength. For the medicine is not the
nourishour of that it extinguisheth. Finally we must remember that, I touched
of late: namely, that Paul does not here say what God does find us to be
whiles he calls us into the society of his son, but what we should be,
after he has had mercy upon us, and has adopted us freely. For by a verb of
the future te^se, he shows what manner of change should follow
righteousness.

3. Know ye not, that all we which have been baptized into Jesus Christ, have
been baptized into his death. 4 We are buried then with him by baptism into
his death, that like as Chirste was raised up from the dead by the glory of
the father, so we also should walk in newness of life. 3 Know ye not. He
proves the former sentence: namely, that Christ kills sin in his, by the
effect of baptism, whereby we are incorporated into his faith. For it is out of
question, yt we put on Christ in baptism: Then do we truly grow up into the
body of christ when his death brings forth fruit in us.
and with this condition are we baptized, that we should be one with him. Now
Paul takes another principle: namely, that we do then indeed grow up into
the body of Christ, when his death brings forth his fruit in us. Yea he
teaches that this participation of death, is principally to be respected in
baptism. For not only purgation, but also mortification and the dying of the
old man is proposed there: whereby it is manifest, after we are received into
the grace of Christ, the efficacy of his death appears straight ways.
Finally, what this society with the death of Christ avails, it follows
straightwayes.

4 Being buried then with him. Now he begins to show, although he do not
plainly declare, whereunto it apperteineth that we are baptized into the death
of Christ: namely, that we being dead unto our selves, might become new men.
For from the participation of his death, he passes conveniently unto the
participation of life: because these two hang together by an inseparable
connection: Mortificatio^ and newnes of life go together.
namely, the old man to be abolished by the death of Christ, that his
resurrection might restore righteousness, and make us new creatures. And surely
seeing Christ is given us unto life, to what end should we die with him, except
we might rise again unto a better life? And therefore to no other end has he
flaine that is mortal in us, but that he might truly quicken us. Furthermore,
let us note that the Apostle does not simply here exhort us to imitate Christ,
as if he said the death of Christ is in steed of an example, which all
Christians ought to follow. For he surely goes higher, delivering doctrine,
out of the which afterward he draws exhortation, as it is easy. And this is
the doctrine, that the death of Christ is effectual to extinguish and banish
the prauitie of the flesh: and his resurrection to raise up the newnes of a
better nature: and that by baptism we are received into the participation of
this grace. This foundation being laid, a man may very aptly exhort
Christians, that they strive to answer their calling. Moreover, it forces
not that this virtue does not appear in all those are baptized. For Paul
after his manner, because he speaks unto the faithful, conioyneth the
substance and effect with the external sign. For we know that by their faith is
established and ratified whatsoever the Lord offers by the visible pledge. To
be brief he teaches what is the verity of baptism rightly received. So to
the Galathians he testifies, Gal. 3.27. When the sacraments are effectual
pledges and when the^ be but bare signs.
that all they whosoever are baptized in Christ have put on Christ. For so a
man must say so long as the institution of the Lord, and the faith of the godly
agree together, For we never have bare and idle signs, but when our
unthankfulness and wickedness hinders the working of Gods bountifulnes. By the
glory of the father: That is, through his notable power, whereby he has
declared himself truly glorious, and has (as it were) manifested the
greatness of his glory. So oftentimes in scripture is ye power of God which has
showed it self in the resurrection of Christ, set forth by some excellent
title: and not without cause, for it is grealy material, that by such express
mention of the incomparable power of God, not only the faith of the last
resurrection, which far exceeds ye capacity of flesh, but also other fruits
which we receive by the resurrection of Christ, should be highly extolled with
us.

5 For if we be graffed into the similitude of his death, eue^ so also shall we
be partakers of his resurrection. 6 Knowing this, that our old man is
crucified together with him, that the body of sin might be destroyed, that we
should not serve sin any more. 5 For if we be graffed. By plainer words he
proves ye argument, which he has put down before. For, the similitude he
brings in, takes away al ambiguitie because grafting does not only note the
conformity of example, but a secret conjunction, whereby we grow up
together with him: so that he quickening us with his spirit; powers his
virtue into us. Therefore as a graft has the condition of life and death
common together with the tree in the which it is grafted: so it is reason we
should no less be partakers of the life then of the death of Christ. For if
we be grafted into the similitude of the death of Christ, and that is not
without his resurrection: then no more shall our death be without a
resurrection. But the words may have a two fold exposition, either that we
are grafted in Christ into ye similitude of his death: or simply we are grafted
into his similitude. The first acception would require the greek Dative
homoiomati, that is, to the similitud, to be referred to the showing of the
manner. And I deny not but that has a fuller sense, yet because the other
agrees better to the simplicity of the word, I have thought good to prefer
it. Albeit it is but a small matter seeing both come to one sense. Phil. 2.7.
Chrysostom thinks Paul said, the similitude of death, for death: as in
another place, How we are grafted into the similitude of the death of Christ.
being made in the similitude of men. But me think I see some greater
Emphasis in this word. For besides that it avails to infer the
resurrection, it seems to tend unto this, not that we should die like
Christ by a natural death: but that we have this congruencie with his death:
that as he dyed in the flesh which he received of us, so we should die in
our selves, that we may live in him. Then is it not the same death, but the
like: for ye resemblance or proportion between the death of this present life
and spiritual renouation is to be noted. Graffed. This word is very
significant^, for it declares plainly that the Apostle does not exhort only,
but rather delivers the doctrine of the benefit of Christ. For he requires
not any thing of us, which is to be done by our study or industry: Wherein
the similitude of grafting holds not.
but he preaches that grafting which is done by the hand of God. Neither is it
convenient a man should go about to apply ye metephor or co^pariso^ to every
part. For between the graftinge of trees and this our spiritual graftinge,
there will straightwayes appear a diversity: for, in that, the graft does
draw his nourishment from the root, but yet reteineth his natural property
of bearing fruit: but in this insertion or grafting of ours, we do not only
draw the juice and strength of life from Christ, but also we pass from our
nature into his. Howbeit the mind of the Apostle is to note nothing else, then
that efficacy of the death of Christ which shows it self in the
mortification of our flesh: and that of his resurrection, to renew in us a
better nature of the spirit.

6 That our old man. It is called the old man, as the old testament is so
called in respect of the new. For it begins to be old, when our
regeneration being begun, How it is called the old man.
it is by little and little destroyed, and he means the whole nature, which we
bring out of our mothers womb, which is so incapable of ye kingdom of God, t^^
must needs perish so far forth, as we may be restored into (...) life. He
says this old man is fastened to the cross of Christ, because through his
virtue it is slain. And he has precisely alluded unto the Cross, that he
might expressly show, How the old man is crucified.
how we have not mortification else where, then by the participation of his
death. For I do not agree unto them, who understand that he said rather
crucified then dead, because it lives yet and floorisheth on some part. That
is verily a true saying: yet it agrees but little with the present place. The
body of sin, What is meant by ye body of sin.
which he adds a little after, signifies not ye flesh and bones, but the
mass of sin and corruption. For manne being left to his own nature, is a
mass contracted of sin. He notes the end of this abolishing when he says:
That we should not serve sin any more. Whereby it follows, that so long
as we are the sons of Adam, and nothing else but men, we are so subject unto
sin, that we can do nothing else but sin: but being grafted into Christ,
we are delivered from this miserable necessitye: not that by and by we cease
altogether to sin, but that at length we become Victorers in the fight.

7 For he that is dead is justified from sin. 8 For if so that we be dead
with Christ, we believe that we shall also live him. 9 Knowing that Christ
being raised from the dead, dies no more, death has no more power over him.
10 For in that he dyed, he died to sin once: but in that he lives, he lives
unto God. 11 So ye also esteem your selves dead verily unto sin: but living
unto God in Christ Jesus our Lord. 7. For he that is dead. This is an argument
taken from the property or effect of death. For if death put down all the
actions of life, we which are dead must needs cease from the actions of that
life, which actions it exercised whiles the same life continued. For justified
understand freed and deliuer^^ ^^om servitude or bondage. For as he is loosed
from the b^^^ of accusation, who is freed from the sentence of the Judge: so
death loosing us from this life, does free us from all the actions thereof.
Furthermore, albeit there is no where amongst men such an example extaunt,
yet there is no cause, why thou should think this that is said here,
either to be a vain imagination, or should despair because thou find
not thy self in ye number of those, who have utterly crucified the flesh. For
this work of God is not perfected the same day it is begun in us: but it
increases by little and little, and by daily increments as by degrees is
brought to perfection. The fruit of our communicatio^ with ye death of Christ,
is that the flesh with his concupiscences be mortified.
To be brief then, take it thus, if thou art a Christian, there must appear
in thee, the sign of thy communication with the death of Christ: whose fruit
is, that the flesh be crucified with all his concupiscences. Howbeit thou
may not therefore count this communication as none, because as yet thou
do feel some relics of the flesh to live in thee: but thou art
continually to study for the augmentation thereof, until thou art come unto
the mark. For it is well if our flesh be continually mortified, and we have
profited well, when the flesh, being subdued, has yielded to the holy spirit.
There is another communication of the death of Christ, whereof as the Apostle
speaks often else where, so to the Cor. namely, 2. Cor. 4.
the bearing of the cross, after which follows the participation of eternal
life.

8. For if we be dead. This he repeateth to no other end, then that he might
add a declaration, which follows afterward, that Christ being once raised
from the dead dies no more. Whereby he teaches, that this newness of life
must be followed after of Christians their whole life. For if they ought to
represent in themselves by the mortification of the flesh, the image of
Christ, and life of the spirit, How mortification must be once for all.
that must be done once for all, but this must continue still. Not as though
the flesh were mortified in us in a moment, as we said of late: but because
we must not revolt or go back in mortifiyng the flesh. For if we turn
back unto our filthiness, we deny Christ, of whom we cannot be partakers, but
by newnes of life, even as he leads a life incorruptible.

9 Death has no more power over him. He seems to insinuate, that death did
once conquer or rule over Christ. And verily when he gave himself to death
for us, he did in a sort subject him self unto the power of death: yet with
that condition, that it was impossible for him to be holden bound with the
sorrows of it, to be overcome or swallowed up of it. Therefore in yielding unto
the power of death for a moment, Christ for a while yielded unto death.
he swallowed up death for ever. Albeit in speaking more simplye, the power of
death is referred unto the voluntary condition of death, to whom resurrection
has set an end. The meaning is, Christ who now quickens the faithful with
his spirit, or inspireth life into them by his secret power from heaven, was
exempted from the power of death, when he rose again, that he might deliver
all his from the same.

10 He dyed to sin once. Whereas he said, that we, after the example of
Christ are loosed for ever from the yoke of death, now he applies it unto his
purpose, namely, that we are no longer subject unto the tyranny of sin: and
that he declares by the final cause of the death of Christ, in as much as he
dyed that he might extinguishe sin.

Furthermore, in the phrase of speech is to be noted what is proper unto
Christ. For he says not, he is dead unto sin, that he might cease to sin,
like as it must be said, if the talk be of us: but because he dyed for sin,
that offering himself the price of our redemption, he might bring the power
and authority of sin unto naught. And he says that he dyed once, not only
because eternal redemption being purchased by his only one sacrifice, and
purgation of sin being made by his blood, he has sanctified the faithful
for ever: but also that we might be aunswearable by a mutual resemblance or
similitude. For albeit death spiritual has his continual proceedinges in us,
yet are we properly said to die once, whiles Christ by his blood reconciling
us to the father, Heb. 10.14.
does also by the virtue of his spirit regenerate us. In that he lives.
Whither you expound it with God or in God all comes to one sense. For his
meaning is, he now lives a life subject to no mortality, in the immortal and
incorruptible kingdom of God: The figure of Christ his celestial life ought
to appear in the regeneration of the godly.
the figure whereof ought to appear in the regeneration of the godly. Here we
are to keep in mind the word similitude. For he says not we shall live in
heaven as Christ lives there: but he makes that new life which by
regeneration we lead in earth conformable to his celestial life. And whereas
he says we must die to sin after his example, it is not so, that it may be
called the same death. For we dye to sin, when sin dies in us, but it is
otherwise in Christ who by dying, did put sin to flight. Now verily whereas
he said before, we believe there is a life shall be common unto us, by the
word believe, he sufficiently shows, that he speaks of the grace of
Christ. For if he had only admonished us of our duty, he should have said
thus, seeing we are dead with Christ, we must likewise live with him. And this
word believe notes that the doctrine of faith is handled here, which is
grounded upon the promises: as though it were said, Christians ought to resolve
themselves yt through the benefit of Christ they are so dead according to ye
flesh, that the same Christ may continue in the^ newness of life unto the
end. The future tense in the verb, live, does not apperteyne unto the last
resurrection: but simply notes the perpetual course of a new life, so long as
we live in this world.

11 Even so you, esteem your selves etc. Now is added that definition of the
analogy, How we may dye, even whiles we live.
which I touched. For whereas he said that Christ died once for sin, and
lives for ever unto God, applying both unto us, he now admonishes how we
may dye in living: namely when we renounce sin. But withal he omitteth not
that part, namely, when we have once embraced the grace of Christ by faith:
although the mortification of the flesh be but begun in us, yet in this same is
the life of sin extinguished, that in steed thereof spiritual newness, which
is heavenly, might dure for ever. For except Christ did kill sin in us, once
even unto the end, his grace should not be firm and stable. the meaning
therefore of the words is, esteem, the case is thus with you, as Christ died
once, that he might slay sin, so you must die once that ye may cease to sin
hereafter: yea you must daily proceed in that mortification which is begun in
you, until sin be utterly extinguished. As christ was raised unto an
incorruptible life, so ye must be regenerat by ye grace of God, that ye may
lead your whole life in holiness and righteousness: seeing this virtue of ye holy
spirit whereby ye are renewed, is eternal, and shall flourish for ever. I had
rather keep the words of Paul, in Christ Jesus, then with Erasmus to
translate it, by Christ: for so ye grafting is better expressed which makes us
one with Christ.

12 Let not sin therefore reign in our mortal body, that ye might obey it,
in the lusts thereof. 13 And give not your members weapons of unrighteousness
unto sin: but give your selves to God, as living from the dead: and your
members weapons of righteousness unto God. 12 Let not sin therefore reign.
Now he begins an exhortation, which voluntarily arises out of ye doctrine
which he delivered of our communication with Christ: albeit sin abides in
us, yet is it absurd yt it should be of power to reign in us, for the virtue
of sanctification ought to have the superiority over it, that our life might
testify, we are indeed the members of Christ. Of late I admonished that this
word, body, is not to be taken for the flesh, skin, and bones, By body is
meant ye whole corrupted mass of man.
but (if I may say so) for the whole mass of man. And that may be gathered
more certainly out of this present place: because another member which he will
add straight ways concerning the parts of the body, is also extended unto
the soul. And so Paul means even grosely the earthly man. For the
corruption of our nature causes, yt we show forth nothing worthy of our
original. So God also whiles he complains that man is become flesh or
carnal as the brute beasts, leaves nothing unto him, but that is earthly.
Genesis 6.3.
Hereunto apperteineth that saying of Christ. That which is borne of flesh is
flesh. Ioh. 3.6.
For if any object that there is another consideration of the soul: the
aunsweare is at hand, namely, as we are now degenerate, our souls are so
fastened to the earth, and so addicted to our bodies, that they are fallen from
their dignitye or excellency. Furthermore, the nature of man is called
corporal, because he being deprived of celestial grace, is only a certain
deceivable shadow or image. And add, that this body is called mortal of
Paul by contempt, that he might teach how the whole nature of man inclines
unto death and destruction. Now verily he calls sin, that first
corruption abiding in our souls, which draws us to sin, whence properly
all evil deeds, and abominations flow. Between that and us he puts
concupiscences in the midst, that that might be in steed of a king,
concupiscences as statutes, and commandments.

13 Give not your members. When sin has once gotten the dominion in our
soul, all our members are straight ways given over into his obsequie or
obedience. Wherefore he describes here the kingdom of sin by the sequeles,
that he might declare the better, what we must do, if we will shake off his
yoke. And he borrows his similitude from warfare, whiles he calls our
members weapons: like as if he said, as a soldier has always weapons in a
readiness, to use them as often as he shall be commanded by his captain, and
never uses them, but at his appointment: so Christians ought to esteem all
their members to be weapons of the spiritual warfare. We are ye soldiers of
Christ, and ought to have nothing to do with the camps of sin.
If therefore they abuse any member of theirs unto wickedness, they are
worthy to be blamed. But by the oath of warfare, they have bound themselves to
God and Christ, by which oath they are tied. They ought therefore to have
nothing to do with the camps of sin. They may see here by what right they
can pretend the name of Christian, whose whole members being as it were the
brothell houses of Satan, are ready to commit all filthiness. On the
contrary now he bids us give our selves wholly to God: namely, that we
restrayning our mind and heart from all wandering, whereunto the lusts of the
flesh draw us, might intend upon the will of God only, might be ready to
receive his commandments, and prepared to obey his precepts: that our
members also might be destinated and consecrated to his pleasure: that all the
powers of our soul and body, might favor nothing but his glory. And the
reason is added, because it is not in vain, that the former life being done
away, the Lord has created us to a new, after which, actions and deeds ought
to follow.

14 For sin shall not have dominion over you. For you are not under the law:
but under grace. 15 What then? Shall we sin, because we are not under the law
but under grace? God forbid. 16 Know ye not, that to whom ye have given your
selves servants to obey, his servants ye are whom ye do obey: whether it
be of sin unto death: or of obedience unto righteousness? 17 But thanks be
to God, that ye were the servants of sin: but ye have obeyed from the
heart, the type of doctrine whereinto ye have been brought. 18 And being freed
from sin, ye are made the servants of righteousness. 14 For sin shall not
have dominion. It is not necessary to abide long in reciting and refuting those
expositions which have none or but little show of truth. There is one which may
more probably be suffered then the rest: namely which takes this word under
the law. For, to be subject unto the letter of the law, which does not renew
the mind: as again, to be under grace, is as much, as by the spirit of grace
to be freed from evil concupisce^ces. But that exposition is not simply
allowed of me. For if we take that sense, whereunto shall that interogation
tend which follows straight ways? Shall we sin because we are not under
the law? The Apostle would never have subjected such a question, except be
had meant, that we are freed from the rigor of the law, that God might no
more deal with us according to extreme justice: wherefore, there is no doubt
but his meaning is to show here some deliverance from the bondage of the
law of the Lord. But all contention laid aparte, I will briefly declare what
I think. And first here seems unto me to be a consolation, wherewith the
faithful are confirmed, that they faynte not in the study of holiness, through
the feeling of their weakness. He did exhort them that they should apply
all their powers unto the obedience of righteousness. But so long as they
carry about the relikes of the flesh, they must needs halte somewhat.
Therefore least they, being overcome with the knowledge of their infirmity,
should despair, he preuenteth this in time, comforting them in this, that
their works are not to be examined according to the severe rule of the law,
but their impuritie being remitted, God does favorably and mercifully accept
of them. The yoke of the law cannot be borne, but it breaks or crusheth those
that bear it: it remains therefore that the faithful flee unto Christ, and
desire him to be their deliverer. And so he offers himself. For to this end
took he upon him the servitude of the law, whereunto otherwise he was not a
debtor, yt he might deliver those were under the law, as the Apostle says
unto the Galathians. Gal. 4.5. What is ye meaning when it is said, we are not
under the law.
Therefore, not to be under the law, signifies, not only that by the dead
letter is prescribed unto us, that which makes us guilty, because we are
unable to perform it: but also yt we are not subject unto ye law, as it
requires perfect righteousness, pronouncing death against all those transgress
it in any part. Under the name of grace we understand likewise both parts of
redemption: that is, the remission of sins, whereby God imputes righteousness
unto us: and the sanctification of the spirit, by the which he frames us a
new unto good works. I take the particle aduersatiue to be put for a causall,
which happens often: as though it were said, because we are under grace,
therefore we are not under the law. Now the sense shall be plain. For ye
Apostles mind is to comfort us, that we faint not in the study of well doing,
for that we feel as yet in our selves many imperfections. For howsoever we be
vexed with the sting of sin, yet it cannot subdue us, because we get the
upper hand through the spirit of God: Moreover being under grace we are free
from the severe exaction of the law. Here furthermore the Apostle is to be
understood to take it for a thing granted, that all they who are destitute of
the grace of God, being bound unto the yoke of the law, are holden under
condemnation. And so on the contrary a man may argue, that so long as me^ are
under the law, they are subject to the power of sin.

15 What then? Because the wisdom of the flesh always cries out against ye
mysteries of God, he necessarily adds this Preoccupation. For seeing the law
is the rule of righteousness, and was given to govern men: we think, that it
being broken, straightwayes all discipline falls to the ground, ye bars are
broken, and finally, there remains no choice or difference of good and evil.
But herein we are deceived, that by the abrogation of the law, we think that
righteousness is abolished, which God commends unto us in the law: We are not
delivered from the obedience of the commandments but from the curse of the law.
For this is not to be drawn unto the precepts teaching a right form of
life, which Christ confirms and establishes, rather then abrogateth. And
this verily is the proper solution, that nothing else is taken away but the
curse of the law, whereunto all men that are out of grace be subject. But
Paul albeeit he does not expressly show that, yet indirectlye he
declares it.

16 God forbid. Know ye not. It is not a bare reiection, as some have
thought, as though he had rather detest such a question, then refute it. For
straight after follows a confutation taken from the nature of contraries,
almost to this sense, between the yoke of Christ and sin, there is more
co^trariety, then that any can together bear them both. If we sin, we deliver
our selves into the servitude of sin: but on the contrary, the faithful are
redeemed from the tyranny of sin, that they might serve Christ: therefore it
is impossible they should abide bound unto sin. But it shall be profitable more
nearly to discuss the order of this argument as it is digested of Paul. To
whom you obey. This relative has the force of a Particle causall, as it does
often come to pass. Like as if one said, there is no kind of wickedness, a
paricide will not do, who doubted not to commit the greatest mischief of al,
and such a cruelty as in it self is almost abhorred of the very beasts. And
the reason of Paul is taken partly from the effects, partly from the nature of
Correlatiues. For first, if they obey, he gathers they are servants: because
their obedience testifies that he has power to command, who brings them so
into his obsequie. This reason is taken from the effect of servitude: out of
the which aryseth that other, if ye be servants: Then again is the power of
dominating in him. Or of obedience. He speaks improperly. For if he would
have made one part aunsweare another, he should have said, or of
righteousness unto life. But seeing the inuersion of the words did hinder
nothing the sense of the matter, he choose rather, by the name of obedience,
to express what righteousness is. Wherein yet there is the figure Metonymia,
because obedience is taken for the commandments of GOD which are to be
obeyed. Obedience put for the commandments are to be obeyed.
And whereas he has put down this word obedience, without any addition,
thereby he declares it is God only, unto whose authority consciences ought
to be subject. And therefore obedience, yea though yt name of God be not
expressed, nevertheless is referred unto God, for it cannot be manifold.

17 But thanks be unto God. This is the application of the similitude unto
the present cause: wherein although they were only to have been admonished,
that they are not the servants of sin, he adds a thanksgiving, first, that
he might teach, how it is not of their own merit, but of the singular mercy
of God: and also that by the thanksgiving they might learn, how great a
benefit of God it is, and so much the more might be encouraged to detest
sin. And he gives thanks, not in respect of that time wherein they were the
servants of sin, but, for that deliverance followed, Wherefore Paul gives
thanks.
whiles they ceased to be that they were before. And this secret comparison
of the former estate with the present, has an Emphasis. For the Apostle takes
up the slaunderers of the grace of Christ, whiles he shows ye that ceasing,
all mankind is holden captive under sin: but so soon as that shows it
self, the kingdom of sin cease.

Hereuppon we may gather, yt we are not therefore freed from the servitude of
the law, that we should sin: because the law does not loose his dominion or
power, before the grace of God have taken us to it self, that it might restore
righteousness in us: and therefore it is impossible we should be under sin,
when the grace of God reigns in us. For we showed before, that under this
word is contained the spirit of regeneration, you have obeyed from the
heart. Here also Paul compares by the way of contrariety, the secret
virtue of the spirit, with the external letter, as though he said, Christ
inwardly frames our hearts better, then if the law should force them by
threatening, and terrifiyng. And so is that obloquie done away, namely, if
Christ deliver us from the subjection of the law, he brings liberty of
sin: To what end we are delivered from sin in Christ.
Seeing he does not deliver his, that they should live as they list, or that
they should triumph without modesty, as loose horses through the fields: but
leads them unto the best kind of life. Although Erasmus following the old
interpreter chooses rather to translate it form, I am constrained to leave
this word type, which word Paul uses: except some peradventure had rather
turn it example. For he seems unto me to note ye express image of that
righteousness, which Christ graueth in our hearts. And that answers to the
prescript or determinate rule of the law, whereunto all our actions ought to be
formed, that they lean not to the right or left hand.

18 But being freed from sin. The meaning is, it is absurd, that any after
he is delivered out of bondage, should abide in the condition of servitude: for
he ought to defend that state of liberty which he has received. It is not
meet then, that you should be brought again under the power of sin, from
the which you were delivered by the manumising of Christ. This argument is
taken from the efficient cause. There follows also another, taken from the
final cause, namely, to this end are ye exempted from the servitude of
sin, that ye might pass into the kingdom of righteousness: therefore ye
ought to be altogether unmindful of sin, and to turn your whole mind unto
righteousness, into the obedience whereof ye are brought. And it is to be
noted, that no man can serve righteousness, except by the power and benefit
of God, They only can serve righteousness who^ Christ has delivered from the
tyranny of sin. Ioh. 8.36.
he be first delivered from the power and tyranny of sin. As Christ himself
testifies: If the son shall make you free, ye shall be free in deed. What
then shall our preparations, by the virtue of our free will, be, if the
beginning of goodness depend upon this manumission, which the only grace of
God accomplisheth.

19 I speak after the manner of man, because of the infirmity of your
flesh: as ye have given your members servant of uncleanness, and to
iniquity, into iniquity, even so now also give your members servant of
righteousness unto sanctification. 19 I speak etc. He says that he speaks
after the manner of man, not in respect of the substance, but in respect of the
form: as Christ in the 3. of John faith that he offers earthlye things,
John 3.12. How Paul speaks after the manner of man.
whiles notwithstanding he entreats of heavenly mysteries: but yet not so
honorably as the dignity of things required, because he would humble himself
unto the capacity of the rude and simple people. And thus the Apostle speaks
by ye way of Preface, that he might the better show that calumniation to be
too gross and wicked, when the fredome got by Christ, is thought to give
liberty of sinning. And withal he aduerticeth the faithful that nothing can
be more absurd, or rather filthy and shameful, then that the spiritual
grace of Christ should be of less force with them, then an earthly manumission
or freedom. As though he said, by the comparing of righteousness and sin, I
can show how much more fervently ye ought to be drawn into the obsequie of
that, then ever ye obeyed this: but yet that I might something pardon your
weakness, I omit that comparison.

Howbeit that I may deal with you very favorably, this I may by right require
of you, that at the least ye do not embrace righteousness more coldly, or
negligently, then ye have served sin. And therein is included a certain
kind of silence or concealing, when we will have more understood, then we
express by words. For he does nevertheless exhort the^ to obey righteousness
so much ye more studiously, as it is more worthy the^ sin to be served:
although he seems not to require so much in words. As ye have given. That
is, seeing before this, al your members were so ready to obey sin, thereby it
easily appeared, how miserably ye prauity of your flesh did hold you captive
and bound. Now therefore in like sort be prone and ready to be ruled of God:
and let not your courage be less now in doing of good, then it was before in
doing of evil. He does not observe the order of the Antithesis, to apply the
parts on both sides: as to the Thessalonians he opposes uncleanness against
holiness. Yet his meaning is apparaunt. First, he sets down two kinds,
uncleanness, 1. These. 4.7.
and iniquity: the first whereof is opposed to chastity, and sanctimonie, the
other has respect unto injuries, whereby our neighbors are hurt. Moreover,
he repeateth this word iniquity twice, in a diverse sense. For in the first
place it signifies, rapines, deceiptes, periuries, and all kind of injuries:
Iniquity has a twofold acception.
in the second place it signifies the universal corruption of life: as if it
were put thus, ye have given over your members to commit wicked works, that
the kingdom of sin might florishe in you. I understand righteousness to be
put for the law and rule of a right life, whose end is sanctification: namely
that the faithful consecrate themselves in purity to the worship of God.

20 For when ye were the servants of sin, ye were free from righteousness.
21 What fruit had ye then in those things, whereof ye are now ashamed? For
their end is death. 22 But now being freed from sin, and made the servants
of God, ye have your fruit in holiness, and the end everlasting life. 23 For
the wages of sin is death: but the gift of God, is eternal life, in Christ
Jesus our Lord. 20 For when ye were. Yet he repeateth that contrariety,
between the yoke of sin and righteousness, whereof he made mention before.
For sin and righteousness, are things so contrary: that he, which voweth
himself to one, must needs depart from the other. And that he does to the
end, that whiles they are looked upon, either of them by them selves, it
might more easily appear what a man is to look for of them both. For
separation or distinction helps in the consideration of the nature of every
thing. Therefore he sets sin on one hand, and righteousness on the
other, then having put a difference, he shows what does follow on both
sides. Let us therefore remember, that the Apostle does yet argue from
contraries, after this manner, so long as ye were the servant of sin, ye
were free from righteousness, now on the contrary, ye must serve
righteousness, because ye are free from the yoke of sin. He calls those
free from righteousness, who are holden by no reyne of obedience to the study
of righteousness. Who are called free from righteousness.
This is the liberty or licentiousnes of the flesh, which freeth us so from
God, that it makes us the bondslaues of ye devil. Miserable and cursed then is
that liberty, which by an unbridled, or rather by a mad fury triumphs to
destruction.

21 What fruit therefore, etc. He could not any way more substantially
express his mind, then by appealing to their conscience, and as it were in
their person to be ashamed. For the godly as soon as they begin to be
illuminated by the spirit of Christ, and the preaching of the Gospel, all the
former part of their life, which they have led out of Christ, they do
willingly acknowledge to have been damnable: and they are so far from going
about to excuse themselves, that rather they are ashamed of them selves. And
also they do always call to mind the remembrance of their ignominy, to the
end they being so ashamed, might more truly, and more readily be humbled
before the Lord. Neither is it in vain he says, Now ye are ashamed. For he
insinuates, with how blind love of our selves we are taken, whiles we are
plunged in the mistes of sin, that we esteem not of so great uncleanness in
us. It is only the light of the Lord, which can open our eyes, that they may
see the corruption lurketh in our flesh.

Who is truly endued with the principles of Christian religion.
To conclude therefore, he is endued with the principles of Christian
philosophy, who indeed is displeased with himself, and has learned well to
be ashamed of his own misery. Finally by the co^sequent he shows yet more
plainly, how greatly they ought to be ashamed, when they understand, that they
were eue^ at the threshold of death and destruction: yea were already entered
the gates of death, if they had not been drawn back by the mercy of God.

A twofold end of sin, and righteousness.
22 You have your fruit. As before he put down a twofolde end of sin, so
now of righteousness. Sin, in this life brings the torments of an evil
conscience, and after this life eternal death. Of righteousness, in this life
we reap for fruit, sanctification: in time to come we hope for eternal
life. These things, unless we were too sottishe, ought to begette in us, a
hatred and horror of sin, and a love and desire of righteousness. And
whereas some do take this word Telos for tribute, I think it is not the
meaning of the Apostle. For although it is true, that we suffer the punishment
of death for sin, yet that word cannot agree to the other member, whereunto
it is applied of Paul. For life is not called the tribute of righteousness.

23 For the wages of sin. There are some which think, that here is noted
displeasauntly, how hard a wage is paid to sinners, whiles Paul compares
death to cates, which word with the Grecians sometime is taken for the diet of
soldiers. But rather he seems indirectly to check the blind appetites of
those, who daungerously entangle themselves, with the inticementes of sin, no
otherwise then fishes with the hoke.

Howbeit it shall be more simply to take it for stipendes or wages. For surely
death is a very sufficient reward for ye reprobate. And it is the conclusion,
and as it were the Epilogue of the former sentence. And yet is it not in vain
that he repeateth the same thing in other words again: for by doubling the
terror, he would make sin more detestable. But the gift of God. They are
deceived which translate this proposition thus, What is meant by the gift of
God, and what fruit the same brings worth in us.
life eternal is the gift of God: as though righteousness were the subiectum
and gift of God predicatum. Because that sense should make nothing unto the
contraposition. But as before he taught, that sin brings forth nothing but
death: so now he adds, that this gift of God, namely, our justification, and
sanctification, brings unto us the blessedness of eternal life. Or, if you
had rather, as sin is the cause of death, so righteousness wherewith we
are endued by Christ, has restored eternal life unto us. In the mean while,
here we may most certainly gather that our salvation is wholly of the grace,
and mere bountifulness of God. He might otherwise have said, ye wages of
righteousness is eternal life, that one member might have aunsweared another:
but he saw it was the gift of God, whereby we obtain life, and not our
merit. And that gift also, is not one, nor single: for we being clothed
with the righteousness of the son, are reconciled to God, and by the virtue
of the spirit, renewed into holiness of life. And therefore he adds, in
Christ Jesus our Lord, that he might draw us from all opinion of our own
worthiness.

CHAP. 7.
1 Do ye not know brethren (for I speak to them know the law) that the law
has dominion over a man as long as he lives? 2 For the woman which is in
subjection to a man, is bound by the law to the man, whiles he lives: but if
the man be dead, she is delivered from the law of man. 3 So then, if while the
man lives, she take another man, she shall be called an adulteress: but if the
man be dead, she is free from the law, so that she is not an adulteress,
though she take another man. 4 So ye, my brethren, are dead also to the law by
the body of Christ, that ye should be unto another, even unto him, that is
raised up from the dead, that we should bring forth fruit unto God,
ALthough he had sufficiently (as in such breuity it could be) unfolded the
question of the abrogation of ye law: yet because it was both a difficult
question, and of it self might bring forth many others, he does more
copiously declare, how the law is abrogated from us: secondly he shows what
profit we get thereby: because whiles it does hold us bound without
Christ, it can do nothing but condemn us. And least any should thereby
accuse the law, he meets with the objections of the flesh, and refuteth
them: where he excellently handeleth a notable place of the use of the Law.

1 Do ye not know. Let the general proposition be, that the law was given
to no other end unto men, then that it should govern this present life, To
what end the law was given.
with those be dead it has no place. Whereunto afterward, he adds a more
special: namely, that we are dead unto the law in the body of Christ. Some
other understand, that the dominion of the law abides so long to bind us, as
the use thereof is in force. But because this sentence is somewhat obscure, and
it does not so properly agree unto that special proposition follows
straightwayes: I had rather follow those, who take it to be spoken of the life
of man, and not of the life of the law. And the interrogatio^ verily has more
strength to set forth the certainty of the matter is spoken of. For it
shows that that is not strange or unknown to any of them: but is
indifferently granted among all. For I speak to them have knowledge. This
parenthesis, is to be referred thither, whither the proposition is referred,
as if he should say, yt he knew they were not so unskillful of the law, as they
could doubt of that. And albeit both might be understood, of all laws
together, yet is it better to understand it, of the law of God, which is now
in question. Whereas some think the knowledge of the law, is attributed unto
the Romans, because the best part of the world, was under their Empire, and
government, that is very childish. For partly he speaks unto Jews, or other
strangers, partly unto vulgar and obscure men. Yea, he chiefly respects the
Jews, with whom he had to do concerning the abrogation of the law. And least
they should think they were dealte withal very captiously, he shows that he
takes a principle common and known to the^ all, whereof they could not be
ignorant, who were brought up from their infancy in the doctrine of the law.

2 For the woman which is in subjection to the man. He brings a similitude,
whereby he proves that we are so freed from the law, that it has properly
and by right no power over us any more. And albeit he could have proved it by
other reasons: yet because the example of matrimony served very well to set
out the matter, in steed of a confirmation he has inserted a similitude taken
from thence. Howbeit least it should trouble any man, that the members
compared one with another do not agree at all: we are to be admonished, that
the mind of the Apostle was purposely by a little inuersion to avoid the
spite of a more rigorous or severe word. He should have said, that he might
have framed his similitude in order, the woman after the death of her husband
is loosed from the bond of matrimony: the law which is in steed of an
husband to us, is dead unto us. Therefore we are free from the power thereof.
But least he should offend the Jews with the asperitie of the word, if he
had said that the law was dead, he used a digression, or deflection, saying,
we are dead to the law. He seems unto many to argue from the lesser to the
greater: yet because I fear, least that be more wrested, I rather allow the
former interpretation, which is more simple. The whole argument therefore is to
be directed into this order. The woman is bound unto her husband by the law,
so long as he lives, so that she cannot take another: but after the death of
her husband she is loosed from the bond of that law, so that she may marry
whom she will.

Then follows the application,

The law was as it were our husband, under whose yooke we were holden, till
it was dead unto us.

After the death of the law, Christ took us, that is, joined us being freed
from the law, unto himself. Therefore we being joined unto Christ risen from
the dead, ought to cleave unto him only: and as the life of Christ after his
resurrection is eternal, so after this there shall be no diuorcement.

Moreover, the word law is not always here put in one and the same sense: The
word law diversely taken.
but sometimes it signifies the mutual right of wedlock, sometimes the
authority of the husband, to whom the wife is subject, sometimes the doctrine
of Moses. And we are to remember, that Paul does here touch that part only,
which is proper unto the ministry of Moses. For as concerning the ten
commandments wherein God has delivered what is right, and has ordered our
life, we are not to dream of any abrogation of the law: because the will of
God ought to stand for ever. Therefore we are diligently to remember, that this
deliverance, is not from that righteousness is taught in the law: but from the
severe exaction of the law, and that curse proceeds thence. The^ the rule of
life, which the law prescribes is not abrogated: but that quality which is
opposed to the liberty purchased by Christ, namely, whiles it requires
absolute perfection: because we perform it not, it holds us bound under ye
gilt of eternal death. But because his meaning was not, here to decide what
the right of matrimony is: he was not greatly careful to recko^ up the
causes, which make a woman free from her husband. Unaptly therefore should sure
doctrine in that respect be sought for here.

4 By the body of Christ. First of all, Christ having erected the banner of his
cross, did triumph over sin: which could not be, unless ye hand writing were
canceled, wherein we were bound. That hand writing is the law, which, whiles it
stands in force, makes us debtors unto sin, and therefore is called the
strength of sin. From the power therefore of this hand writing we are delivered
in the body of Christ, whiles it is fastened to his cross. How the law is the
strength of sin.
But the Apostle goes further, namely, saying, that the bond of the law was
loosed. Not that we should live according to our minds, as a widow woman is left
to her own mind whiles she is a widow: but we are now bound to another
husband: yea, from hand to hand (as they say) we are passed from the law unto
Christ. In the mean while he mitigateth the austeritie of the sentence, when
he says, that Christ delivered us from the yoke of the law, that he might
graft us into his own body. For although Christ did voluntarily subject
himself unto ye law for a time, yet is it not meet the law should have
dominion over him. Furthermore, that liberty which is proper to him, he
co^municateth also to his members. Therefore it is no marvel if he deliver
those from the yooke of the law, whom he coupleth unto himself by a sacred
connection, that they might be one body with him. His, who was raised from the
dead, We have already said, that Christ is put in the place of the law, least
any liberty should be imagined without him, or least any should dare to make a
diuorcement from the law, The life purchased by Christ, is eternal.
not being yet dead to himself. Now he uses this circumlocutio^ to note the
eterniti of yt life, which christ has purchased by his resurrection: yt
Christians might know, this copulatio^ is perpetual. Finally, he speaks more
clearly of ye spiritual matrimony of Christ with his church, to the Ephe.
That we might bring forth fruit to god. Ephe. 6.
He always adds the final cause, least any under this pretense, that Christ
has delivered us from the servitude of the law, should cocker the flesh and
the lusts thereof, For he offered us with himself in sacrifice to the
father, and to this end he regenerateth us, What fruits we should bring
forth in Christ.
that we might fructify to God in newenesse of life. And we know what
fruits our heavenly father requires of us: namely, holiness and
righteousness. Neither is it prejudicial to our liberty, if we serve God.
Yea, if we will enjoy so excellent a benefit of Christ, afterward we are not,
but to study how the glory of God may be advanced, for which cause Christ
has taken us: otherwise we abide still not only ye servants of the law, but of
sin and death.

5 For when we were in the flesh, the affections of sins, which are by the
law, wroughte in our members to bring forth fruit unto death. 6 But now we
are delivered from the law, being dead unto it, wherein we were holden: that we
should serve in newnes of the spirit, and not in oldnesse of the letter. 5 For
when we were. By the contrary he shows yet more plainly, how ill those,
that are zealous of the law, deal, to deteine the faithful yet under the
power thereof. For so long as the litterall doctrine of the law rules and
bears swaye, the lasciviousness of the flesh is not brideled, but rather it
increases. Whereby it follows that the kingdom of righteousness is not
established, till Christ have freed us from the law. And withal Paul
admonishes what works do become us being loosed from the law. So long
therefore as a man is holden under the yoke of the law, by sinning
continually, he can bring nothing unto himself but death. If the service of
the law begets sin only, then deliverance which is contrary must tend
unto righteousness: if that lead unto death, then this unto life. But let us
consider the very words of Paul. Whiles he goes about to describe that time,
wherein we were under the dominion of the law, he says we were in the
flesh. Whereby we understand, that all they which are under the law, reap
nothing else thereby, then that without fruit and efficacy their ears are
beaten with the external breath thereof: seeing they are inwardly destitute of
the spirit of God. Therefore they must needs abide altogether corrupt, and
perverse, until a better remedy come to heal their disease. And note the
usual phrase of the Scripture, to be in the flesh, for, What it is to be in
the flesh.
to be endued only with the gifts of nature, without that special grace,
wherewt God vouchsafes his elect. Furthermore, if this whole state of life be
corrupt it is apparent that naturally there is no part of our soul sound:
neither is there any other power of free will, but that it may send forth evil
affections as darts into every part. Affections of sins which are by the
law. That is, the law did stir up evil affections in us, which did declare
their efficacy in all our members. For there is no part, which did not serve
the evil affections. This is the work of the law: namely, to inflame our
hearts the more, that they should burst forth into such lusts, if that
inward master of the spirit be not present. But observe here, that the law
is matched with the corrupt nature of man: whose peruersitie and lust, the more
it is restrained by the bars of the law, the more furiously it bursteth
forth. He adds again, so long as the affections of the flesh were ruled
under the law, they brought forth fruit unto death, that they might show, how
the law by it self kills, whereby it follows that they are foolish, who
so greatly covet after that service, brings death.

6 But now we are freed from the law. He pursues his argument from
contraries, if the band of the law did so little prevail to bridle the
flesh, that it was rather an increment of sin: then of necessity must we be
loosed, that we may cease to sin. If then we be freed from the bondage of
the law, that we might serve God: they do wickedly, which take from hence
liberty of sinning. And they speak wickedly, which say by this means the
raines are loosed to concupiscence. Note therefore, we are then loosed from
the law, when God does indue us, being freed from the severe exaction, and
curse thereof, with his spirit, that we might walk in his ways. Being dead
to it. This part conteyneth a reason, or rather shows the manner whereby we
are delivered: namely, whiles the law is so far forth abrogated from us,
that we be not oppressed with the burden thereof: or least that the severe
rigor thereof ouerwhelme us in the Curse. In the newness of the spirit. He
opposes the spirit against the letter, because, before that our will by the
holy Ghost, be formed unto the will of God, we have nothing in the law but
the outward letter: Why newness is ascribed unto the spirit.
which in deed brideleth our external actions, but it restrains not the
fury of our concupiscence at all. He attributes newenesse unto the spirit,
because it succeeds in the steed of the old man: as the Letter is called
old, which perishes by the regeneration of the spirit.

7 What shall we say then? is the law sin? God forbid. But I knew not
sin, but by the law. For I had not known concupiscence, except the law had
said, thou shalt not lust. 8 But sin took an occasion by the commandment.
and wrought in me al manner of concupiscence. 7 What shall we say then? Because
it was said, we must be delivered from the law, that we might serve God in
the newness of spirit, this fault did seem to be in the law, as though it did
drive us unto sin. But, seeing that is very absurd, the Apostle did very well
to take in hand to refute it. When he demands therefore, whether the law be
sin, his meaning is, whether it beget sin so, that the fault thereof ought to
be imputed to the law. Sin remains in us and not in the law.
But I knew not sin. Then does sin abide in us, and not in the law: because
ye cause of sin is ye wicked concupiscence of our flesh, and we come into ye
knowledge thereof by ye knowledge of ye righteousness of God, which is declared
unto us in the law. But you are not to understand it, as though there were no
difference at al between right and wrong without the law. But ye either we
are too blind in seeing our corruption, or else whiles we flatter our selves,
we are altogether secure: as also it follows. For I had not known
concupiscence. This is therefore a declaration of the former sentence: wherein
he shows that that ignorance of sin whereof he spoke, did stand in this,
that men marked not their concupiscence.

And purposely he persisteth in one kind, wherein chiefly Hypocrisy raygneth,
whereunto retchlesse pampering, and security is always annexed. For men are
never so deprived of judgment, but external works keep with them their
difference. Yea they are forced also to condemn wicked counsels, and such like
devises: which they cannot do, but they must needs give unto a right will,
that praise is due unto it. But the fault of concupiscence is more hidden, and
more deeply laid up: whereby it comes to pass that it never comes into
question, so long as men judge according to their sense. For he does not boast
himself to have been void of it, but he did so flatter himself, that he
made no account of that sin lurking in his heart. For seeing he was deceived
for a time, when he thought, that righteousness could not be hindered by
concupiscence: then at length he perceived he was a sinner, when he saw
concupiscence (of the which no man is void) to be forbidden by the Law. (
Augustine says that Paul under this word conteyneth the whole law: which,
so that we understand it well, is true. For when Moses shows of what things
we are to take heed, least we offend or hurt our neighbor, he adds thou
shall not lust, which is to be referred unto all those precepts went before.
There is doubt but in the former commandments he had condemned whatsoever
wicked affections our hearts conceive: Concupiscence without consent is sin.
but there is great difference between a set will, and affections, whereby we
are tickled. Therefore by this last precept, God requires such integrity of
us, yt no corrupt lust should move us unto evil, howsoever it be that we
consent not unto it. And for this cause it was, I said, Paul did mount higher
then the common capacity of man is able to reach. For politic laws cry that
they punish the counselles and not the euentes: and the Philosophers more
subtly place both vices and virtues in the mind: but God by this precept
pearceth unto the concupiscence, which is more secret then the will. And
therefore men did not count it for sin. Neither was it only pardoned of the
Philosophers, but at this day the Papists contend mightily, that it is not
sin in the regenerate. But Paul says he found out his guiltiness, by this
lurking disease. whereupon it follows yt they are not excusable, who so are
sick of it, but so far forth as GOD does pardon the fault. A twofolde
concupiscence.
In the mean while we are to hold that distinction between evil lusts
which come unto consent, and concupiscence which only so tickleth and moves
the hearts that it stays in the middle way.

8 But sin took an occasion. So then whatsoever is evil it arises of sin,
and the corruption of the flesh: the occasion only is in the law. And although
he may be supposed to speak of that provocation only, whereby through the law
our lust is so stirred up, that it bursteth forth into greater madness: yet I
refer it chiefly unto knowledge, as though it were said, it discovered in me
all concupiscence: which, whiles it lay hidden, seemed in a manner to be none.
And yet I deny not, but ye flesh is more vehemently provoked unto
co^cupisce^ce by the law: and so this way it comes into light: which thing
might also happen unto Paul. But that which I said of manifestation agrees
rather unto the text. For straightwaies he adds.

For without the law sin is dead. 9 And I lived sometime without law. But
when the commandment came, sin revived: 10 But I died: and that commandment
which was ordained unto life, was found unto me to be unto death. 11 For sin
taking an occasion by the commandment, led me out of the way, and by that
killed me. 12 Wherefore the law is holy, and the commandment holy, and just,
and good. For without the law. Here he does plainly express the meaning of
the former words. For it is as much as if he said, yt knowledge of sin
without the law, is buried. And it is ye general sentence, whereunto he does by
and by apply his example. Wherefore I marvel what the interpreters meant to
translate it in the preterimperfectence, as though Paul spoke of himself:
seeing it is apparent that his mind was to begin at an universal proposition,
and afterward to open the matter by his example.

9 And I lived sometime wthout law. His meaning is to insinuate, yt there was
a time wherein, to him, or with him sin was dead. For it is not to be
understood that he was at any time lawless: but this word I lived is very
significant: because the abse^ce of the law made that he lived, that is, being
puffed up with the confidence of his own righteousness, he challenged life unto
himself when nevertheless he was dead. That the sentence may be more clear,
resolve it thus, when sometime I was without law, I lived. And I said, that this
word was significant, because in faining himself righteous, he claymed unto
himself life also: This then is the meaning, when I sinned without knowledge
of the law, sin was so drowned, that I did not observe it, and that it
seemed almost to be dead. On the other side, I, because I did not see that I
was a sinner, did please my self in my self, thinking that I had life at home
with my self. For the death of sin, is the life of man: again the life of
sin is the death of man. But the question is, what time yt was, 2. Cor. 3.14.
how paul being brought up of a child in the doctrine of the law is said to
have lived sometime without law.
wherein by the ignorance of the law, or (as he says) by the absence of the
law, he did confidently claim life unto him self. For sure it is he was
brought up of a child in the doctrine of the law: But that was a litterall
Divinity, which does not humble his Disciples. For as he says in another
place, the veil was interposed, that the Jews could not see the light of
life in the law: So he also, so long as he being void of the spirit of
Christ, had his eyes covered, did please himself in ye external show of
righteousness. He therefore counts the law absent, which though it were
present before his eyes, yet did not smite him with a perfect sense of the
judgment of the Lord. Thus are the eyes of hypocrites covered with a veil,
that they see not how much this precept requires, wherein we are forbidden
of concupiscence. But when the commandment came. So now on the contrary he
counts the law then to come, when it began truly to be understood. The
law therefore did (as a man would say) raise sin from the dead, because it
discovered unto Paul, with how much corruption the inward parts of his
heart abounded, and also did flea him. And let us always remember, that he
speaks of a secure confidence, wherein hypocrites rest, whiles they flatter
themselves, because they wincke at their sins.

10 Was found unto me etc. Two things are said here, 1. namely that the
commandment shows unto us the way of life in the righteousness of God: and
therefore was given, that we observing the law of the Lord, The law in it self
is the way of life. But that none are saved by the law, the cause is, for that
none does keep it.
might obtain eternal life, if the prauity of us all did not hinder it. 2.
But because there is none of us that keeps the law, but rather we are
altogether carried headlong into that kind of life, from the which it does
call us, it can bring nothing else but death. Thus we are to distinguish
between the nature of the law, and our corruption. Whereby it follows that
whereas the law does wound us unto death that is accidentical: as if an
incurable disease should be stirred up ye more by an wholesome medicine. Indeed
I confess it is an insepararable accident, and therefore the law in another
place in respect of the Gospel, is called the minister of death: but yet this
abides firm, 1. Cor. 3.7.
that it is not hurtful unto us of his own nature, but because our corruption
does provoke and cause his curse.

11 has lead me out of the way. Verily true it is, although the will of God
be hidden from us, and no doctrine does shine unto us, the whole life of men
is wandering and full of errors: yea until the law does show unto us the
way of a right life, we can do nothing but wander. Yet because then we
begin to feel our error, when the Lord does reprove us a loud, Worthily
says Paul, that when sin is discovered, then we are led forth of the way.
So then the word Ex apatan: that is, to lead out of the way is not to be
understood of the thing it self, but of knowledge: namely, How we are said by
occasion of the law to be led forth of the way.
for that by the law it is apparnt how much we have declined from the right
course: therefore of necessity it was to be translated, has led out of the
way, because hereby sinners, (who went on securely before) began to have a
loathing and disliking of them selves, whiles after the filthiness of sin
was reueiled by the law, they understood how they made have unto death.
Finally he infers again the name of occasion, that we might know how
the law by it self is not deadly, but that comes otherwise, and is (as a
man would say) foreign or such as comes by some other means.

12 Wherefore the law is holy. Some think there is a repetition doubling in
words, law and commandment: to whom I do so consent, that I judge there is
included a great Emphasis or force. To say, the law it self, and what so ever
is commanded in the law, that is all holy, and therefore is greatly to be
reverenced: it is just, and therefore not to be charged with any
unrighteousness: it is good, and therefore pure and clean from all corruption.
So he clears the law of all accusations, least any should ascribe that to
the law, which were not good, just, and holy.

13 Was that then which is good, made death unto me? God forbid. Yea sin
that it might appear sin, wrought death in me by that which is good: that
sin might be out of measure sinful by the commandment. 13 Was that then
which is good. Hitherto he has so cleared the law from all calumniations:
that yet notwithstanding it remained doubtful, whither it were the cause of
death or no. Yea here are men's minds wonderfully plonged, how it may be, that
we should reap nothing but death, of so singular a benefit of god. Now therefore
he answers that objection, denying that death is of the law, although
through occasion thereof, it is brought upon us by sin. And albeit this
answer seems to be contrary unto that which he said before, namely, that
the commandment which was ordained unto life, was found death unto him: yet
in deed there is no contrariety. For before, he meant, that by our
wickedness it comes to pass, that we abuse the law to our destruction,
otherwise then the nature of it does bear: The law is not the material cause
of deah. 2. Cor. 3.7.
and here he denies it to be the matter of death, that death should be
imputed to it. In the second to the Corinthians he speaks more freely of
the law, where he calls it the administration of death. How be it that he
does, as it is wont to be, in the heat of disputation: not respecting the
nature of the law, but the opinion of the adversaries.

Yea sin, under the correction of others, I think it is to be read as I
have put it down: and therefore I suppose this to be the sense, sin in a
manner is justified, before it be detected by the law: but when by occasion of
the law it is reueiled, then truly it takes the name of sin: and so much
the more mischievous and (that I may say so) sinful it appears then,
because it conuerteth the goodness of the law being perverted to our
destruction. For that must needs be a very poysonable thing, which causes
that, which otherwise by his own nature is wholesome, to be hurtful. The
meaning is, that it was meet the outragiousnesse of sin should be
discovered by the law: for except, sin did (as they say) burst forth by an
outrageous, and enormious excess, it should not be acknowledged for sin.

This excess does power out it self more violently, whiles it conuerteth
life into death. Therefore, then is all excuse taken away.

14 For we know that the law is spiritual: but I am carnal, sold under
sin. 15 For I know not that which I do. For what I would that do I not: but
what I would not that do I. 16 If I do then, that I would not: I consent to
the law of God that it is good. 17 Now then, it is no more I that does it,
but the sin that dwells in me. 14 For we know. Now he begins more
nearly to campare the law with the nature of man, that it might more clearly
appear, whence the fault of death proceeds. Secondly he propounds an
example of a regenerate man: in whom the relics of the flesh do so dissent
from the law of the Lord, that yet the spirit does willingly obey the same
law. But first of all (as we said) he sets down a bare comparison of
man's nature and the law. Seeing there is no greater variance in the world,
then of the spirit and the flesh: the law is spiritual, man is carnal.
What concord then has the nature of man with the law? namely such as the
light has with darkness. How the law is called spiritual.
Furthermore, whereas he calls the law spiritual, thereby he does not
only signify that it requires the inward affections of the heart (as many
expound it): but according to the nature of an antithesis, it has a
signification contrary to the word carnal. The former interpreters we spoke
of expound it thus, the law is spiritual, that is, it does not only bind
our hands and feet, in respect of external actions: but also is imposed upon
the affections of the heart, and requires the sincere fear of God. But here
is expressed an antithesis or contrariety between the flesh and the spirit.

Finally, by the text it may sufficiently appear, and partly it has been
already declared, that under the name of flesh, is comprehended what so ever
men bring with them out of their mothers womb. And men being taken for such as
they are borne, and for such as they be so long as they reteyne their own
wit, are called flesh: for as they are corrupt, so they neither sauoure nor
breathe any thing, but that is gross and earthly. Spirit put for the renewing
of our corrupt nature.
On the contrary the spirit is called the renewing of our corrupt nature,
whiles God reformeth us to his image. And hence comes that kind of speech,
because that newnes which is wrought in us is the gift of the spirit.
Wherefore the integrity of the doctrine of the law, is set against the
corruption of man's nature. The meaning therefore is, the law requires a
certain celestial, and angelical righteousness, wherein there should appear
no blot, to whose cleanness nothing ought to be wanting: but I carnal man can
do nothing but strive against it. And that interpretation of Origin, which
notwithstang before this time, it has pleased many, is unworthy to be
refuted. He says the law is called spiritual of Paul, because the
Scripture is not literally to be understood. What is this unto the present
cause? sold under sin. By this parcel he shows, what flesh is of it
self. For by nature, man is no less the bondeslaue of sin, What men are by
nature.
then those bondemen are bought with money, whom their masters abuse at their
pleasure, like Oxen or Asses: we are so utterly mastered under the power of
sin, that our whole mind, heart, and all our actions bend toward sin. I
do always except coaction: for voluntarily we sin, because it were no sin,
except it were voluntary. But we are so addicted unto sin, that we can
do nothing freely but sin: because that corruption rules in us, draws us
hereunto. Wherefore this similitude imports not (as they say) a coacted or
forced astriction or tying, but a voluntary obsequie, whereunto the ingraffed
servitude addicteth us.

15 For that which I do I know not. Now he descends unto a more
particular example of a regenerate man: in whom, both those things he
intends, do more clearly appear: namely, how great discord there is
between the law of God, and man's nature, and how the law does not of it
self bring death. For truly seeing the carnal man, with all the inclination
of his mind, does rushe into the lust of sinning, he seems to sin with
such free election, that he might moderate himself if he would: as this
pernicious opinion has almost prevailed with all men, namely, that a man by
his own natural strength, without the help of Gods grace, is able to elect
whither he will. But verily whiles the will of a faithful man is led unto
good by the spirit of God, thereby appears plainly the corruption of
nature, which obstinately resists and strives to the contrary. Therefore
thou haste in a regenerate man a very fit example, whereby thou may know,
how contrary the righteousness of the law is, to our nature. Hence also the
declaration of the other member is more aptly drawn, then from the bare
consideration of man's nature. For the law, because it brings forth nothing
but death in that man which is altogether carnal, is there more easily
charged: for it is doubtful whence the fault proceeds. In the regenerate
man it brings forth wholesome fruits: whereby appears, that the flesh
only is in the cause, that it quickneth not: so far is it from generating
death of it self. That this disputation therefore may both more faithfully
and more certainly be understood, We begin not to strive against sin before
we be indewed with the spirit of sanctification
we must note, that this conflicte of the which the Apostle speaks, is not
in any man, before he be sanctified by the spirit of God. For man being left
to his own nature, is wholly carried without resistance unto concupiscences:
for although ye wicked are tormented with the sting of their conscience, and can
not so flatter themselves in their vices, but that they have some taste of
bitterness: yet thou can not gather thereby, that they either hate evil, or
love that is good. Only the Lord does suffer them to be so tormented, that
he might partly show unto them his judgment: not that he might put into
them, either a love of righteousness, or hatred of sin.

This difference therefore there is between them and the faithful, that they
(meaning the wicked) are never so blinded, A difference between the sting of
sin in the wicked, and the feeling of sin in the godly.
and hardened in their minds, but if they be admonished of their
abominations, in the judgment of their own conscience they condemn them.
For knowledge is not utterly extinguished in them, but they retain a
difference of right and wrong. Sometime also through the feeling of their sin
they are so shaken with horror, that even in this life they sustain a kind a
damnation. Nevertheless they like sin with their whole heart: and therefore
without any true resistaunce of the affection, they give them selves unto it.

For those stinges of conscience wherewith all they are stonge, arise rather of
the contradiction of judgment, then the contrary affection of the will. On the
contrary the godly, in whom the regeneration of GOD is begun, are so
divided, that with a special desire of the heart they fervently aspire unto
GOD, they couette celestial righteousness, and hate sin: but again by the
relics of their flesh they are drawn toward the earth. Therefore whiles
they are thus destracted, they fight against their nature, and their nature
fights against them. And they do not only condemn their sins, because
they are forced thereunto by the judgment of reason: but because from the very
heart they abhor them, and are diipleased with them. This is that Christian
warrefare, between the flesh and the spirit, of the which Paul speaks to
the Galathians. Gal. 5.17.
And therefore is it well said, that the carnal man with the whole consent,
and agreement of mind does rushe into sin: and that the division or
struggling, then first begins, when he is called of the Lord, and
sanctified by his spirit.

For regeneration is only begun in this life: the remnante of the flesh
which remains, does always follow his corrupt affections, and so moves
war against the spirit. The unlearned which consider not whereaboute the
Apostle goes, or what kind of dispensation he holds, do think that the
nature of man is here described. And certainly such a description of humane
wit there is amongst the Philosophers. Howebeit the scripture sets down
a more deep philosophy, because since the time that Adam was spoiled of the
image of God, it saw nothing to remain in the heart of man, besides
peruersitie or frowardness. So Sophisters when they go about to define free
will, or to estimate of what value the strength of nature is, sease upon this
place: howebeit Paul (as I said) does not here propounde the bare nature of
man: but under his own person, Paul describes, what, and how great the
infirmity of the faithful is. Augustine was some time in this common error:
yet when he had more nerely sifted the place, he did not only retract that,
which he had taught amiss, but in his first book unto Boniface, by many
strong arguments he proves, that it can not otherwise be understood, but
of the regenerate. And we will do our endeavor that the readers may clearly
see it is so. I know not. His meaning is, that he did not acknowledge those
works, which he did commit through the infirmity of the flesh, for his:
because he did detest them. Therefore it is not amiss that Erasmus has used
the word approve: but because that might be ambiguous, I chose rather to
retain the word, know, or understand. Whereby we gather that the doctrine
of the law is so agreeable, unto right judgment, that the faithful refuse
the transgression thereof, as a brutishe thing. And because Paul seems to
confess, that he taught otherwise then the law commanded, many interpreters
have been deceived, which have thought that he took upon him the person of
another: hence came that common error, that some have supposed the nature of
an unregenerate man to have been described in this whole chapter. But Paul
under the transgression of the law includes all the offenses of the godly,
What is meant by transgressio^,
who, neither shake off the fear of God, nor study of well doing. Therefore
denies he him self to do that which the law commands, because he does
it not absolutely, but in a manner faints in his endeavor.

For what I would do. You may not understand this to have bin always in him,
as though he could never do any good: but only he complayneth that he could
not do that he coueted: namely that he could not prosecute that was good,
with such alacrity as was meet, because he was holden in a manner bond:
again, that he fainted in that wherein he would not, because he was feeble
through the infirmity of the flesh. The godly mind therefore does not that
good it would, How the godly do not that they would.
because it stands not with courage as were meet: and it does the evil it
would not, because it desires to stand, and falls, or at the least shakes.

Howebeit this will and nill, must be referred unto the spirit, which ought
to have the principality in the faithful. Yea the flesh has his will: but
Paul calls that, will, which he coueted with the special affection of his
heart: and he calls that contrary to his will, which did gaynestande the
same.

Here verily we may gather that we said, namely that Paul here entreats of
the faithful, in whom that grace of the spirit florisheth, which does
illustrate the consent of a sound mind with the righteousness of the law:
because the flesh can not hate sin.

15 And if I do that I would not I consent to the law. That is to say,
whiles my heart does recreate it self in the law, and is delighted with the
righteousness thereof (which thing undoubtedly comes to pass, when it has
the transgressing thereof) therein it feels and acknowledges the goodness
of the law: so that we are sufficiently convicted, yea even by experience:
that no evil is to be imputed to the law: Yea it would be wholesome unto
men, if it happened upon right and pure hearts. And here we are not to take
consent for such as we hear to be in the wicked, whose words are, What
kind of consent to the law of God there is in the godly and godles.
I see better things, and I allow of them, I follow after worse. Item, I
will follow those things which are hurtful: and flee those things, I think
may profit. For they do it by compulsion, because they subscribe to the
righteousness of God, from the which otherwise their will ^^l together
aduersant: but the godly consents in deed, and with a most cheerful desire
of heart: for that he coueteth nothing more then to mount up into heaven.

17 Now it is no more I that works it. This is not the speech of one
excusing him self, as though he were without fault: as many triflers think
they have a good defense, whereby they may cover their sins, whiles they cast
them upon the flesh: but it is a declaration, how far he dissenteth from his
flesh, in his spiritual affection. For the faithful are carried with such
feruencie of spirit to obey God, that they deny their flesh.

Furthermore this place proves, that Paul disputes not here of any other,
then of the godly which be already regenerate. For so long as man abides
like himself, whatsoever he be, he is worthily counted corrupt. But Paul
here denies himself to be altogether possessed of sin, yea he exempteth
him self from the bondage thereof: as if he said, that sin remained only
in some part of his soul, seeing he does earnestly from his heart labor,
and strive unto the righteousness of God, and in deed declares himself to
bear the law of God graven within him.

18 For I know that in me (that is in my flesh) there dwells no good thing.
For truly to will is present with me: but I find no means to perform that
is good. 19 For the good that I would that do I not: but the evil that I
would not that I do. 20 And if I do that I would not: now then I do it not,
but sin that dwells in me. 18 For I know. He says that there dwells no
good thing in him, in respect of nature. Therefore it is as much as if it
were said, in me, so far forth as of my self. For even by the first
words he condemns him self wholly of corruption, when he confesses there
dwells no good thing in him: then in the second place he adds a
correction, least he should be contumelious against the grace of God, which
did also dwell in him: but was no part of the flesh. And here again he
confirms that he speaks not of every man, but only of the faithful man,
who through the relics of the flesh, and grace of the spirit is divided in
him self.

For to what purpose were this correction, except some part were free from
fault? and therefore not carnal. Under the name of flesh he always
comprehends all the gifts of man's nature, and also what so ever is in man,
besides the sanctification of the spirit. As under the name spirit, which he
is wont to oppose against the flesh, he signifies that part of the soul, with
being purged from corruption, the spirit of God has so fashioned it, that the
image of God, does appear in it.

Both these names therefore, as well of the flesh as the spirit agree unto the
soul: The word flesh agrees unto the soul.
but the one unto that part of the soul which is regenerate, the other unto
that which reteyneth still his natural affection, To will is present with me.
His meaning is not, that he had nothing but an ineffectual desire: but he
denies that the efficacy of the work aunsweared his will: because the flesh
hindered him, yt he could not exactly do yt he did. And so also understand yt
which follows, namely, to do ye evil he would not: because the flesh of the
godly does not only let them, that they cannot run speedily: but also
puts many impedimentes in their way whereat they stumble. They do it not
therefore, We are said, not to do that which we do not as we should.
because they perform it not with such alacritye as were meet. Wherefore
this will he speaks of, is the readiness of faith, whiles the holy spirit
does so frame the godly, that they are ready, and study to give their members
to obey the Lord. And because their strength is not sufficient, Paul says,
he found not that were to be wished: namely the effect of a good desire.

Heereunto apperteineth the confession that next follows: namely, that he
did not the good he would, but rather the evil which he would not: namely,
because the faithful, howsoever they be right minded, yet being privy to
their own infirmity, they esteem no work to proceed from them without
fault. For seeing Paul entreats not here of a few faults of the Godly,
but in general notes the whole course of their life, we gather that their
best works are always stained with some blot of sin: so that no reward is
to be hoped for, but so far forth as God does pardon them.

Finally, he repeateth that sentence, namely that so far forth as he is
endued with celestial light, he is a faithful witness and subscriber to the
righteousness of the law. Whereby it follows, that if we had the pure
integrity of nature, the law should not be deadly unto us: for the law is
not aduersante to that man, who being of a sound mind, abhors from sin.
Howebeit health is of the celestial Physician.

21 I find then by the law, that when I would do good, evil is present with
me. 22 For I consent to the law of God, concerning the inner man. 23 But I see
another law in my members, rebelling against the law of my mind, and
leadinge me captive unto the Law of sin, which is in my members. 21 I
find then. Here Paul imagines a fourefolde law. Namely, 1. the law of God,
which only is properly so called, because it is the rule of righteousness,
whereby our life is fashioned aright. A fourefold law.
2. Hereunto he adds the law of the mind, so learning the readiness of a
faithful mind to obey the law of the Lord: because it is a certain
confirming of us to the law of God. 3. On the contrary side, he opposes the
law of unrighteousness, and by a certain allusion, he so calls, the
dominion which iniquity has as well in a man not yet regenerate, as in the
flesh of a regenerate man. For the laws of Tyraunts how wicked soever they
be, yet abusiuely are called laws. 4. Unto this law of sin, he makes the
law of members answer: that is, the concupiscence resting in our members: For
that consent it has with iniquity. Concerning the first member, because many
interpreters take the name law, in his proper sense, they understand Cata or
Dia: and so does Erasmus translate it, by the law. As thoug Paul had said, by
the instruction, and direction of the law he found out that corruption was
graffed in him. But that thou may understand or add nothing, the sentence
shall run well thus, the faithful whiles they go about to do good, they
find a certain tyrannical law in them selves: because there ^s graffed in
their marrowe and bones a corruption contrary, and rebelling the law of God.

22 For I consent to the law of God. Here then thou see, what manner of
division there is in godly minds, whence arises that battle of the flesh
and the spirit, which Augustine in a certain place, does notably call the
Christian warfare.

The law of God calls man unto the rule of righteousness: iniquity which is
(as it were) a tyrannical law of Satan, pricketh forward unto wickedness.
The spirit carries unto the obedience of the law of GOD: the flesh draws
back unto the contrary part. Man thus distracted with diverse desires, is now
in a manner divided, and of one made two men: but because the spirit ought to
hold the principality, he judges and estimateth himself chiefly by that
part. Therefore Paul says he was bound captive of his flesh: because whereas
he is yet tickled and moved with evil concupiscences: that is a coaction, in
respect of the spiritual desire which altogether resists. But the acception
of the inner man and members is diligently to be noted, which whiles many did
mistake, they have fallen upon this rock. Therefore the inner man, is not
simply taken for the soul, but for that spiritual part of the soul which
is regenerate of God: the word members signifies the other part that
remains. What is meant by members, and how the spirit has the name of inner
man
For as the soul is the more excellent part of man, and the body the
inferior: so is the spirit more excellent then the flesh. By this reason
therefore, because the spirit occupies the place of soul in man: and the
flesh (that is, the corrupt, and contaminated soul) the place of body:
spirit has the name of inner man, and flesh the name of members.

The outward man is taken in another sense the second to the Corinth. But the
circumstaunce of the present place necessarily requires that interpretation I
have put down, and it is called inner, by the way of excellency, because it
possesses the heart and hidden affections, seeing the appetites of the flesh
are wandering, and as it were out of man. Or surely it is like, as if a man
should compare heaven with earth. For Paul by the way of contempt, under the
name of members, notes what so ever appears in man, that he might the better
declare how the secret renouation is hidden, and covered from our senses,
save so far forth as it is apprehended by faith.

Now then, seeing the law of the mind without question, signifies an
affection rightly composed and set in order, it appears that this place is
wickedly wrested unto men not regenerate.

For Paul teaches that such are without mind, because their mind or soul
degenerateth from reason.

24 O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from this body of death? 25
I thank God through Jesus Christ our Lord. Then I my self in my mind serve
the Law of God, but in my flesh the law of sin. 24 O wretched man. He
windeth up the disputation with a vehement exclamation, whereby he teaches
that we are not only to strive with our flesh, but with continual sighing
to bewail both with our selves, and before God our unhappiness. And he
demands not by whom he might be delivered, as though he doubted, as
unbelievers do, who hold not that there is one only delivered. But it is the
voice of one panting, and almost fanting, because he does not sufficiently
see present help. And therefore has he used the word take or deliver, that
he might show how there is required unto this deliverance a special power
of God. By the body of death, He means the mass of sin, What is meant by
the body of death.
or heap whereon man is compacted: saving that in him there remained only
certain relics, with whose bonds he was holden captive. The pronowne this,
or of this, which I with Erasmus have referred unto body, may also fitly be
applied unto death, but almost in the same sense: because the mind of Paul is
to show, that the eyes of the sons of God are opened, that they might
prudently discern from the law of God, the corruption of their nature, and
death which proceeds thence. How be it the name body, is all one with the
name external man, and members: for Paul notes this to be the original of
sin, that man is fallen from the law of his creation, and so is become
carnal and earthly. For although he do yet excel brute beasts, yet his
true dignity is taken from him: and that which remains, is filled with
innumerable corruptions: so that his soul, as it is degenerate, Genesis 6.3.
may be said to be changed into a body. So god says with Moses, my spirit
shall strive no more with man, because he is but flesh: where by the way of
reproach, he compares man being spoiled of his spiritual dignity, unto brute
beasts. And this place of Paul serves notably to beat down all the glory of
flesh. For it teaches, that the most perfect men of all, so long as the dwell
in their flesh, are addicted unto misery, because they are subject unto
death: yea, whiles they do diligently examine them selves, they find nothing
in their nature but misery.

Furthermore, least they should cocker their dullness, by his example Paul
provoke them unto careful morninges, and commands them so long as they
wander in earth, to desire death as the only remedy of their evil. And this
is the right end of coveting or desiring death. Why and how the godly may
wish for death.
For oftentimes desperation drives profane men unto the same desire: but
rather for the lothsomnesse of this present life, then for the weariness of
their sin, they do wickedly wish for death. Add also that the faithful
albeit they level at the true mark, yet they are not carried with an unbridled
or outrageous passion to wish for death, but submit themselves to the will
of God, to whom we ought to live and die. Wherefore they do not rage with
indignation against God, but they do humbly lay their griefs in his bosom:
for they do not so stay or rest in the cogitations of their miseries, but
being mindful of the grace received, they temper their sorrow with mirth as
it follows,

25 I thank God. He therefore adds this thanksgiving straightwayes, least
any should think he murmured stubbornely against God in his complaint. For
we know how easy it is, yea even in just dolor or sorrow to fall unto
murmouring or impatiencie. Notwithstanding therefore Paul bewayling his
estate, did fervently covet death: yet he confesses him self to rest in the
grace of God. For it is not meet that the Saints whiles they examine their
own imperfections, should forgette what they have received of God. Finally,
this cogitation suffices to bridle impatie^cie, and nourish peace, namely that
they are received into the custody of God, to the end they should never
perish: and even now feel them selves endued with the first fruits of the
spirit, which assures them of the eternal inheritance. And albeit they do
not yet enjoy the promised glory of heaven: yet they being content with that
measure which they have obtained, never want matter of joy.

Then I my self. A brief conclusion, wherein he teaches that the faithful
never come unto the mark of righteousness, We never come unto the mark of
righteousness so long as we live in the flesh.
so long as they dwell in their flesh: but they are in the way, until they
have put off the body. By mind he understands, not that reasonable part of
the soul, which the Philosophers make so much on: but which is illuminated
with the spirit of God to understand and will aright. For there is not only
mention made of the understanding, but also the serious desire of heart is
joined. To conclude, by this exception he confesses that he is in such sort
addicted unto God, that yet creeping upon the earth, he is defiled with many
corruptions. This is a notable place to convince, These professed themselves to
be pure.
that pernicious doctrine of the Catharites or Nouatian heritikes, which some
tumultuous spirits go about to renew again at this day.

CHAPTER. 8.
1 Now then there is no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus: which
walk not after the flesh, but after the spirit. 2 For the law of the
spirit of life in Christ Jesus, has made me free from the law of sin and
death. 3 For that which was impossible to the law, because it was weak
through the flesh, God by sending his son in the similitude of sinful
flesh, yea he has condemned sin of sin in the flesh. 4 That the
rigeteousnesse of the law might be fulfilled in us, which walk not after the
flesh but after the spirit.
Now then there is no. Having set down that conflict which the godly have
with their flesh, he returns unto a very necessary consolation for them,
whereof he made mention before: namely, that although they are yet beset on
every side with sin, nevertheless they are exempted from the power of death
and from all curse: so be it they walk not in the flesh. but in the spirit.
For he joins three things together, imperfection which is always in the
faithful, the mercy of God in pardoning and forgiving the same, regeneration
of the spirit: and this last verily is added, least any upon a vain opinion
should boast himself, as though he were freed from the curse, whiles in the
mean time he does securely cocker his flesh. As the carnal man therefore
does in vain flatter himself, if he being retchlesse to refourme his life,
under the pretense of this grace promise to himself impunitie: so the
trembling consciences of the godly, have an invincible safegarde, that whiles
they abide in Christ, they know they are without all danger of condemnation.
Now it behooves us to examine the words, Who walk according to the spirit.
he counts those to walk according to the spirit, not which have
altogether put off all the senses of flesh, so that in their whole life there
appears nothing besides a celestial perfection: but which do so diligently
labor in taming the flesh, that the study of piety may appear to reign in
them: he denies such to walk according to the flesh, because wheresoever
the sincere fear of God florisheth, it takes the dominion away from the
flesh, albeit it does not abolishe all the corruptions thereof.

2 For the law of the spirit of life. This is a confirmation of the former
sentence: for the understanding whereof, the signification of the words is to
be observed. What is meant by the law of the spirit.
He calls the law of the spirit improperly the spirit of God, which
sprinckleth our souls with the blood of Christ, not only that it might cleanse
them from the blot of sin, in respect of giltinesse, but also sanctify them
unto true purity. He adds, that it quickens (for the Genetiue case after
the manner of the Hebrews) is taken for an Epitheton) whereupon it follows
that who so deteineth a man in the letter of the law, makes him subject unto
death. On the contrary he calls the law of sin and death, What is meant by
the law of sin
the dominion of the flesh, and tyranny of death which proceeds thence. The
law of God is as it were placed in the midst: which law teaches righteousness,
but gives it not: yea rather it binds us in stronger bonds unto the
servitude of sin and death. Therefore the meaning is, where as the law of God
condemns men, that comes to pass, because so long as they abide under the
bond of the law, they are pressed with the bondage of sin: and so are gilty
of death. But the spirit of Christ, whiles by correcting the inordinat lusts of
the flesh, Objection.
he abolisheth the law of sin in us, does also deliver us from the giltines of
death. If any should object, that then the forgiveness whereby our offenses are
buried, Answer.
does depend upon regeneration: the answer is easy: namely, that the cause is
not here set down of Paul, but the manner only is delivered, whereby we are
loosed from giltinesse. And Paul denies us to obtain that by the doctrine of
the law, but whiles we are renewed by the spirit of God, we are also
justified by free forgiveness, that the curse of sin might no more lie upon
us. This sentence therefore is as much, as if Paul had said, the grace of
regeneration is never separated trom the imputation of righteousness. I dare
not take ye law of sin and death with some, for the love of god, because it
seems to be a hard speech. For although by increasing sin, it beget death,
yet Paul did purposely above, withdraw from this despite or roughness of
speech. Although nothing the more I consent to their opinion, who understand
the law of sin, for the concupiscence of the flesh, as though Paul said, he had
conquered it. For shortly after it shall (as I hope) sufficiently appear that
he speaks of free forgiveness, which does bring unto us a perfect peace with
God. I had rather keep the name of law, then with Erasmus to translate it
right or power: because Paul did not without cause allude unto the law of God.

3 For that which was impossible to the law. Now follows the polishing and
setting forth of the confirmation, namely, that the Lord has by his free
mercy justified us in Christ: which thing was impossible for the law. But
because this is a very notable sentence, let us examine every part thereof.
That he entreats here of free justification, or of remission whereby god
reconcileth us to himself, The doctrine of remission and free mercy is
restrained unto those who join repentance unto faith.
it may be gathered by that last clause where he adds, who walk according
to the spirit, and not according to the flesh. For if Paul went about to
teach, how by the spirit of regeneration we are instructed or furnished to
conquer sin, to what end were this addition? But it was very expedient, that
after he had promised free remission unto the faithful, then this doctrine
should be restrained unto those, who join repentance unto faith, and abuse not
the mercy of God, unto the licenciousnes of the flesh. Secondarily, here is to
be noted the rendering of the cause. For the Apostle shows how the grace of
Christ does absolve us from giltines.

Now concerning the words impossible to the law, out of question is taken for
a defect or impotencie: as though it were said, there was a remedy found of
God, whereby the impossibility of the law was taken away. As for the particle
en O, which Erasmus has turned, that part wherein, because I think it to be
causall, I choose rather to translate it, because. And albeit perhaps you shall
not find such a phrase of speech with good authors of the Greek tongue: yet
because the Apostles do every where use Hebrewe phrases, this interpretation
ought not to seem hard. Certainly the sound Readers will grant, that the
cause of defect was expressed here, as we shall declare again a little after.
Now whiles Erasmus puts down of himself ye principal verb, in my judgment
the text does run very well o-otherwise. The Conjunction Kai and, has
deceived Erasmus, that he should insert or thrust in the verb Praestitit: that
is, he has performed. But I think it was put for amplification sake, except
any perhaps like the conjecture of the Greek gloser better, who joins this
member, and of sin, to that goes before: namely, God sent his son in the
similitude of sinful flesh, and for sin. Howebeit, I have followed that,
which I have thought to be the natural sense of Paul. Now I come unto the
thing it self. Paul affirms plainly, that our sins were therefore done
away by the death of Christ, because it was impossible for the law to make us
righteous. Whereupon it follows, there is more commanded in the law, then
we are able to perform: because if we were able to perform the law, it
were in vain to seek for remedy else where. Wherefore it is absurd that man's
strength should be measured by the precepts of the law: as though God in
requiring that is just, had regarded what, and how great our strength were.
Because it was weak. least any should think the law were charged
irreverently with weakness, or should restrain this unto ceremonies, Why the
law cannot justify.
Paul has precisely expressed, that that defect is not through the fault of
the law, but through the corruption of our flesh. For we must confess if any
did absolutely satisfy the law of God, he were righteous before God. So then
he denies not the law to be able to justify us, in respect of doctrine, as
which contains the perfect rule of righteousness: but because our flesh
does not compass that righteousness, the whole strength of the law falls
or vanishes away. So their error, or rather dotage is refuted, who think the
power of iustifiyng is taken away only from ceremonies: when Paul plainly
putting the fault in us, declares that he does find no fault in the
doctrine.

Furthermore understand the infirmity or weakness of the law, as the
Apostle is wont to use the word astheneias, not only for a little
weakness, but for impotencie: that he might signify how the law has no
force at all to justify. Thou see then we are utterly excluded from the
righteousness of works, and therefore must flee unto the righteousness of
Christ, because there can be none in our selves. Which thing is chiefly
necessary to be known: for we shall never be clothed with the righteousness
of Christ, except first we know assuredly, that we have no righteousness of our
own. The name flesh is put always in the same signification: namely, for our
selves. Therefore the corruption of our nature makes the law of God
unprofitable to us: because whiles it shows the way of life, it does not
reduce us back, How God has restored us to righteousness by his son.
who are running headlong unto death. God by sending his son. Now he shows
the manner how the celestial father has restored us to righteousness by his
son: namely, because he has condemned sin in the flesh of Christ: that is,
the handwriting, being as it were cancelled, he has done away the giltines,
which did hold us bound before the Lord. For the condemnation of sin has
brought us into righteousness, because the giltines being put away, we are
absolved, that God might repute us just. But first he says, that Christ was
sent, that he might admonish us how righteousness is not resident in us, seeing
it is to be sought for in another: and in vain do men trust to their merits,
who are not otherwise justified then by prayer or entreaty: or else because the
borrowe righteousness of that satisfaction, which Christ fulfilled in his flesh:
and he says, yt Christ came in the similitude of sinful flesh: because albeit
the flesh of Christ was stained with no blots, yet to the sight it seemed
sinful, so far forth as he sustained that punishment was due to our sins.
And certainly upon the same flesh, as subject unto him, death did show all the
parts of his power, And because it behooued our high priest by his own
experience to learn what it is to succor the weak: Christ would undertake our
infirmities, that he might be the redier unto mutual passion: in which part
also there appeared a certain image of sinful nature. Yea of sin: I have said
a while ago, that this was expounded by some, of the cause or end why God did
send his son: namely, that he might make satisfaction for sin. Chrysostom
and diverse after him, understand it somewhat more hardly: namely, that sin was
condemned of sin, because it slew Christ unjustly and unworthily. Indeed I
confess, because he being just and innocent, undertook punishment for
sinners, by this means was the price of redemption paid: Sin taken for the
sacrifice of sin.
yet I cannot be brought to think the word sin to be put here in any other
sense, then for a sacrifice of satisfaction, which of the Hebrews is called
Asham, as the Grecians call Catharma, a Sacrifice whereunto malediction or curse
is annexed. So the same Paul says, Christ who knew not sin became sin for us,
that we might be made the righteousness of God in him. And the preposition
Peri, of or for, is taken here causally, as though Paul had said, upon that
sacrifice, or else, for the burden of sin which was laid upon Christ, sin was
cast down from his power, that now it might not have us in subjection. For he
says, that sin was condemned metaphorically, as they who are cast in a matter
and loose their process: because God deals no more against those guilty
persons, who are cleared by the sacrifice of Christ. If we say, the kingdom
of sin wherewithal we were oppressed, was abrogated, it is all one.
Therefore Christ took unto him that was ours: that he might power upon us
that was his. For having taken upon him our curse, he has endued us with his
blessing. Here Paul adds, in the flesh. that our confidence might be more
sure, whiles we see sin was conquered and abolished even in our own nature,
for so it comes to pass, that our nature is truly made partaker of that
victory: which thing he also declares straightwayes.

4 That the righteousness of the law might be fulfilled. They who gather out
of this place, that those are renewed by the spirit of Chrste, do fulfill the
law, they bring in a feigned matter, altogether wide from the meaning of Paul:
for the faithful so long as they wander in this world, never come unto that
perfection, that the righteousness of the law should be full and perfect in
them. Therefore this must needs be referred unto grace, because whiles the
obedience of Christ is imputed to us, the law is satisfied that we might be
accounted for just. For the perfection which the law required, was therefore
exhibited in the flesh, that the rigor thereof should no more be of force to
condemn us: But because Christ does communicate his righteousness to none, but
whom he has coupled to himself by the bond of his spirit. Regeneration is
added again, least Christ should be thought to be the minister of sin:
Righteousness by faith in Christ, is coupled with sanctification.
as many are ready to draw that unto the lasciviousness of the flesh,
whatsoever is said of the fatherly mercy of God: and some do wickedly slander
this doctrine, as though it extinguished the study of a right life.

5 For they who are after the flesh, study or cogitate those things which
are of the flesh: and they which are after the spirit, the things which are
of the spirit. 6 The wisdom or cogitation verily of the flesh, is death: but
the wisdom or cogitation of the spirit is life and peace. 7 Seeing the
wisdom or cogitation of the flesh, is enmity against God. For it is not
subject to the law of God: neither can it be.

8 They therefore which are in the flesh, can not please God. 5 For they who
are after the flesh. He brings in this difference of the flesh and the
spirit, not only, by an argument taken from the contrary, to prove that he
said before, namely, that the grace of Christ does not appertain unto any,
but those, who being renewed by the spirit, do give them selves unto
innocence: but also that with due consolation he might cheer up the
faithful, least whiles they are privy in them selves unto many infirmities,
they should despair. For seeing none are delivered from the curse, but they
who lead a spiritual life, it might seem that hope of salvation were cut off
from all men. For what man shall be found in the world furnished with an
Angelical purity, so that he has nothing to do with the flesh? It was
necessary to add this definition, what it is to be in the flesh, and to
walk according to the flesh. At the first Paul does not distinguishe so
precisely: but yet (as we shall see in the process) his purpose is to put the
faithful in good hope, albeit they are yet tied to their flesh: so be that,
they loose not the reins to the lusts thereof, but suffer them selves to be
ruled by the holy spirit. When he says, that the carnal do care for, or
meditate the things of the flesh: he testifies, that he counts not those
for carnal, Who are carnal.
who aspire unto heavenly righteousness, but who are altogether addicted to
the world.

Therefore I have put down the word cogitate which comprehends more, in
steed of to be wise, or understand, that the reader might know, that they are
excluded from the sons of God, who being given to the inticementes of the
flesh, apply their minds, and studies to wicked lusts. Now in the second
member, he exhorts the faithful to hope well, if they feel themselves to
be lifted up by the spirit unto the meditation of righteousness. For
wheresoever the spirit reigns, it is a sign of the grace of GOD bringinge
salvation: seeing that the grace of God has no place there, where the spirit
being extinguished, the kingdom of the flesh flourishes. But here I do
briefly make mention of that, whereof I admonished before, namely, in the
flesh, or after the flesh, is as much, as to be void of the gift of
regeneration. And such are all they who abide (as the common speech is) mere
natural men.

6 The wisdom or cogitation verily of the flesh. Erasmus has put affection:
the old interpreter, wisdom. But seeing it is sure that the word To
Phronema is that with Paul, Genesis 6.5.
which Moses calls the imagination of the heart, and in this word all the
senses of the soul from reason and understanding unto the very affections are
comprehended: the name cogitation seems unto me to serve better. And although
Paul has used the particle causall Gar, for, yet I doubt not but he does
simply confirm. For here is a kind of concession or granting: because after
that he had briefly defined, what it is to be in the flesh, now he adds what
end remains. For all those are given to the flesh. What end abides for such
as are still carnal.
And so on the contrary he shows, how they are not capable of the grace of
Christ whosoever abide in the flesh: who all their life long make haste and
are carried unto death. And it is anotable place, whereby we may learn, how by
the course of nature we rush headlong into death: because we conceive nothing
of our selves, but that which is deadly. And straightwaies he has opposed the
contrary member, that he might teach, if any part of us tend unto life, then
the spirit shows forth his virtue: because there comes no sparkle of life
from our flesh. He calls the cogitation or wisdom of the spirit, How the
cogitation of ye spirit is called life.
life, because it quickens or leads unto life. And under the name of peace,
after the manner of the Hebrews, he notes all the parts of felicity. For
whatsoever the spirit of God works in us, it appertains to our
blessedness: yet it follows not that any should therefore ascribe salvation
unto works. For although God does begin our salvation in us, and at the length
does accomplish it, by fashioning us to his likeness, yet the only cause is
his good pleasure, whereby he makes us partakers of Christ

7 Seeing the cogitation or wisdom of the flesh. Now he adds a
confirmation of that he put down before: namely, that nothing proceeds from
the studies of our flesh, but death: because they fight fiercely with the will
of God. And the will of God, is the rule of rigteousnesse: whereupon it
follows, that that is unjust whatsoever disagreeth from the same: and if it
be unjust, then is it also deadly.

Now then God being against it, and offended, in vain does any look for
life. For after his wrath must needs forth with follow death, which is the
reuengement of his wrath. Man's carnal will is in all things contrary to the
will of God.
And here let us observe, that the will of man is in all things contrary to
the will of God. For look by how much, crokednesse differs from
straightness, so much must we needs differ from God. For it is not subject
to the law of God. An exposition of the former sentence: for it declares how
all the meditations of the flesh, war against the will of God: because the
will of God is not else where to be sought for, then where he has revealed
it. For in the law he shows what does please him: they therefore that will
rightlye examine, how rightly they agree with God, let them apply all their
counsayles and studies unto this rule. For although nothing be done in the
world but by the direction of the secret providence of God, yet under
pretense of this, to say that nothing is done but God does allow of it, is
intolerable blasphemy: where about certain frenzy persons cavil at this
day. For to seek the difference of right and wrong, which the law has
distinctly and plainly set before our eyes, in a deep Labyrinth, what
madness were it? We must conte^e our selves with the revealed will of God.
in deed (as I said) the Lord has his secret counsel, whereby at his
pleasure he disposes all things: but because it is incomprehensible to us,
let us know that we are restrained from too curious searching after it. In
the mean while let this abide firm, that nothing pleases him but
righteousness: neither can right judgment be given of our works but by the
the law, wherein God has unfeignedly testified, both what does please or
displease him.

Neither can it. Behold here the power of free will, There is not free will in
the natural man.
which sophisters cannot sufficiently advance. Undoubtedly Paul does here in
plain words affirm that, which they with full mouth do detest: namely, that
it is impossible for us to subject our affections unto the obedience of the
law. They brag that our heart is plyaunt unto both parts, so it be helped
by the instinct of the spirit: and that in us there is a free election of good
or evil, the spirit does only help: but it is ours to choose or refuse.
They feign also good motions, whereby of our own accord we are prepared:
Paul on the contrary says our heart is full of hardness, and untamed
stubbornness, so that it is never moved naturally to undertake the yooke of
God: and he disputes not of one or two affections, but speaking indefinitely,
does cast all those motions arise out of us, into this bundle. Let that
Ethnicall Philosophy therefore of freewill, be far from a christian mind.
Let every man (as in truth he is) acknowledge himself to be the servant of
sin, that being manumised by the grace of Christ he may be free: and it is
altogether folly to glory in another liberty.

8 They therefore which are in the flesh. It is not without cause that I have
expounded the particle aduersatiue de by the causall: For verily the Apostle
gathers out of the premises, that they, who deliver over themselves to be
lead by the lusts of the flesh, Who have nothing to do with Christ.
are all of them abominable to God. And hitherto he has confirmed that
sentence: namely, that all they have nothing to do with Christ, which walk
not after the spirit, because they are void of an heavenly life.

9 Now ye are not in the flesh, but in the spirit: if so be the spirit of
GOD dwell in you: for if any have not the spirit of Christ* the same is not
his. 10 And if Christ be in you, the body verily is dead, because of sin:
but the spirit is life for righteousness sake. 11 If (I say) the spirit of
him that raised Jesus from the dead, dwell in you: he which raised Christ
from the dead, shall also quicken your mortal bodies, because of his spirit
that dwells in you. 9 Now ye are not in the flesh. By a supposition he
applies the general sentence unto them, to whom he wrote: not only to the
end, that directing his talk as proper unto them, he might the more
vehemently move them: but also that by the definition late put down, they
might certainly gather, how they are of the number of those, from whom
Christ has taken the curse of the law. Yet withal, showing of what force
the spirit of God is in the elect, and what fruit it brings forth, he
exhorts them unto newenesse of life. If so be that the spirit of God. This
is a correction very fitly applied, whereby they are stirred up to examine
themselves more nearly, A note to know the true sons of God from the
children of the world.
least they pretend the name of Christ in vain. And this is a most sure
note, whereby the sons of God are discerned from the children of the world:
if by the spirit of God they be regenerate unto innocence and holiness.
Although it seems, his purpose was not so much to correct hypocrisy, as to
suggest matter of glorying, against those were preposterously zealous over the
law, who esteemed more of the dead letter then of the inward virtue of the
spirit which quickens the law. Furthermore, this place teaches, that Paul
by the name of spirit, meant not the mind or understanding (which of the
Patrones of free will is called the more excellent part of the soul) but the
heavenly gift. For he expounds those to be spiritual, not which obey
reason by their own motion, but whom God governs by his spirit. Who and
how they are called spiritual.
Neither yet are they said to be according to the spirit, as though they were
full of the spirit of God (which thing has happened to none yet) but because
they have the spirit of God abiding in them, howesoeuer they feel some
relic of the flesh remaining in them. And it cannot, meaning the spirit
cannot remain, except it have the superiority. For we are to note, that a man
is named of the chiefest part in him. But if any have not the spirit of
Christ. He adds this, that he might show how necessary the denial of
the flesh is in christians. The kingdom of the spirit, is the abolishing of
the flesh, in whom the spirit of Christ reigns not, they do not
appertain unto Christ. Then they are not Christians that serve the flesh.
For they who pull Christ away from his spirit, make him like unto a dead image
or carcass. And always we are to remember that counsel of the Apostle:
namelye, that free remission of sins cannot be separated from the spirit of
regeneration: because this were as a man would say, to rent Christ in
pieces. Which thing if it be true, it is marvel that we are charged, by the
adversaries of the Gospel, with arrogancy, that we dare acknowledge the
spirit of Christ dwelling in us. For either we must deny Christ, or
confess, that we are Christians by his spirit. Surely it is horrible to
hear, that men are so fallen from the word of the Lord, that they do not
only boast themselves to be Christians without the spirit of God: but also
they scoff at the faith of others. But this is the Philosophy of Papists.

Now verily let the Readers mark here, that the spirit is indifferently
sometime called the spirit of God the father, sometime of Christ: not only
because all the fullness thereof is shed upon Christ, How the spirit of God
is also called the spirit of Christ.
as he is our mediator and head, that from thence might redownde to every one
of us his portion: but also because the same spirit is common to the father
and the son, who have one essence, add the same eternal dietie. Yet because
we have no communication with God, but through Christ, the Apostle very
wisely descends from the father (who seems to be further of) unto Christ.

10 And if Christ be in you. That which before he said of the spirit, now
he says of Christ: whereby is declared the manner of Christ's dwelling in us.
For as by his spirit he consecrateth us for temples to himself, so by the
same spirit he dwells in us: and now he does more clearly open that, which
we touched before: How Christ dwells in us.
namely, that the sons of God are counted spiritual, not in respect of a
full and absolute perfection, but only for the newness of life is begun in
them. And here is a preoccupation, whereby he preuenteth that doubt, which
might otherwise vex us. For howsoever the spirit possesses one part of us,
yet we see another part to be holden still of death. Therefore he answers,
that in the spirit of Christ there is a virtue of quickening, which is of
power to swallow up our mortality. Whereupon he infers, how we are
patiently to expect, till the relics of sin be utterly abolished.
Furthermore, ye Readers have bin already admonished, yt by the word spirit they
understand not our soul, but the spirit of regeneration: which spirit Paul
calls life, not only because it lives, and florisheth in us, but because by
his strength it quickens us, until at the length our mortal flesh being
extinguished, it does perfectly renew us: as on the contrary the word body,
signifies that gross mass, which is not yet cleansed by the spirit of GOD,
from the dregs of the earth, which savor of nothing but that is gross. For
otherwise to attribute unto the body the guiltiness of sin were absurd.
Again, the soul is so far from being life, that it lives not it self.
Then the meaning of Paul is, although sin does judge us unto death, so far
forth as there remains yet in us the corruption of the first nature, yet is
the spirit of God the conqueror: neither does this hinder any whit: namely,
that we are only endued with the first fruits, because even one sparkle
thereof, is the seed of life.

11 If (I say) the spirit. This is a confirmation of the last sentence, being
taken from the efficient cause after this manner: if by the power of the spirit
of God, Christ were raised, and the spirit keeps his power for ever, Then
it shall also show forth the same power in us. And he takes it for a thing
granted: namely, that a proof of that power which apperteineth unto the body
of the whole Church, was declared in the person of Christ. And because he
makes God the author of the resurrection, he assigns unto him the
quickening spirit. Who raised. by a circumlocution he describes God, which
did agree better for the present purpose, then if had simply named him. In like
manner he ascribes the glory of Christ raised unto the father: for that was
more effectual to prove ye thing he intended, then if he had attributed it
unto Christ himself. For it might have been objected, Christ was able by his
own virtue to raise up himself, which no man can do. But when he says,
that God raised up Christ by his spirit, which he has also given unto you,
nothing can be brought against it, seeing thereby he does put us in sure
hope of the resurrection. John. 10.18. Seeing Christ rose by his own power,
how then is his resurrection ascribed to the father.
And for all this there is nothing derogated from that sentence of John:
namely, I have power to lay down my soul, and to take it again. Surely,
Christ did rise of himfelfe and by his own power, but as he is wont to
transfer unto the father whatsoever heavenly virtue is in him, so the Apostle
(not improperly) has translated that unto the father, which was a most proper
work in Christ. Finally, by mortal bodies he understands, whatsoever
remains yet in us subject unto death: as his common custom is, by this name
to call the grosser part of us. Whence we gather that he speaks not of the
last resurrection which shall be in a moment, but of that continual operation
of the spirit, whereby it mortifieth by little and little the relics of the
flesh, and renueth a celestial life in us.

12 Therefore brethren we are debtors, not to the flesh, that we should live
after the flesh. 13 For if you live after the flesh, ye shall die: but if by
the spirit, ye mortify the deeds of the flesh, ye shall live. 14 For who
so are lead by the spirit of God, they are the sons of God. 12 Therefore
brethren. This is the conclusion of the premises. For if we be to renounce
the flesh, then ought we have nothing to do with it. Again, if the spirit
ought to reign in us, not to be at his beck were absurd. The speech of
Paul here is imperfect, because he omitteth one member of the antithesis or
contrariety: namely, that we are debtors unto the spirit: howebeit the sense
is clear enough. And this conclusion has the force of an exhortation: as he
is always wont to draw exhortation out of doctrine: So in another place, Ephe.
4.30.
he admonishes us that we grieve not the holy spirit of God, whereby we
are sealed unto the day of redemption.

And again, if we live in the spirit let us also walk in the spirit. Gal.
5.25. When we may be said to live according to the spirit.
And that comes to pass whiles we renounce our carnal concupiscences, that
we might (as it were) bind our selves in service to the righteousness of God.
For verily in this sort we ought to reason: and not as some blasphemous
persons, who prate, saying, let us be secure, because there is no power in us.
But this is as it were to fight against God, if through contempt and
negligence, we extinguish his grace offered to us.

13 For if ye live after the flesh. He adds a commination or threatening,
that he might the rather shake off from them all drowsinesse: whereby also
they are notably refuted, who brag of justification by faith, without the
spirit of Christ. Although in their own conscience they are sufficiently
reproved: because there is no trust in God, where there is not also a love of
righteousness. Indeed it is true, that we are justified by the sole mercy of
God in Christ: but this also is as true and certain, that all they are
justified, are called of the Lord, that they should live worthy their
calling. Let the faithful therefore learn to embrace Christ not only unto
righteousness, but also unto sanctification, as he was given unto us to both
these ends: least through their lame faith, they rent him in pieces. But if by
the spirit ye mortify the deeds of the flesh. He so tempereth his speech,
that he cause not the godly to despair, who feel yet in themselves many
infirmities. For howsoever we be yet subject unto sin, We must not kill our
bodies, but sudue the lusts of them.
neuerthe less he promises life unto us, so that we study to mortify the
flesh. Neither does he require exactly the destruction of the flesh, but
only charge us to study to came the lusts thereof.

14 For who so are lead by the spirit of God. This is a confirmation of that
went immediately before. For here he teaches, that they are counted amongst
the sons of God, who are ruled by his spirit: because by this mark God
acknoweledgeth them to be his. Who are the sons of God.
By this means the vain ostentation of hypocrites is done away, who usurp
the title without the thing: and the faithful are encouraged unto most sure
confidence of their salvation. The sum is, they are the sons of GOD who so
are lead by the spirit of GOD: But all the sounes of GOD, are heirs of
eternal life: Therefore they ought to be sure of eternal life, who so are
lead by the spirit of God. And the middle proposition, or assumption (as they
call it) is omitted, because it was out of all question.

Nevertheless, we are to note that there is a manifold leading of the
spirit. For there is an universal whereby all the creatures are supported and
moved: The leading of the spirit is diverse.
there are also peculier in men, and the same are diverse: But here he
understands sanctification, where with God vouchsafes none but his elect,
whiles he does separate them apart to him self for sonns.

15 For ye have not received the spirit of bondage to fear again: but ye
have received the spirit of adoption, whereby we cry, Abba, father. 16 The
same spirit bears witness with our spirit, that we are the sons of God.
17 If we be sons, we are also heirs, even the heirs of God, and heirs
annexed with Christ, if so be that we suffer with him, that we may also
be glorified with him. 18 For I count the afflictions of this present time,
not to be comparable to the glory to come, which shall be revealed unto us.
Now he confirms that certainty of trust or confidence, wherein of late
he bid the faithful stay themselves, and yt by an argument taken from an
especial effect of the spirit: because it is not therefore given us that it
might toss us with trembling, To what end the spirit of god is given us
or press us with anxietie: but rather that all perturbation being quenched,
setting our minds in a quiet state, it might stir us unto assured and free
invocation of God. So then he does not only prosecute the argument he
touched before, but also stands more in that other member which he had
annexed: namely, of the fatherly mercy of God, whereby he forgiueth his, the
infirmity of the flesh, and those faults which yet remain in them. He
teaches that the confidence hereof is assured unto us by the spirit of
adoption, which would not bid us be bold in prayer, A twofold spirit
except it assured us of free remission. And to ye end he might yt rather set
out yt matter, he sets down a twofold spirit: one he calls the spirit of
bondage, which we may conceive by the law^ the other of adoption, which is by
ye gospel. He says that was given in old time unto fear, Heb. 12.18.
and this at this day unto assurance. By such comparison of contraries, the
certainty of our salvation is (as thou see) made more manifest. The author
of the Epistle to the Hebrews, when he says, we are not come unto the mount
Sinai, where all things were so terrible, that the people being overthrown
(as it were) with the present sentence of death, did pray they might not be
spoken unto, yea Moses him self confessed he was afraid: but we are come
unto Sion the hill of the Lord, and his city the celestial Jerusalem, where
is the mediator of the new Testament Jesus. By the aduerbe, again, we
gather that the law is here compared with the Gospel: because the son of
God by his coming brought unto us this inestimable benefit, that the servile
condition of the law should no more bind us. Yet thou may not gather
hereby, either, that none had the spirit of adoption before the coming of
Christ: or that who so received the law were servants and not sons. For he
does rather compare the ministry of the law, with the dispensation of the
Gospel, then persons with persons. In deed I confess that the faithful are
admonished here, how much more liberally God has now dealte with them, then
he did in old time with the fathers under the old Testament: yet he
respects the external dispensation, in respect whereof only we excel:
because howesoeuer the says of Abraham, Moses, and David, was more excellent
then ours: yet for as much as God in a manner kept them under a
schoolemistresse, they were not yet come unto that liberty, which is opened
unto us. And also it is to be noted, that I have purposely (because of false
Apostles) put an antithesis or contrariety between the litterall disciples of
the law, and the faithful, whom Christ the heavenly master does not only
speak unto with sound of mouth, but also inwardely does teach effectually
by his spirit. And although the covenant of grace is contained in the law,
yet he remoueth it thence: because opposing the Gospel, he considers
nothing but that which was proper to the law, namely to bid and forbid*
and by the denouncing of death to bridle sinners: and so he gives unto the
law, What was proper to the law.
that quality whereby it differs from the Gospel. Or if any had rather, he
propounds the bare law, as God therein couenanteth with us in respect of
works. Thus therefore we are to think of the persons amongst ye people of the
Jews, when the law was published, and also after it was published, ye godly
were illuminated with the same spirit of faith: and therefore the hope of eternal
inheritance (whereof the spirit is a pledge and seal) was sealed in their
heart. Here only is the difference, that the spirit is powered out more
abundantly and plentifully in the kingdom of Christ. But if thou have regard
unto the dispensation of doctrine, salvation shall seem to have been then for
a suertie first manifested, when Christ was exhibited in the flesh, with such
obscurity were all things covered under the old Testament, in comparison of
that light is under the Gospel.

Furthermore, if the law be considered in it self, it can do nothing but
bind men, that are subject to miserable servitude, with the horror of death:
because it promises no good thing, but with condition: and it denounces death
against all transgressors. Wherefore as under the law there was the spirit
of bondage, which pressed the conscience with fear: so under the Gospel there
is the spirit of adoption, which cheereth our souls with the testimony of
our salvation. And observe that fear is joined to bondage, because it can not
otherwise be, but the law should with wonderful disquietnes vex and torment
our souls, so long as it exercises his power. How fear is joined with
bondage.
Wherefore there is no other remedy for the quieting of them, then whiles God
forgiving our offenses, does favor us as a father his children. By whom we
cry Abba. He has therefore changed the person, that he might express the
state of all the godly: as though he said, ye have received the spirit,
whereby, you as well as we and the residue of all the faithful, do cry. And
the figure mimesis here used of the Apostle is very significante, Mimesis which
is when one takes on him the person of another.
for in the person of the faithful he pronounces the name of father. The
doubling of the name by diverse words, contains an amplification.

For Paul gives to understand that the mercy of God is now so published
through the whole world, that he is indifferently prayed unto in all tongues:
as Augustine notes.

Therefore his meaning was to express the consent amongst all nations.
Whereupon it follows that now there is no difference between Jew and
Gentile, seeing they are knit together amongst them selves. The Prophet Esaias
speaks otherwise, saying, that the tongue of Chanaan, should be common unto
all: yet all one sense, Esai. 19.18.
because he respects not the external form of speech, but the consent of
heart in woorshipping God, and the same, and simple study in professing his
true and pure woorshippe. The word cry is put to express the constancy, as
if he said, we pray not, doubtingly, What is meant by crying unto God.
but boldly we lift up our voice unto heaven.

In deed the faithful under the law did call God father, but not with such
sure confidence, seeing the veil did drive them far from the sanctuary: but
now when an entrance is opened unto us by the blood of Christ, we may
familiarly, and as it were with full mouth glory that we are the sons of
God: from whence this cry proceeds. Finally by this the prophecy of Osee is
fulfilled, I will say unto them: you are my people: and they shall answer
again, thou art our God. Ose. 2.23.
For the more clear the promise is, so much more boldness is there in
prayer.

16 For the spirit. He does not simply say, the spirit of GOD is a
witness to our spirit: but he uses a compounde verb, which may be
translated, to witness together, if contestation were not somewhat else with
the latins. But Paul means, that the spirit of God does give unto us such
testimony, that by the direction and governance thereof, our spirit is
assured the adoption of God is firm. For our mind of it self, except the
testimony of the spirit went before, could not bring unto us, this
confidence. Moreover here is an exposition of the former sentence. For whiles
the spirit testifies that we are the sons of God, it does withal put this
boldness in our hearts that we dare call God our father. And surely seeing it is
the confidence of heart only that opens our mouth, When God is rightly prayed
unto.
except the spirit gave testimony to our hearts of the fatherly love of God,
our tongues would be dombe to utter any prayers. For that principle is always
to be holden, God is not otherwise rightly prayed unto, unless as in mouth we
call him father: so we be surely persuaded in our hearts that he is such one.

Whereunto the other also answers, namely that our faith is not otherwise
proved then by the invocation of God. And therefore not without cause, Paul
calling us unto this proof, shows that then it appears how seriously
every one believes, when they who have embraced the promise of grace, exercise
them selves in prayers. And here those toys of Sophisters touching moral
conjecture are notably refuted: which is nothing else but vncertaynetie and
doubtfulnesse of mind, yea rather wandering and error. And also their
objection is answered: where they demand how a man may be assured of the
will of God. Whence the certainetie of salvation proceeds.
But this certainty proceeds not from man's brain: but is the testimony of
the spirit of God, as he handles more at large in his former Epistle to the
Corinthians, whence also the fuller exposition of this place is to be gathered.
Therefore this sentence stands sure, that none can be called the son of
God, who does not acknowledge him self to be such one: which knowledge is
called science of John, to show fourth the certaynetie thereof. 1. Ioh. 5.19.


17 If we be children. By an argument taken from that is annexed or from the
consequent, he proves that salvation stands herein, if we have God for
our father. The inheritance is ordained for the sons: seeing then God has
adopted us to himself for sons, he has also ordained the inheritance for
us. Secondly, he shows what kind of inheritance that is, namely
celestial: and therefore incorruptible and eternal, such as was manifested in
Christ. By which manifestation both all uncertainty is taken away, and also
the excellency of the inheritance is commended, which we participate with
the only begotten son of God. Albeit the purpose of Paul is (as shortly
after it shall better appear) highly to advance the inheritance promised
unto us, that we contenting our selves with it, might manfully despise the
allurementes of the world, and patiently bear what so ever troubles happen
unto us in the world. If so be that we suffer with him. There are diverse
interpretations of this place, but I like this sense above all others, We are
the fellow heirs of Christ, so that we follow him, the same way he went
unto that inheritance. And so where as he made mention of Christ, his meaning
is (as it were by these degrees) to pass unto this cohortation, the
inheritance of God is therefore ours, because by his grace we are adopted to
be his sons: and least it should be doubtful, the possession thereof is
already delivered unto Christ, whose partakers we are made. By passions and
sufferings the Lords ministers unto us salvation through his free mercy.
And Christ came unto it by the cross: therefore we must go unto it the same
way. Neither is that to be feared, which some stand in awe of, least by this,
Paul did ascribe the cause of eternal glory to our labors, for this kind
of speech, is not unusual in the scriptures: but rather he declares the
order which the Lord follows in ministering salvation unto us, then the
cause. For before he had sufficiently defended the free mercy of God, against
the merits of works: now whiles he exhorts us unto patience, he
disputes not whence salvation comes to us, but how the Lord governs his.

18 For verily I think. Although they do not altogether amiss, who take this
by the way of correction: yet I had rather refer it to the amplifying of the
cohortation, in steed of a preoccupation: to this sense, it ought not to be
grievous unto us, if we must come unto the celestialll glory by diverse
afflictions, seeing if they be compared with the greatness of this glory, they
are nothing. He has put glory to come, Glory to come put for eternal glory.
for eternal glory: as he calls those afflictions of the world, which
pass away suddenly. Hereby it appears this place was ill understood of
the schoolmen, whence they have gathered their destinction of congruo and
condigno. Neither does the Apostle compare the dignity of them both: but
only mitigateth the bitterness of the cross, by the comparison of the
greatness of glory, and that to confirm the minds of the faithful in
patience.

19 For the fervent expectation of the creature, expects for the revelation
of the sons of God. 20 For the creature is subject to vanity, not of it own
will, but for him, who has made it subject in hope. 21 Because the creature
also shall be delivered from the bondage of corruption, into the glorious
liberty of the sons of God. also,

22 For we know that every creature groneth with us also, and trauayleth in
pain together unto this present. 19 For the fervent. He teaches that we have
an example of the patience he exhorts unto, even in the very dumb
creatures. For to let pass the variety of exposicions, I understand this
place thus, that there is no element, neither any part of the world, which not
being (as it were) touched with the feeling of the present evil, intends not
upon the hope of the resurrection. And he puts down two things, namely,
that all creatures travail, and yet are sustained by hope. Whereby also it
appears how great the price of eternal glory is, that it can provoke and
draw al things into desire of it. Furthermore, this speech, expectation
expects, although it be somewhat strange, yet it has a most convenient
sense: for he signifies thereby, yt the creatures being plunged in great
anxietie, and hanging in suspense, with great desire, do expect that day,
which shall openly declare the glory of the sons of God. What is meant by the
revelation of the sons of God. 1. John. 3.2
He calls that the revelation of the sons of God, when we shall be like
unto God: as John says, for although we know we are his sons, yet it has
not appeared. And I have kept the words of Paul, because the translation of
Erasmus seems unto me bolder then were meet, namely, until the sons of
God be manifest, and yet it does not sufficiently express the mind of the
Apostle. For his meaning is not, that the sons of God shall be manifested in
the last day: but then it shall appear how happy, and blessed their estate
is, when they having put off corruption, shall put on celestial glory. For he
therefore attributed hope unto the creatures that want sense, that the
faithful might open their eyes to behold the invisible life, although it lie
yet hid under a deformed habit.

20 For the creature is subject to vanity. He declares the end of the
expectation by the contrary. For because the creatures now subject to
corruption, can not be renewed, before the sons of God be wholly restored,
therefore they coveting their instauratio^ or renewing, respect the
manifestation of ye celestial kingdom. He says they are subject to
vanity, because they abide not in firm and sure estate, but as frail and
unstable, How the creatures are subject to vanity.
they pass away with swift course.

For there is no doubt but he sets vanity against the perfection of
nature. Not of it own will. Seeing there is no sense in such creatures, will
here assuredly is to be taken for natural inclination, whereby the whole
nature of things is carried to his conservation and perfection. What so ever
therefore is holden under corruption it is against the will of nature.
Prosopopeia is when we give that to things without life which is proper to
living things etc.
But by the figure prosopopeia he brings in all the parts of the world, as
though they were endued with sense: that we might the rather be ashamed of
our sottishenesse, unless the ruinous staggering of the world which we see,
do lift us up higher. But for him. He propounds an example of obedience in
all creatures, and adds that the same proceeds of hope, because hence
comes the alacrity of the sun, moan, and all the stars, to run their
perpetual course, hence comes the sedulous obsequie of the earth to bring
forth fruits, hence comes it the air is never weried with moving, hence
comes the ready power of the waters to flow, because God has given every
thing his charge: and has not only by precise commandment charged what he
would have done, but also inwardly has put hope of renouation. For in that
woeful dissipation which followed the fall of Adam, the whole frame of the
world should fall every moment, and all the parts thereof should fainte, except
some certain secret stabilitie proceeding else where did stay them. It were
therefore too absurd, that the earnest of the spirit should be of less
force in the sons of God, then a secret instinct in dead creatures. How so
ever then the creatures do naturally incline another way, yet because it
pleases God to make them subject unto vanity, they obey his commandment:
and because he has given them hope of a better condition, therein they
nourishe them selves, differring their desire, until the incorruption promised
to them he reueiled. It is by the figure prosopopeia that he now attributes
hope unto them, as before to will and nill.

21 Because the creature also. He shows how the creature in hope is made
subject unto vanity: namely because it shall come to pass that at length it
shall be delivered: as Esaias testifies, and yet Peter also more clearly
confirms.

And here verily it is meet for us to consider what a horrible curse we have
deserved, The condemnation of mankind is graven in heaven, earth and all
creatures.
seeing all the harmless creatures from earth to heaven have suffered
punishment for our sins. For in that they labor under corruption, that
comes to pass through our fault, so the condemnation of mankind is graven
in heaven, earth, and all the creatures. Again hereby appears unto how
excellent glory the sons of God shall come, for the amplifiyng and setting
forth whereof, all creatures shall be renewed.

Finally, he means not that the creatures shall be partakers of the same
glory, with the sons of God, but in their kind they shall be partakers of a
better state: because GOD will restore the world, now fallen with mankind,
into perfection. But what kind of integrity shall be as well in beasts as in
plants and mettalles, it is not meet curiously to search, neither is it
lawful: because the chiefest part of corruption is utter decay. Certain
subtle, but scarce sober men, demand whither all kind of beasts shall be
unmortall: but if these speculations may have loose reins, whither will they
carrye us? Therefore let us be content with this simple doctrine, that there
shall be such a temperature, and such a decent order, that nothing shall
appear either deformed, or ruinous.

22 For we know. He repeateth the same sentence again, that he might make
a passage unto us: although, that is now said, has the force and form of a
conclusion. For in that the creatures are subject unto corruption, and that not
by a natural appetite, but by the ordinance of God. Secondly in that they
have hope, in time to come to put of corruption, it follows they mourn as a
woman trauayling, until they be delivered. And it is a most apt and fit
similitude, that we might know, this mourning whereof he speaks is not
vain nor dead: because at length it shall bring forth a joyful and happy
fruit. The sum is, the creatures neither are content with the present
state, neither yet so travail, that they should fall away without remedy: but
they travail, because there abides for them a renewing into a better state.

And when he says they mourn together, How the creatures mourn together.
he does not mean they are tied amongst themselves by a mutual anxiety, but he
joins the^ for companions to us. The particle hitherto or unto this present,
serves to mitigate the tediousnes of the daily languore. For if the creatures
have continued so many ages in their mourning, how inexcusable shall our
tenderness or rather cowardlines be, if in the short course of a frail life we
faint?

23 And not only the creature, but we also which have the first beginnings of
the spirit: even we do mourn in our selves, waiting for the adoption, the
redemption of our bodies. 24 For we are saved by hope: but hope that is seen,
is not hope: for how can a man hope for that which he sees? 25 But if we hope
for that we see not, we do with patience abide for it. 23 And not only. There
are some who think the Apostles mind here, is to exaggerate ye dignity of our
blessedness to come, because al things wish for it with fervent desire: not only
the unreasonable creatures, but we also who are regenerate by ye spirit of God.
Which sentence truly may be defended. Yet it seems unto me to be a
comparison of the greater and the lesser: as though he said, the excellency of
our glory to come is of so great price to the elements also wanting sense and
reason, yt they burn with a certain desire of it: much more ought we who are
illuminated by the spirit of God, both by firmness of faith, and contention
of study aspire and strive unto so passing a good thing. And he requires a
twofold affection in the faithful: namely that they being pressed with the
feeling of the present myserie, mourn. A twofold affection required in the
faithful.
Secondly, that nevertheless they do patiently expect a deliverance. For he
would that they being lift up with the expectation of the blessedness to come,
should with stoutnes of mind overcome all the present evils: yt they might not
consider, what they are, but what they shall be. Which have the first beginnings.
Whereas some interpret first fruits, a rare, and singular excellency, that I
like not at all: and therefore to avoid doubtfulnes, I choose rather to
translate it, first beginnings. For I do not with the^ take it to be spoken of
the Apostles only, but of al ye faithful, who in this world are only
sprinkled with drops of ye spirit, or certainly when they have profited very
well, being endued with a certain measure thereof, are yet far from the
perfection thereof. These therefore are unto the Apostle the first beginnings or
first fruits. Whereunto ye whole or entire increase is opposed. For seeing we
are not yet endued with fulness, it is no marvel though we be moved with
disquietnes. And whereas he repeateth, we our selves, and adds in our selves,
yt he does for the more veheme^cy, yt he might express a more fervent desire.
And he does not only name and desire, but a mourning: for where there is a
feeling of misery, there is also mourning. Expecting the adoption. Adoption
here improperly yet not without good reason, Adoption put for that inheritance
we are adopted unto, and the fruition thereof.
is called the fruitio^ of that inheritance whereunto we are adopted. For Paul
means that that eternal decree of God, whereby he has chosen us for sons
before the world were made, of the which he testifies unto us by the gospel,
and the faith whereof he seals by his spirit in our hearts, should be void,
unless the promised resurrection were firm and sure, which is an effect
thereof. For to what end is god our father, but that this earthly pilgrimage
being ended, the celestial inheritance might receive us? Hereunto apperteyneth
the redemption of our body which is straightwaies added. For the price of our
redemption was so paid of Christ, that death nevertheless might hold us yet
bound in his bonds: yea we carry it within us, whereupon it follows that the
sacrifice of the death of Christ, should be in vain and fruitles, except
there appeared fruit in the celestial renouation.

24 For we are saved by hope. Paul confirms his exhortation by an other
argument. Namely, because our salvation cannot be separated from a kind of
death, which he proves by the nature of hope. For seeing hope extends it
self unto things not yet known by experience, and represents unto our
minds the image of things which are hid and far off, whatsoever is either
openly seen, or holden with the hand, cannot be hoped for. But Paul takes it
for a thing so granted that it cannot be denied, so long as we live in this
world, our salvation stands in hope: whereby it follows that it is laid
up with God, far above our senses. Whereas he says that is no hope which is
seen, it is verily a hard speech, but yet such as observes not the sense,
for he goes about simply to teach, seeing hope is of good things to come, and
not present, it can never be joined with manifest possession. So then if any
think much to mourn, they must need^ euert the order is set down of God, who
does not call his unto the triumph before he have exercised them in the
warfare of sufferance. But seeing it has pleased God to nourish our salvation
as it were secretly in his bosom, it is expedient for us to labor in earth,
to be oppressed, to mourn, to be afflicted, yea to lie as it were half dead,
or like unto those are dead. For they who covet a visible salvation, they put
them selves by it, renouncing hope which is ordained of God to be the keeper of
it.

25. But if we hope for that we see not. This is an argument taken from the
antecedent to the consequent: because patience necessarily follows hope. For
if it be grievous to want the good thing thou desire: unless thou support and
comfort thy self by patience, thou must fall by desperation. So then hope
always draws patience with it. So it is a most fit conclusion, namely, that
ye does vanquish away whatsoever ye Gospel promises of the glory of the
resurrection, except by bearing the cross and tribulations patiently, we pass
through this present life. For it life be invisible, then we must have death
before our eyes if glory be invisible, then ignominy is present. Therefore if
thou will comprise this place in few words, The salvation of the godly is
laid up in hope.
thou may digest the arguments of Paul into this form. Salvation is laid
up in hope for all the faithful: it is the property of hope, to inte^d upon
good things to come, and which are absent: therefore the salvation of the
godly is hidden up. Now hope is not otherwise mainteyned then by patience:
therefore the salvation of the godly is not consummated but by patience.
Patience is an inseparable companion of faith.
Finally, here we have a notable place, that patience is an inseparable
companion of faith. The reason whereof is at hand; because whiles we comfort
our selves with the hope of a better estate, the sense or feeling of the
present miseries is mollified and mitigated, that they are not so hard to be
^oure.

26 Likewise the spirit also helps our infirmities: for we know not what to
pray as we ought, but the spirit it self makes request for us with sighs,
which cannot be expressed. 27 But he that searches the hearts, knows what
is the meaning of the spirit: for he makes request for the Saints, according
to the will of God. 26 Likewise the spirit also. Least the faithful should
object, that they are weaker, then they are able to bear so many and so hard
burdens, he sets before them the help of the spirit, which is abundantly
sufficient to overcome al difficulties. There is no cause then, why any should
complain, that the bearing of the cross is above their strength, seeing we
are strengthened by virtue from above. And the greek word Sunantilambanesthai,
to help together is very significant, namely, yt the spirit receiving unto it
part of the burden, wherewith our infirmity is oppressed, does not only help us
and succor us, but does so ease us, as though it undertook some part of the
burden with us. And in the word infirmities, the plural number has his
augmentation. For seeing experience does teach us that unless we be stayed by
the power of God, innumerable ruins are straight ways at hand: Paul therefore
admonishes, that notwithstanding we are every way weak, and diverse
infirmities threate^ falling unto us, yet there is aid enough in the spirit of
God, so that we shall never be moved or ouerthrown by any heap of evils.
Howbeit these helps of the spirit teach us more certainly, that through the
ordinance of God it is so brought to pass, that by mourninges and sighs we
should ascend to our redemption. For we know not what to pray. Above he spoke
of the testimony of the spirit, whereby we know God to be our father, and
whereunto we trusting, dare call upon God as father: now repeating again this
second member of invocation, he says we are taught of the same spirit how he
is to be called upon, and what is to be asked of him by prayers. And very aptly
he has annexed prayers to the careful, or heavy desires of the faithful,
because God does not therefore afflict his with myseries, that they should
inwardly devour up a hidden or secret sorrow: Wherefore the godly are afflicted.
but that by prayer they should exonerate and ease themselves, and so exercise
their faith. And albeit I know there are diverse interpretations brought upon
this place, yet the meaning of Paul seems unto me, to be simply thus, that
we are blind in praying unto God: because although we feel our evils, yet our
minds are more intricated and confounded, then that they can rightly elect
what is convenient or expedient. If any man except, Objection.
yt there is a rule prescribed unto us in ye word of God: I answer, our
affections nevertheless abide oppressed with darkness, Answer.
until the spirit direct them by his light. But the spirit it self makes
request for us. Although indeed or by the event it appears not as yet, that
our prayers are hard of God, nevertheless, Paul gathers that even in the
very study of praying the presence of Gods grace already shyneth, because no
man of himself can conceive holy and godly prayers. Indeed the faithless
babble prayers, but with mere mocking of God: because there is nothing in
them, either sincere, or serious, or rightly composed. Wherefore the manner of
praying well must needs be caught of the spirit: he therefore calls those
sighs vneuarrable, wherinto we burst through the vehement motion of the
spirit: because they far exceed ye capacity of our wit. And ye spirit of
God is said to make intercession for us, not yt indeed humbly kneeling it does
abase it self to pray or mourn, How the spirits is said to make intercession
for us.
but because it stirs up those prayers in our hearts, wherewithal it is
meet we should be touched: Secondly it does so move our hearts that with
their feruencie they pearce unto the very heaven. And Paul spoke so to the end
he might more significantly attribute al yt unto the grace of ye spirit.
Indeed we are bidden knock, but no man can of himself premeditate one
syllable, unless by the secret instinct of his spirit, God knock upon us, and
so open our hearts unto him.

27 But he that searches the hearts, knows the cogitations. This is a
notable reason to confirm our faith or confidence that we are heard of God,
whiles we pray by his spirit. For he knows familiarly our desires, as the
cogitations of his spirit. And here the propriety of the word, know, is
to be noted: for it signifies that God does not consider those motions of the
spirit as new and insolent, or reject them as absurd: but acknowledge them,
and also graciously receive them as known to him and approved of him. Therefore
as Paul testified of late, that God does then help us, whiles he does as it
were bring us into his own bosom: so now he adds another consolation,
namely, that our prayers, whereof he is the moderatour, are not in vain. The
reason also is added straightwaies: because in so doing he conformeth us to his
will. Whereby it falls out that that cannot be in vain, which is agreeing to
his will, whereby althinges are governed. Here also we may learn that consent
with the will of God, is the chiefest thing in prayer, which consent our own
desires hold not fast tied unto them. Wherefore if we would have our prayers
acceptable unto God, let us beseech him to moderate them according to his will.

28 Also we know that al things work together for the best unto them that love
God: namely to them who are called Saints according to his purpose. 29 For
those which he knew before, he also predestinate to be made like to the image
of his son, that he might be the first borne amongst many brethren. 30 And
whom he has predestinate, them also he called, and whom he called, them also
he justified, and whom he justified, them also he glorified. 28 Also we know.
Out of the premises he now concludes, that the miseries of this life are so
far from hindering our salvation, that rather they further it. Neither
lets it, that he has put the particle illatiue, seeing it is no noualtie
with him, so to confound aduerbs: although this conclusion does also conteyne
a Preoccupation. For here the sense of flesh exclaimeth, that it appears not
God does hear our prayers, seeing our afflictions proceed always in the same
course. Therefore the Apostle preuenteth that, saying, although God does not by
and by help his, yet he does not forsake them; because by a wonderful skill,
he turns those things to their salvation, which seemed discommodities. If
any had rather read this sentence by it self, as though Paul went about by a
new argument, to prove that adversities which further our salvation, are not
heavily and grievously to be borne, I do not gainstande it. In the mean while
the counsel of Paul is not bscure, although the elect and reprobate are
indifferently subject to the like evils, yet there is great difference: because
God instructing the faithful by afflictions, does procure their salvation. And
we are to remember that Paul speaks not but of adversities: as though he
said, whatsoever things happen to the godly, Adversities by the providence of
God, are made commodious to ye faithful^
they are so tempered from above, that that which the world thinks to be
hurtful, the issue declares it to be profitable. For albeit that is true
Augustine says, even sins through the direction of Gods providence, are so
far from hurting the Saints, that they serve rather to their health: yet it
apperteyneth not unto this place, where he entreats of the cross. And note
that he has comprehended the sum of piety under the love of God: as indeed
the whole study of righteousness depends thereon. To those who are called
according to his purpose. This parcel seems to be added by the way of
correction: least any should think that the faithful, because they love God,
do obtain by their desert, that they receive such fruit by adversities. For
we know when the matter of salvation is in hand, men would gladlye begin at
them selves, and feign unto themselves preparations whereby they may prevent
the grace of God. Therefore Paul teaches, that those whom he called the
woorshippers of God, were elected before of him. For it is sure the order is
therefore noted, that we might know whereas all things fall out for the health
of the Godly, that depends upon the free adoption of God, as the first cause.
Yea Paul shows, that the faithful love not God, before they be called of
him: as in another place he admonishes, that the Galathians were first known
of God, Gal. 4.9.
before they knew him. Verily, this of Paul is true, that afflictions profit
none to salvation, but them love God: God preuenteth us by his grace and we do
not prevent him by our love.
yet that of John is as true, namely, that then at length he is begun to be
loved of us, when he has prevented us by his free grace.

Finally, the calling Paul speaks of here, is large. For it must not be
restrained, unto the manifestation of election, whereof mention shall be made
shortly after, but simply it is opposed to man's course: as though Paul had
said, the faithful get not unto themselves godliness by their own motion, but
rather it is brought by the hand of God, so far as God has chosen them to
himself for his own. The word purpose does plainly exclude, whatsoever may
be imagined to be brought of me^: as though Paul denied the causes of our
election to be sought for else where, then in the secret pleasure of God: which
thing appears more clearly out of ye 1. to the Ephe. 1. and ye 2. Tim. 1.
Where also the Antithesis or contrariety of this purpose, Ephe. 1. 2. Tim. 1.
and humane righteousness is plainly expressed. Yet it is not to be doubted, but
Paul did therefore here precisely say, our salvation is founded upon the
election of God, that he might thence make a passage unto yt which follows
straightwaies, namely, ye afflictions which make us like unto Christ are
destinated to us by the same celestial decree, that he might as it were by a
certain bond of necessity, link our salvation, with the bearing of the
cross.

29 Because whom he foreknew. Therefore by the order of election he declares,
how all afflictions are nothing else, then a mean whereby they are conformed
unto Christ, ve^. 17.
which thing to be necessary, he testified before. Wherefore there is no cause
why it should grieve us, or be bitter and heavy unto us to be afflicted:
except we take in ill part the election of the Lord, whereby we are foreordeined
unto life: except we be unwilling to represent in us the image of the son of
God, whereby we are prepared unto the celestial glory. And the foreknowledge
of God whereof Paul here makes mention, What is meant by foreknowledge.
is not a bare foreknowledge as some unskillful bodies do foolishly imagine:
but adoption whereby he always discerns his sons from the reprobate. In which
sense Peter says, the faithful were elected unto the sanctification of
spirit, according to the foreknowledge of God. Wherefore, they I spoke on,
gather foolishly, that God has elected no others, then those he foresaw to be
worthy of his grace. For Peter does not flatter the faithful, as though every
one were elected for his merit: but calling them unto the eternal counsel of
God, does put them beside all worthiness. And also in this place, Paul
repeateth by another word, that which he touched lately concerning purpose.
Whence it follows that this knowledge depends upon the good pleasure of
God, because God foreknew nothing out of himself, touching those he would
adopt: but only signed whom he would elect. The word Proorizein, which they
translate predestinate, is referred unto ye circumstance of this place: because
Paul only means, ye God has so decreed, yt whomsoever he has adopted, the
same should carry the image of Christ: for he did not simply say, that they
might be conformed unto Christ, but to the image of Christ: that he might show
there is a lively and manifest example in Christ, which is set before all the
sons of God to imitate. Finally, the sum is, Christ is the pattern of all
the sons of God.
that the free adoption wherein our salvation consists, cannot be separated
from this other decree, wherein he has allotted us to bear the cross:
because none can be an heir of the kingdom of heaven, who first is not made
like unto the only begotten son of God. That he might be the first begotten,
or that he should be. For both ways the Greek infinitive Einai may be
resolved, yet I rather allow of the former. Furthermore, in that Christ is
called the first begottten, Paul's mind is only to note this, if Christ obtain
ye prerogative amongst al ye sons of God, he is worthily given unto us for an
example, that we should refuse nothing, which he has voutsafed to take upon
him. Therefore that the celestial father might by all means testify the
right and dignity which he has given unto his son, he will have all who^ he
has adopted into the inheritance of his kingdom to be conformed or made like
to his example. For although there be in show a diverse condition of the godly,
as there is some variety between the members of a man's body: yet is every one
coupled with his head. Therefore as the first borne does bear the name of ye
family, so Christ is placed in an high degree: not only yt he might excel in
honor among the faithful, but also ye under the common note of fraternity he
might contain al under him.

30 And whom he has predestinate, them also he called. Now that he might in a
clearer sort prove how true it is, that that conformation or conformity and
likelinesse with the humility of Christ, is healthful to us, he uses a
gradation, wherein he teaches, that the society of the cross is so linked
with our vocation, justification and glorificatio^, yt they cannot be
separated. Howbeit that the readers might better understand the meaning of ye
Apostle, they are to remember that, I admonished before, namely, What the word
predestinate notes.
yt ye word predestinate, notes not election, but ye purpose or decree of God,
whereby he has ordained for his a cross to be borne: and now teaching that the
same are called, he signifies that God does not hold ye close within himself
which he has determined of them, but has disclosed it: that they might
quietly and patiently undertake the condition laid upon them. For here vocation
or calling, as the inferior is distinguished from secret election. Least any
therefore should object, that no man knows what condition God has appointed
for him: the Apostle says, God by his calling has openly testified of his
secret counsel. And this testimony consists not in the sole external
preaching, but it has the efficacy of the spirit coupled: because the speech
is of the elect, whom God does not only speak unto by voice, but also
inwardly draws. Justification might fitly be extended unto the continual
tenor of the grace of God, even from the time of our calling unto the hour of
death: but because Paul in the whole Epistle uses this word for the free
imputation of righteousness, no necessity does compel to decline from this
sense. For the counsel of Paul is this, that there is a more precious reward
offered, then that we ought to refuse afflictions. For what is more to be
wished for, then to be reconciled to God, that our miseries be no more tokens
of malediction or curse, neither tend to our destruction? Therefore he adds
straightwayes, that the same are glorified, who are now pressed with the
cross, so that their miseries and reproaches damage them nothing at all.
Although glorification is not yet exhibited but in our head, yet because we do
in a manner see in him now the inheritance of eternal life, his glory
brings such assurance of our glory to us, that woorthely our hope is matched
or compared to present possession. And add, that Paul according to the phrase
of ye Hebrew tongue has used the pretertence in the verbes, for the present
tence. Surely it is out of question, that a continual actio^ is noted, The
godly loose as jot of glory whiles they are humbled.
to this sense: whom God now after his own counsel exercises with adversity,
those he also calls and justifies into the hope of salvation: so that they
loose no jot of glory whiles they are humbled. For albeit the present miseries
do deforme it before the world: yet before God and his Angels it always
appears perfect. This therefore is the meaning of Paul by this gradation, that
the afflictions of the faithful whereby they are humbled, do not apperteyne
to any other end, then that they having obtained the glory of the celestial
kingdom, might come unto the glory of the resurrection of Christ, with whom
they are now crucified.

31 What shall we say then to these things? If God be on our side, who can be
against us? 32 Who spared not his own son, but gave him for us all, how shall
he not with him give us al things also. 33 Who shall lay any thing to the
charge of Gods chosen? It is God that justifies. 34 Who shall condemn? It is
Christ which is dead? Yea or rather which is risen again, who is also at the
right hand of God, and makes request for us. 31 What shall we say then? Now
the matter being sufficiently proved, he bursteth forth into exclamations,
whereby he declares with what magnanimity of mind the faithful ought to be
endued, whiles adversities press them unto desperation. And in these words he
teaches how that invincible fortitude, which over comes all tentations
consists in the fatherly favor of God. For we know that judgment is wont
no otherwise to be given of the love or hatred of God, then by the
consideration of the present state. Therefore when things fall out unhappily,
sorrow possessing our minds, it drives away all confidence and consolation,
but Paul cries out, yt the beginning must be further sought forth: and
therefore they reason preposterously who stay upon ye sorrowful spectacle of our
warfare. Indeed I confess the scourges of God in themselves, What the scourges
of God are in themselves.
and by themselves are worthily counted signs of Gods wrath: but because they
are blessed in Christ, Paul commands the Saints before al things to lay
hold of the fatherly love of God: that trusting to this sheelde, they may
boldly triumph over all evil. For this is a brazen wall unto us, that by the
favor of God we should be secure against all dangers. Yet his meaning is
not that we should have no adversity: but he promises victory against all
sorts of enemies

If God be on our side. This is the chief, and surely the only stay that
supporteth us in all temptations. For except God be gracious unto us, although
all things laugh upon us, yet no certain trust can be conceived. And on the
contrary his only favor is a sufficient solace in all sorrow, The favor of
God the only fountain of all consolation.
and a strong defense against all tempests of adversities. And hereunto
apperteyne so many testimonies of scripture, where the saints trusting to the
only power of God, dare despise whatsoever thing comes against them in this
world. If I shall walk in the midst of the shadow of death, Psalm. 23.4. Psalm.
11.1. Psalm. 3.7.
I will not fear evil, because thou art with me. I trust in the Lord, what
shall flesh do unto me? I will not be afraid of a thousand of people that have
compassed me round about. For there is no power under heaven, or above heaven,
which ca^ resist the arm of the lord. Therefore he being our defendour, no
harm at al is to be feared. Wherefore he declares true trust in God who being
content with his protection, fears nothing so, yt he should dispai^e* surely
the faithful are oftentimes shaken: but are never utterly cast down. Finally
hither tends ye counsel of the Apostle, namely, that a godly mind ought to
stand upon the inward testimony of the spirit, and not depend upon external
things.

32 Who spared not his own son. Because it stands us greatly upon, to be
so thoroughly persuaded of the fatherly love of God, yt we may persist in this
glorying: therefore Paul brings forth ye price of our reconciliatio^, to the
end he might prove that God does favor us. And surely this is a notable and
rich experiment of inestimable love, yt the father has not refused to bestow
his son upon our salvation. From thence therefore Paul draws an argument
from the greater to the less, seeing he had nothing more notable, or precious,
or excellent then him, undoubtedly he will neglect nothing, which he foreseeth
may be profitable for us. This place ought to admonish and awake us to
consider what Christ brings with him to us, to behold his riches: for as he
is the pledge of the unspeakable love of God toward us, so he is not sent
bare or void unto us: but being filled with all heavenly treasures, To deliver,
for to give unto death.
least they which possess him should want any thing, that might make to
perfect felicity. And to deliver, here signifies to give unto death.

33 Who shall lay any thing to the charge. The first and chiefest consolation
which the godly have in adversity, is that they be certainly persuaded of the
fatherly love of God: because hence comes both the certainty of salvation,
and the quiet peace of conscience, whereby adversities are made sweet, or at the
least the bitterness of sorrow is mitigated. Therefore a more apt exhortation unto
patience cannot be brought, then when we understand that God is gracious unto
us. And therefore Paul makes this confidence the beginning of consolation,
whereby it behooves the faithful to be strengthened against all adversities.
And because man's salvation is first wounded by accusation, and then overthrown
by condemnation: he takes away the danger of accusation in the first place.
For there is one God, before whose tribunal seat we must all stand. Seeing
then he justifies us, there remains no place for accusation. Indeed the
Antitheses seem not to be exactly digested into their parts: for he should
rather have opposed these two members between themselves. Who shall accuse? It
is Christ that makes intercession. Then to have added the other two, Who shall
condemn? It is God that justifies. For the absolution or deliverance of God,
answers comdemnation: and the defense or supportation of Christ, answeareth
accusation. But Paul, not without cause, has transposed the^ another way,
going about to arm the sons of God from top to toe (as they say) with the
confidence of God, which might banish a far off, anxieties and fears. More
emphatically therefore he gathers that the sons of God are not subject to
accusation, because God does justify, then if he had said, because Christ
is their Patron: for so he expresses better how the way is far shut up
to judgment, where the judge does pronounce himself, that he altogether
exempteth him from guiltiness, whom the accusator would draw unto
punishment. And there is also the like reason, of the second part of the
Antithesis or contrariety. For he shows that the faithful are far from
the peril of condemnation, seeing Christ by making satisfaction for their
sins, has prevented the judgment of God, and by his intercession, has not
only abolished death, but also put our sins out of rememe^raunce, that they
come not into account. The sum is, that we are not only by the present
remedies, when we come unto ye judgment seat of GOD, to be delivered from
fear: but God does help more, that he might better provide for our
confidence.

Howbeit here we are to note yt, with I have always admonished of before this,
namely, that to justify with Paul, is nothing else, then being loosed from the
sentence of God, What it is to justify.
to be counted for just. And it is no hard matter to prove that in this
present place, where Paul reasons from the putting down of one contrary
unto the destruction of another: if so that to absolve and to receive for
guilty be contrary. Therefore God will not admit any accusation against us:
because he has absolved us from every offense. For undoubtedly the Devil is
the accuser of all the godly: the law of God it self, and also their own
conscience does reprove them: but all these prevail nothing before that judge
who does justify them. Therefore no adversary can shake, much less overthrow
our salvation. Furthermore, he so names the elect, that he doubts nothing of
himself to be in the number of them. Here is a general rule prescribed.
And that not by special revelation (as certain Sophisters feign) but by the
common sense of all the godly. Let every one therefore of the godly by the
example of Paul, apply that unto himself which is here said of the elect.
Otherwise if he did bury election in the secret counsel of God, this
doctrine were not only cold, but should lie altogether dead. But seeing we
know, that that is purposely here uttered which every one of the godly ought to
apply unto himself, out of question we are all of us lead unto the touchstone
of our vocation, that we be resolved we are the sons of God.

34 Who shall condemn? As none can prevail by accusing, when the judge has
absolved: so there remains no condemnation when the laws are satisfied, and
now the penalty is paid. But Christ is the man, who once has suffered the
punishment due unto us, thereby professing himself to undertake our turns,
that he might deliver us: he therefore that hereafter will condemn us, must call
Christ himself again unto death, And he is not only dead: but by his
resurrection has appeared Victorer of death, and has triumphed over the power
thereof. And he adds yet more, namely, that he sits at the right hand of
the father: How Christ is said to fit on the right hand of the father. Ephe.
1.20.
whereby is meant, that he obteyneth the Lordship, and full authority of heaven
and earth, as it is said to the Ephesians.

Lastly, he teaches that he sits so, that he is the perpetual advocate,
and intercessour for the defense of our salvation. Whence it follows that if
any will condemn us, he does not only make void the death of Christ, but also
fights against that incomparable power, wherewith the father has adorned
him, placing him in the highest degree with such power. This so great boldness,
which dare triumph against the devil, death, sin, and the gates of hell, ought
to rest in all godly hearts: because our faith is no faith, unless we do
certainly persuade our selves that Christ is ours, and that the father is
merciful unto us in him. Nothing therefore can be imagined more pestilent, or
more deadly then the school doctrine of the uncertainty of salvation. Who
makes incercession for us. It was necessary this should be plainly added,
least the divine majesty of Christ should make us afraid. Although therefore
from his high throne he holds all things in subjection under his feet, yet
Paul gives unto him the person of a mediator: Of whose countenance to be
afraid, were absurd, seeing he does not only gently inuit us unto him, How
Christ is said to make intercession for us*
but also appears an intercessour for us, before the father. Finally, we must
not measure this intercession by carnal sense. For he is not to be thought to
beseech his father humbly upon his knees, with his hands stretched out: but
because he appears still with his death and resurrection, which are in steed
of an eternal intercession and have the efficacy of lively prayer, that they
may reconcile the father to us, and make him intreatable, he is worthily said
to make intercession for us.

35 Who shall separate us from the love of Christ? Shall tribulation? or
anguish? or persecution? or hunger? or nakedness? or danger? or sword? 36 As it
is written, for thy sake we die daily, we are counted as sheep appointed for
the slaughter. 37 But in all those things we overcome by him who has loved us.
35 Who shall separate? Now that security or boldness is extended unto inferior
things. For he which is persuaded of the love of God toward him, is able to
stand in most grievous afflictions: which are therefore wont so greatly to
torment men, either because they think not, they happen by ye providence of
God, or they interpret the^ to be tokens of Gods wrath, or yt they think they
are forsaken of God, or that they look for no end, or remember not there is a
better life, or some other such like. But ye mind which is purged from such
errors shall easily be at rest and be quiet. Finally, this is ye meaning of
the words, whatsoever happens, we must stand in this faith, namely that God
who has once loved us, will never cease to care for us. For he does not
simply say, there is nothing can separate God from the love of us: but he
would that the knowledge and lively sense of love which he testifies unto us
should so floorish in our hearts, that it might always shine in the mist of
afflictions. For as the clouds, although they darken the clear sight of the
son, yet do not altogether deprive us of his shine: even so God in
adversities, sends through clouds, the beams of his grace, least any
tentation should ouerwhelme us with despair: yea our faith being supported by
the promises of God, as by wings, ought through all impedimentes which are in
the way to pearce up into the heavens. Indeed it is true that adversities are
tokens of Gods wrath, if they be esteemed by themselves: but when pardon and
reconciliation is gone before, we are to be resolved, that although God does
chasten, yet he will never forget his mercy. Verily he admonishes what we have
deserved, but withal he testifies that he has a care of our salvation,
whiles he provoke us unto repentance. And he calls it the love of Christ.
Because the father in a manner does open his bowelles unto us in him. Seeing
then the love of God is not to be sought for out of Christ, woorthily does
Paul call us hither: that in the beams of the grace of Christ, our faith
might behold the clear countenance of the Father. The sum is, that this
faith ought not to be shaken with any adversity: for God being gracious
unto us, nothing is against us. Whereas some take the love of Christ passiuely,
for that love wherewith he is loved of us, as though Paul armed us unto
invincible fortitude: this imagination is easily refuted by the whole course of
Paul's speech: and straight way also Paul will remove all doubt herein, by
defining this love more clearly. Tribulation? or anguishe? or persecution? The
Pronowne masculine which he put down of late, contains a secret Emphasis or
force.

For when he might have said in the newter gender, what shall separate us:
he chose rather to attribute the person unto the dombe creatures, that he
might commit into the fight with us, so many champions, as there be kinds of
temptations which assault our faith. How tribulation, anguish, and persecution
differ.
Furthermore these three differ amongst themselves thus, that tribulation
comprehends every kind of grief and discommoditie: but anguish is an inward
passion, namely whiles extremities drive us unto our wits end. Such was the
angush of Abraham and Lot, whiles the one was constrained to offer his wife,
the other his daughters: because they being hard bestead, and wrapped in on
every side, could not tell what to do. Persecution properly notes
tyrannical violence, whereby the sons of God are unworthily vexed of the
wicked. And although Paul denies the sons to be destressed, or to be
brought into narrow straites yet he is not contrary to himself: 2. Cor. 4.^.
because he does not simply make them free from paynefull care, but he
understands they are delivered: as also the examples of Abraham and Lot
declare.

36 As it is written. Psalm. 44.2^*
This testimony brings great weight unto the cause. For he insinuates, how
we ought to be so far off from falling away through the fear of death,
that this is almost fatal to the servants of God, to have death as it were
always present before their eyes. It is probable or like that the miserable
oppression of the people under the tyranny of Antiochus is described in that
Psalm: because it is precisely expressed, that they raged against the
worshippers of God so cruelly for no other cause, then for the hatred of true
godliness. There is also added a notable protestation, that yet they fell not
away from the covenant of God: which thing I suppose was chiefly noted of
Paul, neither does it let, that the Saints there complain of calamity,
which then pressed them otherwise then it was wont. For seeing, they first
having testified their innocence, then show how they were oppressed with so
many evils: an argument is conveniently taken thence, namely that it is no new
thing if the Lord permit the godly without deserte to be cruelly entreated of
the wicked. And it is out of question that the same comes not to pass, but
for their profit: seeing the scripture teaches that it is far from the
righteousness of God, Genesis 18.23.
to destroy the just with the unjust: but rather it is meet, to requite
affliction to those do afflict, and deliverance to those are afflicted. 2.
These. 1.6, 7
Secondly they affirm that they suffer for the Lord: and Christ denounces
them blessed that suffer for righteousness sake. Mat. 5.10.
And whereas they say they die daily, thereby they signify, that death does so
hang over their heads, that such a life differs nothing in a manner from
death.

37 We overcome by him. That is, We wrestle forth always and escape, I have
retained the word which Paul uses, superuincing, though it be not so common
with the latins For sometimes it happens that the faithful seem to be
overcome, and to lie forlorn, the Lord does not only so exercise them, but
also so humble them. Yet this ishue is always given, that they obtain the
victory. Nevertheless to the end they might consider, whence this invincible
strength is, he repeateth yt again which he said before. For he does not
only teach, that God, because he loves us, therefore puts his hand under
us to stay us: but also he confirms that same sentence of the love of Christ.
And this one word does sufficiently declare, that the Apostle speaks not
of the feruencie of that love, wherewith we love God, but of the fatherly love
of God and Christ toward us, the persuasion whereof being thoroughly printed in
our hearts, it will always draw us from the gates of hell into the light of
life, and will be of sufficient strength to support us.

38 For I am persuaded that neither death, nor life, nor angel, nor
principality, nor powers, nor things present, nor things to come. 39 Nor
height, nor depth, nor any other creature shall be able to separate us from the
love of God, which is in Christ Jesus. That he might the rather confirm us in
those things which are felt, now he bursteth also into hyperbolicall or
excessive speeches, Whatsoever (quoth he) is in life or death, which may seem
to be able to separate us from God, shall prevail nothing. Yea the Angels
themselves if they go about to overthrow this foundation, shall not hurt us.
Neither does it withstand that angels are ministering spirits, Heb. 1.4.
ordained for the health of the elect. For Paul here reasons from that which
is impossible: as he does also to the Galathians. Where in we may observe
how all things ought to be vile unto us, Gal. 1.4.
in respect of the glory of God: seeing it is lawful for the maintenance of
his truth, not to care yea even for the angels. By the names of principalities
and powers angels are also signified being so called, because they are the
special instruments of Gods power. Why angels are called principalities and
powers.
And these two words are added, to the end that if the word Angels were not
significant enough, by these some what more might be expressed. Except you had
rather understand it thus, neither angels, and whatsoever high powers there
are: which is a kind of speech, when we talk of things that are unknown to
us, and exceeding our capacity.

38 Neither things present, nor things to come. Although he speaks
hyperbolically or excessiuely, yet in deed he affirms, yt by no continuance
of time it can come to pass, that we should be separated from the grace of
God: which was necessary to have been added: because we are not only to fight
with the sorrow which we feel of the present euilles: but also with fear and
carefulnes, wherewithal the dangers to come do vex us. The meaning therefore
is, that we are not to fear, least the continuance of myseries how long so
ever it be, should put out the faith of adoption. This does plainly impugn the
scholemen, who babble that no man is sure to persevere unto the end, but by the
benefit of special revelation, which they make to be most rare. By which
doctrine faith is wholly destroyed, which in truth is none, unless it be
extended unto death, and also after death. But we on the contrary must believe,
that he who has begun in us a good work, will perform it until the day of
the Lord Jesus.

39 Which is in Christ. That is, Mat. 3.17.
whereof Christ is the bond. For he is the beloved son of God, in whom the
father is well pleased. Wherefore if we cleave unto God by him, we may assure
our selves of the immutable and incessant love of God toward us. Finally here
he speaks more distinctly, then he did of late, placing the fountain of love
in the father, and affirming that it flows from Christ unto us.

CHAPTER. 9.
1 I Say the truth in Christ, I lie not: mine own conscience bearing me
witness together with the holy spirit. 2 That I have great heaviness, and
continual sorrow in my heart. 3 I would wish my self to be accursed or
abandoned from Christ for my brethren: I say, my kinsmen according to the
flesh. 4 Who are the Israelites, to whom perteyneth the adoption, and glory,
and testamentes, and the giving of the law, and the service of God, and the
promises. 5 Of whom are the fathers, and of whom Christ is according to the
flesh, who is God over all blessed for ever. Amen.
IN this Chapter he begins to meet with those offenses, which might turn
away the hearts of men from Christ: namely that the Jews, for whom he was
ordained by the covenant of the law, did not only refuse, or contemn him:
but for the most part did abhor him. For hereupon one, of these two were
thought to follow: either that the promises of God were not true, or else that
that Jesus, whom Paul preached, was not the anointed of the Lord, which was
peculiarly promised to the Jews. Both which douts Paul does notably unfold
in that which follows. How be it he does so handle this place, that he does
bridle him self from all bitterness against ye Jews, least he should exasperate
their minds: and yet he yeldeth not one h^ire breadth unto them, to ye damage
of the Gospel.

For he so gives to them their ornaments, that he derogateth nothing at all
from Christ. But he passes as it were so abruptly to make mention thereof,
that there appears no joining or hanging together of speech: and yet he so
begins a new matter, as though he had touched it before. This he therefore
does, because, having finished the treatise of doctrine, when he turns his
mind unto the Jews, being astonished at their incredulity as at a wonder, he
bursteth forth into a suddayne protestation, no otherwise, then if he would
entreat of a thing handled before: seeing there was none, in whose mind this
cogitation would not voluntarily arise: if this be the doctrine of the law
and the Prophets, how comes it then to pass, that the Jews do so
stubbournely refuse it? Add that it was a thing every where known, whatsoever
hitherto he had said of the law of Moses and the grace of Christ, to have
been more detested of the Jews, then that by their consent the faith of the
Gentiles should be helped. Wherefore it was needful this offense should be
taken out of the way, least it should hinder the course of the Gospel.

1 I speak the truth in Christ. Because this opinion was presumed amongst
the most part, that Paul was as it were a sworn enemy of his nation, so that
he was greatly suspected also of those were of the household of faith, as
though he taught a falling away from Moses: before he begin to dispute of
the purposed matter, he uses a preface to prepare the minds of the readers
unto him: where he clears himself of that false suspicion of evil will
toward the Jews. And because the thing was not unworthy of an oath, and he
also saw his affirmation would scarsly be believed, against the already
conceived prejudice, he testifies by an oath that he speaks the truth. By
which example and such like (as I admonished in the first chapter) we ought to
learn what oaths be lawful: Paul clears himself concerning the Jews
namely, which cause that truth to be believed, which is both profitable to
be known, and also would not otherwise be believed.

This particle, in Christ, is as much as according to Christ. Whereas he
adds, I lie not, thereby he signifies that he speaks without deceipte or
guile. My conscience bearing me witness. By these words he calls his
conscience before the judgment of God, because he brings in the spirit to
bear witness of his meaning. For to this purpose he has interposed the name
of spirit, that he might the rather prove, how he being void and clear of
all corrupt emulation, did handle the cause of Christ, at the direction and
moderation of the spirit of Christ.

Often times it comes to pass, that a man being blinded with the affection
of flesh (although he deceive not) yet wittingly and willingly he does
obscure the light of the truth. And this is properly to swear by the name of
God, What it is to swear by the name of God.
to call him for witness to the confirmation of doubtful matters: and also to
bind our selves to his judgment, if we lie.

2 That I have great heaviness. It is not without great cunning, that he has
so broken off his speech, not as yet showing whereof he spoke. For it was not
yet time, to express plainly the perdition of the people of the Jews. Add
also that hereby he insinuates greater vehemency of sorrow, because
imperfect speeches for the most part do greatly set forth the affections. But
straightwayes he will declare the cause of his sorrow, when he has more
fully testified his sincerity. Furthermore that the destruction of the Jews,
which he knew to come to pass by the will and providence of God, did so
greatly grieve him: hereby we are taught, that the obedince which we give to
the providence of God, lets not, but we may mourn at the fall of wicked
men, whereunto yet nevertheless we know they were ordained by the just
judgment of God. For the same mind may receive this twofold affection: How the
godly may mourn even for the destruction of the reprobrate.
that whiles it respects God it can willingly abide they should perish,
whom he has determined to destroy: but when it has turned his cogitation
unto men, it sorroweth at their evil. They therefore are far deceived, who
require in godlymen a sencelesnes and voidenes of affection, least they should
repugne the ordinance of God.

Anathema What it means, and how Paul wished it, for the Jews.
3 For I would wish. He could not express any greater vehemency of love
then by protestation or declaration. For this is perfect love, when one
refuses not yea even to die for the health of his frinde. But the particle
that is added, does declare that he speaks not only of a transitory
destruction, but of eternal death. And he alluded unto the signification of
Anathema, when he said from Christ.

For it is called of segragating or seperating. And what is it to be segregated
or separated from Christ, but to be excluded from all hope of salvation? it was
therefore an argument of most fervent love, that Paul doubted not to wish
that condemnation to himself, which he saw to hang over the heads of the
Jews, that he might deliver them. Neither lets it that he knew his
salvation was grounded upon the election of God, which can by no means fall
away. For these fervent affections, as they are carried headlong, so they
respect or consider nothing else, but that they tend unto. Therefore Paul did
not join the election of God with his wish, but the remembrance of that being
past by, he was wholly fixed upon the salvation of the Jews. Now where as
many doubt whether it were a lawful desire: that doubt may thus be unfolded:
namely, that this is the perpetuallimitte of love, that it may proceed even
unto death. So that then if we love in God, and not out of God: our love shall
never be too much. And such was this of Paul. For whiles he saw his nation
to be indewed with so many gifts of God, he loved the gifts of God in
them, and them for the gifts sake.

And also was very sorry that these graces should perish: hence came it that
his mind being (as it were) confounded, he burst forth into this extreme
wish. So I receive not their opinion, who think Paul said these in respect
of God only, and not in respect of men: again, neither do I consent unto
those, who without consideration of God, say that Paul gave so much unto the
love of men: but I join the love of men with the study of the glory of God.
And yet I have not declared that, which was the principal: namely that the
Jews are here considered as they are decked with their ornaments, whereby
they were distinguished from mankind. For God by his covenant had so highly
advanced them, that if they fell, the faith and truth of God should fail or
decay in the world. For the covenant had been void, whose stablenes is said to
endure, Psalm. 12.1.
so long as the Sun and Moon shall shine in heaven. So that it were more
absurd the same should be abolished, then that the whole world should be
turned vyside down.

Wherefore, it is not a simple and bare comparing of men: for although it were
better one member should perish then the whole body: yet Paul therefore
esteems the Jews so highly, because he gives unto them the person and (as
they commonly say) the quality of elect people. Which thing also appears
better out of the text, as we shall see straightwayes in his place. These
words, I say my kinsmen according to the flesh, although they signify no new
thing, yet they avail much unto amplification. For first least any should
think he does willingly or voluntarily seek a cause of debate with the
Jews, he signifies that he has not so put off the sense of humanity, but he
is moved at this so horrible a destruction of his own flesh. Again, seeing
the Gospel whereof he was a preacher, must needs come forth of Sion, it is not
without cause that he does so largely infer the commendation of his kindred.
For this exception, according to the flesh, in my judgment, is not added, as
else where, for to extenuate, but rather to cause trust or confidence. For
although the Jews had rejected Paul, yet he dissembleth not that he was
borne of that nation, in whose root the election yet flourished, though the
branches were withered. That which Budaeus says of the word Anathema, is
contrary to the sentence of Chrysostom, who makes (...), and (...), all one.

4 Who are the Israelites. Here now he plainly shows the cause why the
destruction of the people of the Jews did so greatly grieve him, that he was
ready to redeem them with his own destruction: namely, because they were
Israelites. For the Pronowne relative, is put in steed of an Aduerb causall.
So this anguishe grieved Moses, when he desired that he might be put out of
the book of life, that the holy and elect seed of Abraham might not utterly
perish. Therefore besides humane affection, Exodus 32.2.
he notes other reasons, and the same also greater or weightier, which ought
to make him favor the Jews: namely, that the Lord had so advanced them as it
were by a certain prerogative, yt they were separated from the common sort of
men. And these speeches of dignity are testimonies of love. For we use not to
speak so favorably, but of those whom we love. And although through their
ingratitude they made themselves unworthy, who should be esteemed of,
according to these gifts yet Paul ceasseth not even therefore to reverence
them. Whereby he teaches, The good gifts of God can never be so defiled by the
wicked, but they are always praise worthy.
that the wicked cannot so defile the good gifts of God, but they are always
worthy to be praised and had in admiration: although unto those do abuse
them, there come nothing thereby but the greater obloquie. And as we are not,
by hating the wicked, to contemn the gifts of God in the^: so on the
contrary we are to beware, least by our favorable esteeming and praising of
the gifts in them, we puff them up: much more also that our praises carry
not a show of adulation. But let us imitate Paul, who grants unto the Jews
their ornaments in such sort, that afterward he declares all to be nothing
without Christ.

Finally, he does not in vain put this amongst their praises, that they were
Israelites. For Jacob prayed for that in steed of an excellent blessing, Genesis
48.18.
that his name might be called upon over them. To whom pertains the
adoption. The whole speech of Paul is directed unto this mark. Howesoeuer the
Jews by their falling away, have made a wicked diuorcement with God, yet is
not the light of the grace of God utterly extinguished in them, as he also
said in the third Chapter, although they were unbelievers and truice
breakers, Romans 3.3.
yet is not the faith of God made void by their unbelief. Not only because
he has reserved out of the whole multitude a remnant unto himself, but
because by the right of inheritance, the name of the Church did yet abide with
them. And albeit they had now deprived them selves of all these ornaments, so
that it profited them nothing to be called the sons of Abraham: yet because
it was dangerous, least through their fault, the majesty of the gospel should
become vile amongst the Gentiles, Paul considers not what they deserved, but
with many vailes he covers their filthiness and shame, until the Gentiles
were persuaded the Gospel came unto them from the celestial fountain, out of
the privy chapel of God, out of an elect nation. For the Lord, all other
nations being let pass, had selected them for a peculiar people to himself,
and had adopted them for sons, as he often testifies by Moses and the
Prophets. And not content simply to call them sons, sometime he calls
them his first begotten, Exodus 4.22.
sometime his darlings. In Exodus The Lord says thus, Israel is my first
begotten son, let my son go that he may serve me. I am become a father to
Israel, and Ephraim is my first born. Ier. 31.9.
Also in the same place, Is not Ephraim my dear son? Is he not my pleasant
child? Therefore my bowels are troubled over him, and yet I will have
compassion on him. By which words he does not only set forth his favor
toward Israel, but rather shows the force of adoption, under the which the
promise of the celestial inheritance is contained. Glory signifies that
excellency whereunto the Lord had advanced that people above al other nations:
and that both by many and diverse other means, and also because he dwelt in the
midst of them. For besides many signs of his presence, he gave a singular
testimony thereof in the arc, whence he both gave answers, and also did hear
his people, 1. Sam. 4.22.
that he might show forth his power in helping them. For which cause it was
called the glory of God. Because here he has distinguished covenants from
promises, let us not this difference, that we count that a conuenant, which is
conceived by plain and solemn words: and has a mutual promise: namely, the
covenant made with Abraham: but promises they be, which soever occur here and
there in the scriptures. For when God had once made his covenant with the old
people, he ceased not now and then to offer his grace by new promises.
Whereby it follows, that the promises are referred unto the covenant, as unto
their only head: even as the special helps of God, whereby he testifies
his favor toward the faithful, do flow out of the only fountain of
election. And because the law was nothing else but a renewing of that covenant,
which renewing might the better establish the remembrance thereof: it seems
that law giving here in this place ought peculiarly to be restrained unto
judgments. For that also is a singular ornament of the people of the Jews,
that they had God for their lawgiuer. Deuteronomy. 4.32.
For if some glory in Solon, and some in Lycurgus: how much more justly may
they glory in the Lord* of whom you may read Deuteronomy. 4. By worship, he
understands that part of the law, wherein the lawful manner of worshipping
God is prescribed, as are the rites and ceremonies. For they ought to be
esteemed lawful by the rule of God: Without ye which, whatsoever me^ devise,
is but mere profaning of religion.

5 of whom are the fathers. For this also is of some value, to descend from the
saints, and men beloved of God, seeing God has promised to the holy fathers
mercy toward their children even unto a thousand generations: and chiefly in
the words made to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. Genesis 17.4.
And in another place. Neither skilleth it, that this by it self is vain and
unprofitable, if it be separated from the fear of God, and holiness of life.
For the same we see also in worship and glory: both every where in the
Prophets, and specially in Esaias. Esai. 1, 11. and 60.1.
Howebeit because God vouchsafes these, being joined with the study of
piety, with some degree of honor, he has worthily reckoned them amongst the
prerogatives of the Jews. For therefore, are they called the heirs of the
promises, because they descended of the fathers, of whom Christ is, etc. They
which refer this unto the fathers, Acts. 3.
as though Paul's mind were only to say, that Christ descended of the
fathers, they have no reason for it. For his meaning is, by this comme^dacion:
namely, that Christ came of them, to knit up the excellency of the people of
ye Jews. For it is not a thing lightly to be esteemed: namely, to be joined
in carnal kindred with the Redemer of the world. For if he honored all
mankind, when he coupleth himself to us by communicating our nature, much
more did he honor them, with whom he would have a nearer bond of
conjunction. Although it is always so to be taken, that if this blessing of
kindred be separated from piety, it is so far from profiting, that rather it
turns to their greater condemnation. Furthermore, here we have a notable
place: that the two natures are so distinguished in Christ, Two distinct
natures in Christ.
that they are united together into the person of Christ. For whereas he
says, Christ came of the Jews, thereby he declares his true humanity. The
parcel according to the flesh, which is added, does note that he had some
what more excellent then flesh: where is a plain distinction between his
humanity and divinity. And he joins both together, when he says, the same
Christ, which was borne of the Jews according to the flesh, is God, blessed
for ever. We must also note that this speech does not agree unto any other,
then the only and eternal God. 1. Tim. 1.17.
For in another place he preaches one only God, to whom all honor and
glory is due. They who divide this member from the other text, that they might
take from Christ, so manifest a testimony of his Dietie, do too impudently
go about to make darkness at none day. For the words are clear enough.
Christ of the Jews according to the flesh, who is God blessed for ever. And I
doubt not but Paul who had a hard fight, an vrge^t offense, did purposely erect
his mind unto the eternal glory of Christ: yea and that not so much for his
own private cause, as that he might encourage others by his example to look
up.

6 And yet not as though the word of God were fallen away: for all they are
not Israelites, which are of Israel. 7 Neither are they all therefore
children, which are the seed of Abraham: but in Isaac shall thy seed be
called. 8 That is, they are not the children of God, which are the children of
the flesh: but they which are the children of the promise, shall be counted
for the seed. 9 For this is the word of promise, about this time I will
come: and Sara shall have a son. 6 And yet not as though etc. Because Paul
through the heat of his desire, was carried (as it were) into an excess of
mind, now he going about to return unto his parts of teaching, adds a
kind of correction, as though he stayed him self from excessive grief. And
because out of that that he bewailed the destruction of his nation, this
absurdity did seem to follow: namely, that the covenant of God made with
Abraham was fallen away (for the grace of God could not fall away from the
Israelites, but the covenant should be abolished) he preuenteth this
inconvenience in due season: and shows how in so great cecitie of the Jews,
the grace of God nevertheless did abide constantly in that people, whereby the
truth of the covenant did stand. Some read, Neither is it possible, as though
in Greek it were, Oionte: but because I find that reading in no copy, I
rather allow that which is commonly read, not that the covenant is fallen
away: to this sense, that I so lament the destruction of my nation, it is not,
as though I thought the promise of God given to Abraham in old time, were now
void and abolished. For not all etc. The proposition is, the promise was so
given to Abraham and to his seed, that this inheritance should not appertein
to every one of that seed: whereby shall fall out, that the falling away of some
does nothing let, but the covenant may abide firm and stable. But to the end
it may better appear, by what condition the Lord adopted the posterity of
Abraham for a peculier people to himself: two things are to be considered
here: namely, the promise of salvation given to Abraham, to apperteine unto
all which take their beginning of him, because it is offered unto all without
exception: Two things are to be considered here.
and that in this respect they are rightly called the heirs and successors of
the covenant made with Abraham or (as ye scripture speaks) ye sons of the
promise. For seeing that God would have his covenant sealed, as well in Ismael
and Esau, as in Isaac and Jacob, it appears they were not altogether aliants
from it: unless perhaps you count circumcision nothing, which was communicated
to them by the commandment of God: which thing cannot be spoken without the
dishonor of God. And that was it the Apostle said before, the covenants
apperteined unto the^, although they were faithless. And in the Acts they are
called the children of the covenants, Acts. 3.^.
because they were the offspring of of the Prophets. The other thing that is to
be considered, is, that they are properly called the sons of promise, in
whom the virtue and efficacy thereof appears. And in this respect Paul
here denies all the sons of Abraham to be the sons of God, although the
covenant of the Lord were made with them: because but few did stand in the
faith of the covenant: when yet notwithstanding God himself does testify by
Ezechiell, they are all unto him in steed of sons. To be brief, when the
whole people is called the inheritance, Ezech. 16.
and peculier people of God, it is meant they are adopted of the Lord, the
promise of salvation being offered unto them and confirmed by the seal of
circumcision, But because many of them refuse that adoption by their
ingratitude, and therefore enjoy not the benefit thereof, hence arises among
them another difference, whiles the fulfilling of the promise is respected.
Least therefore it should seem wonderful unto any, that that fulfilling of
the promise appears not in many of the Jews, Paul denies them to have
been comprehended in the true election of God. Or if any had rather in other
words thus, the general election of the people of Israel lets not, but God
by his secret counsel may choose out from among them, whom he thinks good.
And this is a singular testimony of Gods free mercy, that he vouchsafed to
make the covenant of life with one nation: but yet his hidden grace abounds
more in ye second election, which is restrained unto a part only. And where
he denies all to be Israelites that are of Israel, and all to be sons, that
are of the seed of Abraham, it is a kind of collusion of words (which is,
when a word is repeated again not altogether the same, but somewhat changed)
seeing in the first member he comprehe^deth the whole progeny, in the other he
notes only the true sons, namely, which do not degenerate.

7 But in Isaac shall thy seed be called. Paul goes about this, that he might
show how the secret election of God, does dominate over the external calling:
and yet is not contrary to it; but rather tends to the confirmation and
perfection of it. That he might therefore in order declare them both, in the
first place, he takes it as a thing granted, The secret election of God is
not contrary to the external calling.
that the election of God is not tied to the carnal generation of Abraham,
neither is that contained in the condition of the covenant: which thing he
now confirms by a fit example. For if there ought to be any natural
progeny, which should not fall from the covenant, that should chiefly have
place in them, which did obtain the first degree: but seeing we see even in
the first sons of Abraham, whiles he was yet alive, Genesis 21.12. Heb. 11.8.
Genesis 17.20.
and the promise yet fresh, that one of the seed of Abraham, was separated or
put apart: how much more may that come to pass, in a long posterity? and this
testimony is taken out of Genesis, where the Lord answers Abraham, that he
had hard his prayers touching Ismael: but yet there was an other in whom the
promised blessing should rest. Whereby it follows that by special
privilege some certain men are chosen out of the elect people of God, in whom
the common adoption might be effectual and firm.

8 That is, they are not. Now out of the testimony he gathers a
proposition, wherein his whole purpose is included. There is a diversity
between ye carnal sons of Abraham.
For if in Isaac, and not in Ismael the seed be called, and yet this was no
less the son of Abraham then he: then must not all the carnal sons be
reckoned in the seed, but the promise must specially be fulfilled in some, and
does not generally, and indifferently belong unto all. He calls those the
sons of the flesh, in whom there is nothing more excellent then carnal
progeny, as he calls those the sons of promise, who are peculierly sealed
of the Lord.

9 For this is the word of promise. He adds another testimony, in the
explication whereof, we may see with what diligence and dexterity he
handeleth the scripture. When the Lord (quoth he) said he would come, Gen,
18.10.
and Sara should bear a son to Abraham, thereby he insinuated, that his
blessing was not yet extant, but was yet to come. Howbeit Ismael was now
already borne, when that was spoken: Therefore the blessing of God, was out of
Ismaell. And let us also by the way note, with what circumspection he
proceeds here, least he should exasperate the Jews. For first the cause
being suppressed he does simply declare the matter: then secondarily he
opens the fountain.

10 Neither he only: but Rebecca also, when she had conceived by one, even
by our father Isaac. 11 For yer the children were borne, and when they had
neither done good nor evil (that the purpose of God might remain according to
election, not by works, but by him that calls.) 12 It was said unto her, the
elder shall serve the younger. 13 As it is written, Jacob have I loved, and
have hated Esau. 10 Neither he only. In this Chapter there are certain broken
sentences: as this is, but Rebeeca also which had conceived by one, our father
Isaac. For he ends in the midst thereof, before he come unto the
principal verb. Yet the meaning is, that this diversity, touching the
inheritance of the promise, may not only be seen in the sons of Abraham:
but also there is a far more evident example thereof in Jacob and Esau. For
in the former, some might allege, the condition was not equal, because one
was the son of an handmaid. But these were both of one womb and twins, yet
was one rejected, and the other received of the Lord. Whereby appears, that
the fulfilling of the promise, does not indifferently fall out a like in all
the sons of the flesh. And because Paul did respect the persons, to whom
God made his counsel known, I choose rather to understand the masculine
Pronowne, The special election was not only revealed to Abraham but also to
Rebecca.
then the Newter, as Erasmus has done, For the meaning is, that the special
election was not only revealed unto Abraham, but also afterward to Rebecca,
whiles she did bear two twins in her womb.

11 For yer the children were borne. Now he begins to ascend higher:
namely, to show the reason of this diversity, which he teaches does not
consist in any thing else, then the election of God. For hitherto he had
touched in few words, that there was a difference amongst the carnal sons
of Abraham: namely, notwithstanding they were all by cirumcision adopted into
the fellowship of the covenant, yet the grace of God was not effectual in them
all: and that they therefore are the sons of the promise, who enjoy the
benefits of God. But whence that came, he had either not spoken of it, or else
he had obscurely insinuated it. But now he does plainly refer the whole
cause, unto the election of God, and the same free, and such as does not depend
upon men: that in the salvation of the godly nothing might be sought for above
the goodness of God: and in the destruction of the reprobate, nothing above
his just severity. The first proposition.
Let this therefore be the first proposition, as the blessing of the covenant,
does separate the people of Israel from all other nations: so also the election
of God discerns the men of that nation, whiles he predestinateth some unto
salvation, and other some unto condemnation. The 2. proposition is, that there
is no other foundation of that election then the mere goodness of God, and also
mercy, since the fall of Adam, The second proposition.
which mercy (not for any consideration of works at all) imbraceth whom it
pleases. The third proposition, that the Lord in this his free election is at
liberty and loose from that necessity, The third proposition.
that he should indifferently impart the same grace unto all. But rather whom
he will he passes over, and whom he will he chooses. All these things does
Paul comprise briefly in one sentence, then afterward he will prosecute the
rest. Finally in these words, when they were not yet borne, or had done good
or evil, he declares that God in putting of a difference, could not have
respect to the works, which were not yet. And they which reason to the
contrary, saying, that does not let, but the election of God may discern
between men, according to their merits, because God does foresee by the works
to come, who will be worthy or unworthy of his grace: do not see more then the
Apostle, but fall in that principle of religion, which ought to be very well
known to all Christians: namely, that God could see nothing in the corrupt
nature of man, such as was in Esau and Jacob, whereby he might be moved to do
good. Therefore when he says, that both of them had then done neither good nor
evil, it is also to be added which he presumes: namely that both of them were
the sons of Adam, by nature sinners, endued with no crumme of righteousness.
Neither do I therefore stand so long in expounding these, as though the mind
of the Apostle were doubtful: but because the Sophisters not being content
with ye simplicity thereof, go about by their frivolous distinctions to creep
out hence, my meaning was to show, that Paul was not ignorant of those
things they bring: but that they rather are blind in the first principles of
religion. Moreover, although the corruption of nature, which is dispersed over
all mankind, before it come (as they say) into action, is auayleable enough
unto condemnation, whereby follows that Esau was woorthely rejected, because
naturally he was the son of wrath: yet least any doubt should remain, as
though through respect of any fault or sin his condition was the worse, it
was necessary as well sins as virtues should be excluded.

Surely true it is, that the next cause of reprobation, is, for that we are
all accursed in Adam: yet to the end we might learn to rest in the bare and
simple will of God, Paul did lead us aside from the consideration thereof, for
so long, until he had established this doctrine: namely, that God has a
sufficient just cause of election and reprobation in his own will or pleasure.

That the purpose of God, etc. Almost in every word he urges the free
election of God: for if works had place, he should have said, that the reward
of God might stand by works. But he opposes the purpose of God, which is
contained (that I might say so) in his only pleasure. And least there should
remain any doubt thereof, by adding the other parcel, according to election, he
has removed all doubt. And then the third clause, not of works, but of the
caller. Now then let us apply our minds more nearly unto this text. If the
purpose of God according to election, be thereby established, yt before the
brethren were borne, and had done either good or evil, the one is rejected, ye
other is chosen: then if any would go about to attribute to their works ye
cause of difference, the purpose of God should so be overthrown. Now whereas he
adds, Our election is grounded only upon the goodness of god.
not of works, but of the caller: He signifies, not of the behalf of
works, but of calling only. For he goes about to exclude all consideration of
works. Wherefore we have all the stablenes of our election concluded in the
only purpose of God: merits are worth nothing here, which serve for nothing
but unto death: no dignity is regarded, for there is none: but the only
goodness of God reigns. And therefore ye doctrine is false and contrary to the
word of God: namely, that God does chose or reject, as he foreseeth every man
worthy or unworthy of his grace.

12 The elder shall serve the younger. Behold how ye Lord puts a difference
between the sons of Isaac yet being in their mothers womb. When the Lord
called Jacob to that birthright was due by ye order of nature to Esau, thereby
he gave a type of another matter.
For this is the answer of the heavenly oracle, whereby it follows, that his
pleasure was to show unto the younger special favor, which he denied unto
the elder. And although this did appertein unto the law of birth right: yet
therein, as in the type of a greater matter, was the will of God declared. And
yt may easily be seen, if we do consider how little according to the flesh the
birthright profited Jacob. For therefore he was both in great danger, and also
for the avoiding of that danger, he was forced to flee from his house and
country, and was discourteously entreated in exilement: and when he returned,
trembling, and doubtful of life, he prostrateth himfelfe at the feet of his
brother, humbly he beseeches him to forgive him his offense, and does not live
but by his pardon. Where is his Lordship over his brother, of whom he is
constrained, by prayer to ask life? Therefore there was some greater matter
then the birthright, which the Lord promised by his oracle.

13 As it is written. Yet he confirms by a surer testimony, how greatly yt
oracle given to Rebecca did avail to the present cause: namely, yt by the
Lordship of Jacob, and bondage of Esau, the spiritual condition of the^ both
was testified: Secondarily, that Jacob obtained this grace, by the goodness of
God, and no merit of his. Therefore this testimony of the Prophet declares
why the Lord gave unto Jacob the birthright. And it is taken out of Malachie,
where the Lord vpbraiding the unthankfulness of ye Jews, first makes mention
of his goodness toward the^. Malac. 1.
I have loved you (quoth he) and he adds whence the beginning of love
proceeded, was not Esau the brother of Jacob? As though he said, what
prerogative had he, why I should prefer him before his brother? none at all.
For there was an equal right, saving yt by the law of nature, this which was
the younger, ought to have been subject to him that was the elder: yet have I
chosen him, and refused this, being moved thereunto by my mercy only, and by no
dignity of works, And now I had adopted you to be my people, that I might
still prosecute the same love toward the seed of Jacob: but I have rejected
the Edomites, the progeny of Esau. Therefore ye are so much the worse, whom
the remembrance of so great favor, cannot provoke to the worship of my
majesty. And although the earthly blessings are there also mentioned, which
god bestowed upon the Israelites: yet we must not otherwise take the^, then
pledges of his benevolence. For where the wrath of God is, there follows
death: but where his love is, there follows life.

14 What shall we say then? is there any unrighteousness with God? God forbid.
15 For he says to Moses, I will have mercy on whom I will have mercy: and
will show compassion on whom I will show compassion.

16 So then it is not in him that wills, nor in him that runs, but in God
that shows mercy. 17 For the scripture says to Pharaoh, For this same
purpose have I stirred thee up, that I might show my power in thee, and that
my name might be declared throughout all the earth. 18 Therefore he has mercy
on whom he will, and whom he will he hardens. 14 What shall we say then?
Flesh cannot hear that wisdom of God, but straightwayes it is troubled with
tumultuous questions, and in a sort strives to bring God to a count. Therefore
we see the Apostle so often as he handeleth any high mystery, answers many
inconveniences, wherewithal he knew the minds of men otherwise to be
occupied. And chiefly when men hear that of predestination, which the
scripture delivers, they are tangled with many trifles. For the
predestination of God is truly a Labyrinth, whence the wit of man can no way
unwind it self: but such is the importunate curiositte of man, that the more
dangerous the inquisitio^ of any thing is, the more boldly he rusheth thither:
so, when talk is of predestination, because he cannot bridle himself,
Predestination is not therefore utterly to be neglected, because it is a hard
and dangerous question.
by his rashness he does straightwaies (as it were) drown himself in the depth
of the sea. What remedy then have the godly? should they flee all remembrance
of predestination? no not so. For seeing the holy ghost has taught nothing,
but yt which is necessary for us to know: assuredly the knowledge thereof
shall be profitable, if it keep it self within ye word of God. Let this the^ be a
sure observation with us, yt we seek to know nothing of it, but that the
scripture teaches where the Lord shuts his holy mouth, let us also stop the
way to our minds of going further. But because we are men into whose minds
those foolish questions do naturally come: let us hear of Paul how we may
meet with the^. Is there any unrighteousness with god? This is a monstrous fury
of man's wit, yt rather it charge god of unrighteousness, the^ it will reprove
itself of c^citie. neither would paul fetch things far of, wherwt he might
trouble ye readers: but (at it were) he takes away that wicked doubt, which
straitwayes creeps in upon many, so soon as they hear that God does
determine of every one according to his pleasure. Furthermore this is that kind
of unrighteousness, which flesh imagines, that one being neglected, God does
respect another. That Paul might loose this knot, he deuideth the whole cause
into two members: in the former whereof he entreats of the elect, in the
other, of the reprobate: and his will is, that in those, we consider the mercy
of God, but in these we acknowledge the just judgment of God. First of all
therefore he answers, that this cogitation is execrable, that
unrighteousness should be thought to be with God: then secondly he declares on
both sides, how there can be none. Yet before we go further, this objection
testifies clearly, that God has elected some, and rejected othersome, and
the cause is no where else to be sought for, then in his purpose. For if the
difference were grounded upon the respect of works, in vain had Paul moved
question of the unrighteousness of God, whereof there could be no suspicion, if
he handled every one according to his desert. Now this also is to be noted in
this second place, yt although he saw this part of doctrine could not be
touched, but murmuring speeches and also horrible blasphemies, would
straitwaies rise against it, yet fra^kly and freely he does denou^ce it, yea he
dissembleth not, what occasion of storming and murmuring there is offered unto
us, whiles we hear, yt before men are borne, every one has his lot appointed
by the secret counsel of God: yet nevertheless he goes on, and without
doubting, he denounces that, which he had learned of the holy spirit. Whereby
it follows that their niceness is intolerable, who seek to be wiser-in
redeeming and pacifying offenses then the holy Ghost. Least God should be
charged with any fault, they make religion of the matter, simply to say, that
the salvation and destruction of men, does depend of his free election. If they
restrained their minds from wicked curiosity, and also brideled their tongues
from too much lauishing, their modesty and sobriety were to be allowed of:
but what boldness is this, to bridle the holy ghost and Paul? Let this
magnanimity therefore flourish in the church of God, that the true teachers be
not ashamed of the simple profession of true doctrine, howsoever it be hated,
and to refute whatsoever reproaches the wicked thrust in.

15 For he says to Moses.) Touching the elect, God cannot be charged with any
unrighteousness: for he voutsafeth them of mercy according to his good pleasure.
And yet here also the flesh finds somewhat to murmr or complain. Because
it cannot yield this unto God, that he should voutsafe one with favor rather
then another, unless the cause appear forth. Because therefore it seems
absurd, that some should be preferred before others without desert, the
frowardnes of men makes wars with God, as though he gave unto the persons
more then equity. Now let us see, how Paul defends the righteousness of God.
First he obscureth not, neither hides that, which he saw to be odious: but in
mainteyning thereof he proceeds with immutable constancy. Secondly, he
labors not to find out reasons to mollify the asperity: but he counts it
sufficient, by the testimonies of Scripture to restrain impure barkinges. This
might seem to be a cold excuse, that God is not unjust, because he is merciful
to who^ he will: but because unto God, his own only authority is sufficient,
so yt he stands in no need of ye defense of any other, it was sufficient unto
Paul yt he was appointed a defe^der of his own right. And Paul brings here
ye answer which Moses received of the Lord, when he prayed for ye health of ye
whole people, Exodus 33.15.
I will have mercy (says the lord) on who^ I will have mercy: and I will show
compassion, to who^ I will show compassion. By this oracle ye Lord declared,
how he is debtor to no man: and that it is of his free goodness whatsoever he
gives unto them: secondly that this beneficency is free, that he may bestow it
upon whom he will: lastly, yt no cause can be imagined above his will, why he
does good unto certain men,, and wills them well, not unto al. His words are
as much, as if it were said, look upon whom I have once determined to have
mercy, I will never take my mercy from him: and I will for ever show
bountifulness unto him, to whom I have determined to be bountiful. And so
he notes the highest cause of bestowing grace, namely, his voluntary decree:
and withal he insinuates, that he has appointed his mercy peculiarly for
certain. For both this short speech excludes all forreyne causes: as when we
chalenging to our selves free power of dooyng, we say, I will do, what I
will do: And also the pronowne Relative expresses plainly, that mercy is not
indifferently for all. This liberty is taken from God, if his election be tied
to external causes. In tow words which Moses uses, the only cause of
salvation is expressed: for Chanan is to favor, or give a benefit freely and
liberally: but Racham is to show mercy. So that is brought to pass that Paul
intends: namely, that the mercy of God because it is free, is not tied, but
he may show it where he lust.

16 So then it is not etc.) By that testimony he gathers, that without all
controversy it follows, the election of God is not to be attributed to our
industry, or study, or endeavor: but is wholly to be referred unto the
counsel of God. Least any should think, that they who are chosen, are
therefore chosen because they did deserve it, or had won unto themselves the
favor of God by any means: or finally, because there was in them any crumme
of dignity or worthiness, whereby the Lord might be provoked. And understand
it simply, that it stands not in our will or study (for he has put course
for study) that we should be nu^bred amongst the elect: but that stands
wholly on the goodness of God, which choseth those freely, that neither will,
nor study, no nor think of it. And they who reason out of this place that
there is in us some force or virtue of study, but which can do nothing by it
self, except it be helped by the mercy of God, they do it foolishly. For the
Apostle does not show what is in us: but excludes all our endeavors. It is
therefore a mere cauillation that they bring in: namely, that we will and
run, because Paul denies it to be in the willer or runner: seeing his
mind is nothing else, then that neither will nor running does any thing. Yet
they are again to be reproved, who, to the end they might give place to the
grace of God, abide secure and idle. For although we profit nothing by our
own study, yet that study which is inspired of God is not vneffectual. These
things are not therefore said, that we should by our waywardness or
slothfulness choke the spirit of GOD infusing his sparkles into us: but that
we should understand, it is of him, whatsoever we have: and therefore let us
learn both to ask all things of him, to hope for all things, and to ascribe
all things to him, and also with fear and trembling to seek our salvation.
Pelagius has gone about by another sophistical, but a filthy or rotten
cauillation, to abuse the sentence of Paul: namely, that it is not the willer
or runner only, because ye grace of God helps. Whom Augustine has not only
soundly, but wittilye refuted: for if the will of man be therefore denied to be
the cause of election, because it is not the only cause, but in part: then
thus it may be said again, that it is not of mercy but of the willer and
runner. For where there is a mutual woorkyng there shall also be a mutual
praise. But assuredly this last saying does fall with the weight of his own
absurdity: The salvation of the elect stands wholly and only upon the mercy
of God.
let us therefore determine that the salvation of those, whom it pleases God
to save, is so ascribed unto the mercy of God, that nothing is left unto the
industry of man. Neither has it much more color, that some would have those
recited together in the person of the wicked. For how shall it hang together,
to wrest those places of Scripture, where the righteousness of God is
defended, to vpbraide unto him tyranny? Again, is it like, seeing the
refutation was ready and easy, that Paul, without speech, would suffer the
Scripture to be so grossly abused? But these starting holes they have
sought, who did measure this incomparable mystery of GOD by their own sense.
It was a rougher doctrine, for their dainty, and tender ears, then that they
could think it meet for an Apostle. But they ought rather to have bended
their own stifneckednesse to the obsequie of the spirit, that they might not
have been, so much addicted to their own gross imaginations.

17 For the scripture says, etc. Now he comes unto the second member, of
the reiection of the wicked. Wherein, because there seems to be somewhat more
absurdity, so much the more diligently he goes about to make manifest,
how God in rejecting whom he will, is not only irreprehensible or without
blame, Exodus 9.16.
but also wonderful in his wisdom, and equity. He therefore takes his
testimony out of Exodus. Where the Lord says it was he that stirred up
Pharaoh to that end, that whiles he went about stubbornely to resist the power
of GOD, he being overcome, and subdued, might be for an example how
invincible the arm of God is: to the bearing whereof, much less to ye breaking
whereof, no human strength is sufficient. Behold the pattern that the Lord
would show in Pharaoh. Two things to be considered in Pharaoh.
Wherefore two things are to be considered here, the predestination of
Pharaoh to destruction: which is verily referred unto the just, but yet secret
counsel of God.

Secondly, the end thereof, which is that the name of God might be celebrated:
and to that end does Paul chiefly stay upon it. For if this hardening be
such, for the which the name of GOD deserves to be declared, that he should
be charged with unrighteousness, is abomination. It is an argument taken
from the places of contraries. But because many interpreters, whiles they go
about to qualify this place also, they do corrupt it, first it is to be
noted, that for the word stirred up. In Hebrewe it is, I have ordained thee:
where, the Lord going about to declare that the stubbornness of Pharaoh was
no let to him, that he might not deliver his people, affirms that his fury
was not only foreseen of him, and that he had means prepared to bridle it,
but also that he had purposely so ordained it, and verily to that end, that
he might show forth a more evident testimony of his power. Some therefore
do turn it amiss, namely that Pharaoh was reserved to a time, seeing rather
he speaks of the beginning. For seeing many things else where occur unto
men, which hinder their counsayles, and let the course of their actions, God
says Pharaoh came from him, and that this person was laid upon him. Unto
which sentence ye word raise or stir up, notably agrees. Finally, least any
should imagine, that Pharaoh was moved from above, by a certain universal and
confused motion, that he might rushe into that fury, the special cause or
end is noted: as if it were said, that God did not only know what Pharaoh
would do: but also purposely appointed him to this use. Where by it follows,
that it is in vain now to strive with him, as though he were bound to give
a reason or account, seeing he does willingly come forth himself, and
preuenteth this objection, denouncing, that the reprobate, in whom he will
have his name celebrated, come from the secret fountain of his providence.

18 Therefore he has mercy on whom he will. Here follows the conclusion of
both members: which can not any way be understood in the person of any other
then of the Apostle: because straightwayes he adds a communication with the
adversary, when he begins to bring forth such things as may be objected of
the contrary part. Therefore it is not to be doubted but Paul speaks these of
his own sense, as we have admonished a little before, namely, that God
according to his pleasure, voutsafeth whom he sees good of mercy: and draws
forth ye severity of judgment against whom he list. For this he goes about
to bring to pass amongst us, that concerning the diversity is between the
elect and reprobate, our mind might be content with this, namely, that it has
so pleased God, to illuminate some unto salvation, and blind othersome unto
death: and not seek for any cause above his will. For we must stand upon
these particles, of whom he will, and whom he will: Beyond yt which he does
not suffer us to pass. But the word harden, To harden how it is taken.
when in the Scriptures it is attributed to GOD, it does not only signify (as
certain tempering moderatours would have it) a permission or suffering, but
also the action of Gods wrath. For all external things, which make to the
excecation of the reprobate, are the instruments of his wrath. And Satan him
self, which inwardly works effectually, is so far forth his minister,
that he works not but at his commandment.

Therefore that frivolous evasion or refuge, which ye school men have of
foreknowledge, does fall down. For Paul does not only say, that the ruin of
the wicked is foreseen of the Lord, but is ordained by his counsel and
will: as Solomon also teaches, Prou. 16.4.
that the destruction of the wicked, was not only foreknowne, but that the
wicked ones themselves were purposely created, that they might perish.

19 Thou will say then unto me, why does he yet complain? who has resisted
his will? 20 But O man, what art thou that pleadest or should plead in
judgment with GOD? shall the thing formed, say to him that formed it, why
have thou made me so? 21 Has not the potter power of the clay, to make of the
same lump, one vessel to honor and another vessel to dishonor? 19 Thou will
say then unto me. Here especially the flesh stormeth, when it hears how
it is referred unto the will of God, that they are destinated unto death which
perish. Wherefore the Apostle descends again unto objections, by taking to
him the speech of the adversary: because he saw the mouths of the wicked
could not be stopped, but with full mouths they would bark against the
righteousness of God. And he does notably express their affection. For, they
not being content to defend themselves, make God guilty in their stead: and
then after they have turned the fault of their condemnation upon him, they are
grieved at his so great power. In deed they are constrained to yield, but
storming, because they can not resist: and attributing to him the principality
they do in a manner charge him of tyranny, much like as Sophisters in their
Schools do in such sort babble of his absolute (as they call it)
righteousness, as though he having forgotten his righteousness, would make a
trial of the might of his lordeshippe, by mixting all things peruersely. Thus
therefore do the wicked reason in this place, what cause has he, why he
should be angry at us? seeing he made us such, seeing he leads us whither
he lusts at his pleasure: what else does he in destroying us, but revenge
his own work in us? neither is it our part to contend with him: and how so
ever we strive, he will have the upper hand. Therefore both his judgment
shall be unjust if he condemn us: and also his power which he abuses now
against us is licencious. But what does Paul answer to these.

20 Who art thou O thou man, Because in Greek there is the participle, it may
also be read in the present tence, which do strive, or contend, or fightest
on the contrary: because this is expressed in the Greek word, to this sense,
who art thou that take upon thee to contend with God: The first answer,
but the sense is not much diverse. By this first answer he does nothing else
then repress the wickedness of that blasphemy, by an argument taken from the
condition of man. He will straightwaies add another, whereby he will clear
the righteousness of God, from all accusation.

This verily is apparaunt, that no cause is brought above the will of God.
Seeing the answer was at hand, namely, that the difference does depend upon
just causes: why did not Paul use this conpendious or short form, but placed
the will of God in the highest degree, that it only might suffice us for all
causes? assuredly if the objection had been false, that God does reject or
elect according to his pleasure, whom he either vouchsafes not with favor,
or whom he loves freely, the refutation had not been neglected of Paul. The
wicked object, that men are cleared from guiltines, if the will of God bear
the chiefest sway in their salvation and destruction. Does Paul deny it? Yea
by his answer he confirms, namely that God does decree or determine of men
as it pleases him: yet in vain and madly do men rise up to contend, because
God by his right power, or authority assigns to his works what lotte he
will. And they who say that Paul wanting reason, did flee unto brauling, or
chiding, charge the holy Ghost with great reproach. For he would not at the
first bring forth those things which might make to the defense of the equity
of God, and which he had in a readiness, because they could not be conceived
or apprehended. Yea he also so tempereth the second reason, that he does
not undertake a full defense. But yet so that he declares or shows forth
the righteousness of God, if it be with devout humility and reverence
weighed of us. That therefore which was most meet, he admonishes man of his
condition, as if he said, seeing thou art a man, thou must acknowledge thy
self earth and ashes: why then do thou contend with the Lord, about a
matter which thou can not understand? to be brief, the Apostle has not
brought that could be said, but that was expedient for our rudnesse. Proud
men storm, that Paul, not denying men to be rejected or elected by the secret
counsel of God, alleges no cause, as though the spirit of God wanting
reason held his peace: and not rather by his silence did admonish that the
mystery which the minds of men do not comprehend, is reverently to be had in
admiration, and so might bridle the waywardness of man's curiosity. Let us
know therefore that God does not for any other end cease from speaking, but
because he sees his infinite wisdom cannot be comprehended by our slender
capacity, and therefore sparing our infirmity, provoke us unto sobriety and
modesty. Shall the thing formed. We see that Paul hitherto does always stand
upon this, namely, that the will of God, although the reason thereof is unknown
to us, is to be counted just. For he shows that the Lord has his right
taken from him, The will of God is always just howsoever we see not the reason of
it.
if he be not at liberty to do with his creatures what he lust. This
seems hard to the ears of many. And there are also some who allege that
God is put to great reproach, if such liberty be given unto him, as though they
with their disdainfulnes were better divines, then Paul, who has appointed
this rule of humility to the faithful, that they should wonder at the power
of God, and not esteem it after their own judgment. And he represseth this
arrogancy of striving with God, by a most fi^ similitud, wherein he seems
rather to have alluded unto Esaias, Esaias. 5.9. Iere. 28.6
then Iere. For nothing else is taught with Jeremy, then that Israel is in the
hand of the Lord, so that for his sins he may break him in pieces, as a
potter may his earthen vessel. But Esaias goes higher: saying, woe be to him
that gain says his maker: namely, to the pot ye strives with the potter.
Shall ye claye say to his potter, what make thou? etc. And surely there is no
cause why mortal man should prefer himself before an ^arthen vessel, when
he compares himself with God. Neither are we to be very curious in applying
that testimony to the present cause, seeing the mind of the Apostle was only
to allude unto the words of the Prophet, that his similitude might have the
more weight.

21 Has not the Potter authority: The reason why the thing formed, ought not
to strive with his former: because the maker does nothing but by his right or
authority. By the word power, he understands not, that he has strength
and force, to do with his vessel what he lust: but that this preeminence or
authority does agree unto him, by good right. For his mind is not to give
unto God any licencious power: but such as is worthily given unto him.

Furthermore in applying the similitude, consider this, as the potter does take
nothing from the claye, what form soever he give it: So to what condition
soever God create a man, he takes nothing from him. Only that is to be
remembered, namely that God is partly robbed of his honor, unless such
authority be given unto him, over men, that he may be judge of life and death.

22 What and if God would, to show his wrath, and to make his power known,
suffer with long patience, the vessels of wrath prepared to destruction: 23
That he might also declare the riches of his glory upon the vessels of mercy,
which he has prepared unto glory? The second answer.
22 What and if. The second answer, wherein he does briefly declare, although
the counsel of God be incomprehensible on this part, yet it is apparent, his
equity is unblameable, no less in the destruction of the reprobate, then in
the salvation of the elect. He does not give a reason of the election of God
in such sort as though he would assign the cause why this man is chosen, and
that rejected. For both it was unmeet, that those things which are contained
in the secret counsel of God, should come under the censure of man: and also
that mystery was vnfoldable. therefore he restrayneth us, from examining
those things curiously, which exceed the capacity of man: in the mean while
he shows, that so far forth as the predestination of God does show forth
it self, therein appears true righteousness. I take the particle eide,
which Paul uses, as though it were said, what and if? that this whole sentence
may be interrogatiue.

For so the meaning shall be more apparent: and it shall be a kind of silence
or concealing, wherein must be understood, who therefore can accuse him of
unrighteousness, or appoint him a day? For here appears nothing but the
most straight rule of righteousness. But if we will understand the mind of
Paul, every word almost is to be examined. For thus he reasons, there are
vessels prepared for destruction, that is, bequeathed and destinated to
destruction: there are also vessels of wrath, that is, made and formed to this
end, that they might be testimonies of the vengeance and wrath of God. Now if
God patiently suffer those for some time, not destroying them at the first
moment, but differring the judgment prepared for them, and that to show forth
the testimonies of his severity, that others might be terrified by so
horrible examples: and also to set forth his power, whereunto he makes them
diversely to serve: and lastly that thereby the greatness of his mercy
toward the elect might be better known, and more clearly appear: what is
worthy to be reprehended in this dispensation? how be it it is no marvel
though he show not, whence it is that they are vessels prepared for
destruction. For out of that is gone before, he takes it to be a sure thing,
that the cause is hid in the eternal, and unsearchable counsel of God: the
righteousness whereof we ought rather to worship, then to search after. And he
has put vessels in a general signification for instruments. For whatsoever
action there is in any creature, it is (as a man would say) the ministry of
the power of God. Very fitly therefore are we the faithful called vessels of
mercy, which the Lord does use as instruments to show forth his mercy:
and the reprobate, the vessels of wrath, seeing they serve to show forth
the judgments of God.

23 That he might also declare the riches. Because I doubted not but in these
two particles, kai ina, and that, there was a displacing of words, that being
in the first place should be in the last: to the end this member might the
better agree with the former, I have translated it: That he might also declare.
And it is the second reason, By the destruction of the reprobrate Gods mercy
toward the elect is made more manifest.
which manifests the glory of God in the destruction of the reprobate:
because thereby the greatness of the goodness of God toward the elect is more
largely confirmed. For what do these differ from those, but that they are
delivered from the same goulfe of destruction by the Lord? And that by no
desert of their own, but of his free goodness. Therefore it can not otherwise
be, but that infinite goodness of God toward the elect, should be
commended more and more, when we consider how miserable all they are, who do
not escape his wrath. I interpret the word glory, which is twice repeated
here, to be put for the mercy of God, by the figure, metonymia, which is
here by putting the effect for the cause: for his chiefest praise consists
in doing good. So to the Ephesians, Ephe. 1.13.
after he has taught how we are adopted of God, to the praise of the glory of
his grace, shortly after he adds, that we are sealed by the spirit of
inheritance to the praise of his glory, the word grace being left out. His
meaning therefore is to signify, that the elect are instruments or vessels,
whereby God does exercise his mercy, that he might gloryfie his name in them.

And although in this second member he does more expressly affirm, that it
is God who prepares his elect unto glory, when as before he had simply
said, that the reprobate are vessels prepared unto destruction: yet there is
no doubt but the preparation of them both, does depend upon the secret
counsel of God. Otherwise Paul had said, the reprobate give or cast
themselves into destruction, But now he gives to wit, that before they are
borne, they are already addicted to their lot.

24 Whom he has also called: namely us, not only of the Jews, but also of
the Gentiles. 25 As he says also in Osee, I will call them my people, which
were not my people: and her beloved, which was not beloved. 26 And it shall be
in the place, where it was said unto them, ye are not my people, that there
they shall be called, the children of the living God. 27 And Esaias cries
concerning Israel, though the number of the children of Israel, were as the
sand of the sea, yet shall but a remnant be saved. 28 For he making his
account short, and gathering it into a brief sum in righteousness, because
the Lord will make a short account in the earth. 29 And as Esaias had said
before: except the Lord of hosts had left us a seed, we had been made as
Sodom, and had bin like to Gomorrha. 26 Whom he has also called. Out of that
disputation which he has hitherto had of the liberty of Gods election, two
things followed: namely that the grace of God is not so included within the
people of the Jews, that it can not also flow forth unto other nations, and
spread it self over the whole world. Secondly that it is not so tied to the
Jews, that it must needs come unto all the sons of Abraham according to the
flesh, without exception. For if the election of God, be grounded upon his
pleasure only: whither so ever his will shall turn it self. there also the
election of God has place. Election therefore being put down, now the way in
a manner is made unto those things which he has purposed to say as well of
the calling of the Gentiles, as the reiection of the Jews: the one whereof,
for noualtie did seem absurd, the other altogether unmeet or unworthy. Yet
because this latter had more offense in it, he handles the other, being less
odious, in the first place.

He says therefore that the vessels of Gods mercy, which he chooses unto the
glory of his name, are taken every where, no less from among the Gentiles,
then the Jews. But in the relative, whom, although the reason of grammar be
not observed by Paul, yet his meaning is, a passage as it were being made, to
add, that we are those vessels of Gods glory, who are partly taken out from
amongst the Jews, and partly from amongst the Gentiles. Where, by an argument
taken from the vocation of God he proves, there is no difference of nation
in election. For if petigrey taken from the Gentiles, was no impediment why God
should not also call us, it is apparaunt, the Gentiles are not banished from
the kingdom of God, and the covenant of eternal salvation.

25 As he says also in Osee. Now he declares that the calling of the
Gentiles ought not to seem new: as which was testified long before, by the
oracle of the prophet. The sense is plain enough, but that there is somewhat
to do for applying the testimony: for none will deny, but the Prophet
speaks there of the Israelites. For the Lord being offended at their
wickedness, denounces, they should no more afterward be his people. After
that he adds a consolation: and of not beloved, makes them beloved, of not
a people, a people. And Paul goes about to apply that unto the Gentiles,
which is precisely spoken unto the Israelites.

They who hitherto have best unfolded this knot, have thought that Paul would
reason thus: that which might be supposed an impediment to the Gentiles, to
hinder them from being partakers of salvation, was also in the people of
Israel: as God therefore in old time did graciously receive the Jews into
favor, whom he had cast off and banished: even so now he uses the same
bountifulnes toward the Gentiles. But because that interpretation, although
it may be suffered, yet seems unto me to be somewhat forced, let the readers
consider, whither this be not more apt, if we do believe, yt consolation of
the Prophet was not given to the Jews only, but also to the Gentiles. For it
is no new or strange thing among the Prophets, after they have published the
vengeance of God, against the Jews for their iniquities, to turn themselves
unto the kingdom of Christ, which was to be dispersed over the whole world.
Neither did they that whithout reason. For seeing the Jews by their sins did
so provoke the wrath of God, that they deserved to be divorced from him, there
remains no hope of salvation, unless they turn themselves unto Christ: by
whom the covenant of grace is restored, and as it was founded in him, so now
by his intercession it is renewed. And assuredly seeing Christ is the only
refuge in desperate affairs, or such as are past all hope: no sound
consolation can be brought unto miserable sinners, and such as see the wrath
of God hang over them, but by setting Christ before their eyes. Yea this (as
we have admonished) is ordinary amongst the Prophets, when they have humbled
the people being pricked with ye threatening of Gods vengeance, to recall them
unto Christ, the only sanctuary of those have no other refuge. And where the
kingdom of Christ is erected, there also that heavenly Jerusalem is raised
up, into which the Citizens out of all parts of the world are gathered. And
that chiefly avails in the present oracle: for when the Jews were cast out
of the family of God, by that means they were brought into a vulgar or common
estate, and were made like unto the Gentiles. After the difference is taken
away, now the mercy of God has place indifferently amongst all nations.

Whereby we gather that the testimony of the Prophet is fitly applied unto
the present cause. Wherein, God, after he has matched the Jews with the
Gentiles, pronounces that he will gather a Church of them both, that they
which were no people might begin to be.

I will call them my people which is not my people. This is said in respect
of the diuourcement, which GOD had now made with the people, depriving them
of all dignity, that they should not excel the foreign nations. And
although they whom God has ordained for sons unto himself, in his
eternal counsel, these are, and are for ever, sons: yet the scripture many
times reckons not among the sons of God, but whose election is confirmed by
calling, Whereby also he teaches us not to judge, and much less to denounce
of the election of GOD, How far was may denounce of the election of God.
but so far forth as it manifests it self by his tokens. So likewise
after that Paul had showed unto the Ephesians, that their election and
adoption was determined with God before the creation of the world, a little
after, he testifies they were sometime strangers from GOD: Namely, according
to that time, wherein the Lord had not yet declared his love toward them:
although he had embraced them with eternal mercy. Therefore in this place
they are called, not beloved, to whom the Lord rather testifies his wrath
then love. Finally, until adoption reconcile men unto God, we know his wrath
lies upon all mankind: the feminine gender of the participle, depends upon
the text of the Prophet. For he had said that a daughter was borne unto
him, whom he called not beloved: that under this type, the people might know
they were hated of God. Now as reiection was the cause of hatred, so the
Prophet teaches that the beginning of love is, when God does adopt them, who
for a time were forreiners.

27 And Esaias cries. Now he comes unto the second part, whereat he would
not begin least he should exasperate their minds too much. And this is not
without skill, that he brings in the prophet Esai crying, and not speaking:
namely that he might make them more attentive.

Furthermore, the words of the Prophet are plain, to fear the Jews, least
they should glory too much in the flesh. For it is horrible to be heard, that
of such an infinite multitude, a small number only should be saved. For
although the Prophet after he has described the destruction of the people,
least the faithful should think the covenant of God were utterly wyped out,
puts them in mind there is some hope of grace remaining: yet he restrayneth
that unto a few. But because the Prophet prophesied that of his time, we are
to see how Paul does rightly apply it to his purpose. And thus it ought to be
applied, when the Lord would deliver his people out of the captivity of
Babylon: he would the benefit of his deliverance should come unto a very
few of so great a multitude: which might justly be called the remnant of that
destruction, in respect of the multitude of people, which he suffered to perish
in exilement. Now that same carnal restitution, did figure the true
instauration of the Church of God, which is accomplished in Christ: Yea, it was
only the beginning thereof. That therefore which happened then, must needs
more certainly be fulfilled now in the progress and perfection of the
deliverance.

25 For he making his account short. The diversity of interpretations being
omitted, this seems unto me the natural sense, the Lord will both so shorten,
and cut off his people, yt that which shall remain may seem (as it were) a
certain consumption, that is, the form or print of a wonderful great ruin.
Yet this fewness which shall remain of the co^sumption or wasting, shall be ye
work of ye Lords righteousness: or, which I like better, shall serve to testify
ye righteousness of god through ye whole world

Because, word, generally in Scripture signifies a thing, word consummated
or perfected, is put for consummation or perfection. Where many interpreters
have grossly erred, whiles they go about to reason too subtillie. For they
have imagined, that the doctrine of the Gospel is so called, because the
ceremonies being cut off, it is a brief abridgement of the law. Although
it ought: rather to be called a consumption.

Where also not only there, but in Esai and Ezechiel, the interpreter has
erred, Esaias 10.22. and 28.22. Ezec. 11.13.
where it is said, Ah, ah, Lord God, will thou make a consummation of the
remnantes of Israel? when the Prophets would say, will thou destroy even the
remnauntes unto utter destruction? and that comes to pass through the
ambiguitie or doubtfulnes of the Hebrewe word.

For seeing the word Chalah may signify as well to end and finish, as to
consume, this difference has not been sufficiently observed in his place.
Neither has Esaias word for word so spoken, but he has put two substantive
nownes, namely, consumption, and definition, or deciding and ending: so that
the desire or seeking after Hebraisme in the Greek interpreter is marvelous
unreasonable. For to what purpose is it, to inwrappe a sentence, by it self
clear, in an obscure figurative speech? Add also that Esai speaks here
excessiuely, whiles by consumption he means extenuation or diminishing,
such as is wont to be in some famous destruction.

29 And as Esaias had said before. He brings another testimony out of the
first chapter, where the Prophet bewayleth the destruction of Israel in his
time. And if that has been once done, it is no new example. For the people of
Israel has no prerogative, but from their parents or auncetours: who
notwithstanding were handled in such sort, that the Prophet complayneth they
are so afflicted, that they were but a little from the destruction of Sodom and
Gomorrhe. Yet this difference there was, that a few were reserved for a seed,
to raise up the name, least it should perish utterly, and by eternal
forgetfulness be wiped out. For it behooued God, always to be so mindful of
his promise, that in the midst of his most severe judgments, he might leave
some place for mercy.

30 What shall we say then? that the Gentiles which followed not righteousness,
have attained unto righteousness, even the righteousness which is of faith. 31
But Israel in following the law of righteousness, has not attained unto the
law of righteousness. 32 Wherefore? because they sought it not by faith, but as
it were by works. For they have stumbled at the stumbling stone. 33 As it is
written, behold, I lay a stumbling stone in Sion, and a rock of offense: and
every one that believes in him shall not be ashamed. 30 What shall we say
then? Now, that he might take from the Jews all occasion of murmuring
against God, he begins to show those causes may be comprehended by man's
capacity, why the nation of the Jews was so rejected. But they do leudly,
and inuerte order, who go about to set and erecte these causes above the
secret predestination of God, which he taught before to be taken for the
first or highest cause. Howebeit as that is above all causes: so the corruption
and wickedness of the ungodly does give place and matter to the judgments
of God. And because he had to deal in a difficulte cause, he uses a
communication, and demands (as though he doubted) what might be said
here. That the Gentiles which followed not righteousness. Nothing was
thought more absurd or unlike, then that the Gentiles, who having no care of
righteousness, wallowed in the pleasures of their flesh, being called into
the participation of salvation, should obtain righteousness: and the Jews
on the contrary, who seriously gave diligence to the works of the law,
should be put beside all reward of righteousness.

Paul so utters that in bare words, which was a marvelous paradoxe or
strange thing, that by a reason added, he tempereth what so ever sharpness
or roughness was in it: namely that that righteousness the Gentiles attained
unto, does consist in faith: and therefore does depend upon the mercy of the
Lord, and not on man's own worthiness. And that that study of the law was
in the Jews, was preposterous, because they sought to be justified by
works: and so they labored to attain unto that, whereunto man can not come.
Yea, they also were offended at Christ, by whom only we have enteraunce to
obtain righteousness.

But the purpose of the Apostle in this former member, is to advance the mere
grace of God, that no other cause should be sought for in the calling of the
Gentiles then this, namely, that he vouchsaued to embrace them, being
unworthy of his favor. There is no salvation without righteousness.
He speaks of righteousness by name, without the which salvation comes
not: but whiles he says it proceeded from faith, he gives to understand
that the righteousness of the Gentiles does consist in free reconciliation.
For if any imagine they were therefore justified, because by faith they had
gotten the spirit of regeneration, he is far wide from the mind of Paul. For
it could not be true, yt they obtained yt they sought not, unless the Lord
freely embraced them straynge and wandering, and offered them righteousness,
whereof, in as much as they knew it not, there could flourishe no study
amongst them. But also it is to be noted, that the Gentiles did not otherwise
obtain righteousness by faith, but because God prevented their faith by his
grace.

For if by faith they had first attained unto righteousness, this now had
been to follow it. Therefore faith it self was a portion of grace.

31 Israel in following righteousness. Paul does frankly denounce that, which
was incredible to bespoken, namely, that it was no marvel, if the Jews by
following righteousness earnestly, profited nothing: because by running out of
the way, they wearied themselves in vain. Now in the first place he seems
unto me to have put the law of righteousness, by the figure hypallage, for
the righteousness of the law: Hypallage is, when things are turned vpside
down.
and in the repetition of the second member, in another sense to have so
termed the form or rule of righteousness. Therefore the sum is, that
Israel depending upon the righteousness of the law, namely that, which is
prescribed in the law, had not the true manner of justification. And it is a
notable allusion of words, whiles he teaches that the legal righteousness
was in cause, that they fell from the law of righteousness.

32 Not by faith, but as it were by works. Because commonly the excuse of
preposterous zeal seems to be just, Paul shows they are justly rejected,
who seek to get unto themselves salvation, by the confidence of works:
because so much as in them is, they destroy faith, out of the which there is no
health to be hoped for. Therefore if they should be partakers of their
desire, that success should be a making void of true righteousness.

Faith and the merit of works are utterly contrary.
Furthermore thou do see, how faith and the merits of works are compared
together, as things utterly contrary. Seeing then the confidence of works is
a great let, whereby the way to obtain righteousness is stopped up against
us: it is necessary that that being rejected, we rest upon the only goodness
of God. For this example of the Jews ought justly to terrify all those, who
seek to obtain the kingdom of God by works.

For as it is already declared, he calls not the observations of ceremonies
the works of the Law: but the merits of works: unto the which faith is
opposed, which faith not regarding his own worthynes, does (that I may say so)
with both eyes behold the sole mercy of God. For they have stumbled at the
stumbling stone. By an excellent reason he confirms the former sentence. For
nothing is more absurd, then that they should obtain righteousness, which
go about to overthrow it. Christ is given unto us for righteousness: he
labors to deprive him of his office, who so thrusts upon GOD the
righteousness of works. And hereby it appears, so often as men rest upon the
confidence of works, under the vain pretense of being zealous for
righteousness, by furious folly they fight with GOD.

Moreover, it is no hard matter to be known, how they stumble at Christ,
who trust to the confidence of works: for except we acknowledge our selves
to be sinners, How iusticiaries stumble at Christ.
bare and void of righteousness that is our own, we obscure the dignity of
Christ: which consists in this, that he might be light, health, life,
resurrection, righteousness, and medicine to us all. And to what end serve
all these, but that he might lighten the blind, restore the damned, quicken
the dead, rear them up are brought to nothing, wash them are full of filth,
cure and heal those are deadly diseased? yea if we claim unto our selves any
righteousness, we do in a sort strive with the power of Christ: seeing his
office is, as well to beat down all pride of flesh, as to ease and comfort
those labor and are heavy laden. And the testimony is properly cited. For
there God denounces that he will be an offense to the people of Judah and
Israel, where at they should stumble and fall.

Seeing Christ is the same God, spoke by the Prophet, it is no marvel,
though that be now fulfilled in him. And calling Christ a stone of offense.
He admonishes, that it is not strange, if they profited not in the way of
righteousness, who stumbled at the offense by their own perverse stubbornes,
when God had declared an easy way. And it is to be noted, that this does not
properly and of it self agree unto Christ, but rather is accidental by the
malice of men, as it follows straightwayes.

33 And every one that believes in him shall not be ashamed. He adddeth this
testimony, being taken other where, to the consolation of the godly: as if
he said, where as Christ is called a stone of offense, there is no cause that
therefore we should be afraid of him, or in steed of trust, conceive
trembling. For he is ordained to the ruin of the faithless, but to the life
and resurrection of the godly. Therefore as that Prophecy of stumbling and
offense is fulfilled in the rebellious and faithless: so there is another
which is directed to the godly: namely, that he is a strong stone, a precious
and corner stone, most firmly grounded, upon whom whosoever shall leave, he
shall not fall. And whereas he has put not to be ashamed, For not to make
have or precipitate, that he had from the Greek interpreter. Assuredly the
Lord there goes about to confirm the hope of his: And when the Lord bids
us hope well, thereby it follows, that we cannot be ashamed. 1. Pet. 2.
See the place of Peter, not much unlike unto this.

CHAP. 10.
1 BRethren, my hearts desire, and prayer unto God for Israel is, that they
might be saved. 2 For I bear them record, that they have the zeal of God,
but not according to knowledge. 3 For they being ignorant of the righteousness
of God, and going about to establishe their own righteousness, have not
submitted themselves to the righteousness of God. 4 For Christ is the end of
the law, for righteousness unto every one that believes.
HEreby we may see with how great carfulness the man of God does occur or
meet with offenses. For yet that he might temper whatsoever was bitter or
sharp, in opening the reiection of the Jews, he testifies, as before, his
good will toward them, and does confirm the same by the effect: namely, that
he had a care of their salvation before the Lord. For this affection
springs from pure charity. Although perhaps for some other cause also, he
was forced to testify his love toward the nation whereof he came: for his
doctrine had never been received of the Jews, if they had thought him to be
their sworn enemy: and also his falling from the law had been suspected of
the gentiles, because they had thought, that for the hatred of men, he was an
Apostata from the law, as we have touched in the former Chapter.

2 For I bear them record. This apperteineth to procure credit to his love:
for there was just cause, why he should rather have compassion on the^, then
hate them: seeing that he saw they fell only of ignorance, and not through
wickedness of mind, yea when he saw that for no other cause, then for some
affection of God, they were moved to persecute ye kingdom of Christ. But
hereby let us learn, It is dangerous to follow our good intentions
whether our good inte^tions do carry us, if we obey them. Commonly this is
thought to be a good and very fit excuse, when he that is reproved,
pretends he meant no harm. And this pretense at this day holds a great
many, that they apply not their study to search out the truth of God, because
they think that to be excusable whatsoever they transgress of ignorance,
without set malice, yea with a good intention. But there is none of us can
excuse the Jews, that they crucified Christ, that they cruelly raged against
the Apostles, that they went about to destroy and extinguish the Gospel: and
yet they had the same defense, wherein we glory securely. Therefore let those
vain hastings or wranglings of good intention go. If we seek the Lord from
our heart, let us follow the way by the which there is access unto him. For it
is better, (As Augustine says) yea even to halt in the way, then to run
stoutly out of the way. If we would be religious, let us remember that is true
which Lactantius teaches, namely, that is true religion, which is joined with
the word of God. And again when we see them to perish, who through good
intention wander in darkness, let us think we are worthy of a thousand deaths,
if we, being illuminated of God, do wittingly and willingly wander from his way.

3 For they being ignorant of the righteousness of God. Behold how through rash
zeal they erred: namely, that they went about to erect their own righteousness:
which foolish trust came of the ignorance of Gods righteousness. Mark the
antithesin or contrariety of the righteousness of God and men: first we see
they are opposed one against the other as things contrary, and which cannot
stand together: whereby it follows, that the righteousness of God is
overthrown, so soon as men establish their own righteousness. Secondly, to
the end the Antitheta, or contrarieties might answer one the other, What
righteousness is called the righteousness of God, and what the righteousness of
men.
out of question that is called the righteousness of God, which is the gift of
God: as again that is called the righteousness of men, which they seek, in,
or of themselves, or which they trust that they bring unto god. Therefore he is
not subject to the righteousness of God, who will be justified in himself:
because the first step to obtain the righteousness of God, is, to resign or
forsake his own righteousness: for, to what end is it, to seek for righteousness
elsewhere, but because necessity does constrain us? and we have declared in
another place, how men put on the righteousness of God by faith: namely, because
the righteousness of Christ is imputed unto the^. Finally, Paul does greatly
disgrace that pride wherewith hypocrites are puffed up, howsoever it be covered
with a fair face of zeal, whiles he says, the yoke of god being as it were
shaken off, they are all adversaries and rebels against the righteousness of God.

4 For Christ is the end of the law. The word fulfilling, seems unto me,
not to serve amiss in this place, as Erasmus also, has translated it
perfection: but because the other reading is received by the consent almost of
all men, and the same also agrees well, the readers for my part shall be at
liberty to retain it. By this reason the Apostle meets with an objection,
which might be moved against him. For the Jews might seem to have kept the
right way, because they applied or gave themselves to the righteousness of the
law: It stood him in hand to refute this false opinion, which thing he
does here. For he shows that he is a preposterous interpreter of the law,
who seeks to be justified by the works thereof: because the law was given to
this end, that it might lead us by the hand to another righteousness. Yea,
whatsoever the law teaches, whatsoever it commands, whatsoever it
promises, it has Christ always for his mark: so then all the parts thereof
are to be directed unto him. And that cannot be, unless we, being spoiled of
all righteousness, confounded with the knowledge of sin, do seek for free
righteousness of him only. Whereby it follows, that the corrupt abuse of the
law is justly reprehended in the Jews, who lewdly of their help made their
hinderance: yea it appears they did shamefully lame the law of God, who
having rejected the life or soul thereof, did take to them the dead body of
the letter. For albeit the law of righteousness does promise a reward to his
obseruers: yet after it has brought all under giltinesse, it substituteth a
new righteousness in Christ, which is not gotten by the merit of works,
but, being freely given, is received by faith. So the righteousness of faith
(as we saw in the first Chapter) has testimony of the law. And we have
here a notable place, that the law in all his parts respects Christ: and
therefore no man can have the true understanding thereof, who does not still
seek to come unto this mark.

5 For Moses describes the righteousness, which is of the law, that the man
which does these things, shall live in them, 6 But the righteousness which is
of faith, speaks on this wise, say not in thine heart, who shall ascend
into heaven? That is, to bring Christ from above. 7 Or, who shall descend
into the deep? that is, to bring Christ again from the dead. 8 But what
says it? The word is near thee, in thy mouth, and in thy heart, this is
the word of faith which we preach. 9 For if thou shall confess with thy
mouth, the Lord Jesus, and shall believe in thine heart, that God raised him
up from the dead, thou shall be saved. 10 For with the heart man believes
unto righteousness, and with the mouth man confesses to salvation. 6 For
Moses describes etc. That it might appear how greatly the righteousness of
faith, and the rigteousnes of works are contrary one to the other, he compares
them together. For by comparison, the repugnancie which is between things
contrary appears better. And he deals, Why paul rather alleges the
testimony of Moses then the Prophets.
not with the oracles of the Prophets, but with the testimony of Moses, for
this only cause, that the Jews might understand, there was not a law given by
Moses, which should hold them in ye confidence of works: but which should
rather lead the^ unto Christ. For although he should have alleged the
Prophets for witnesses of his sentence: yet this doubt had remained, why the
law did prescribe another form of righteousness. He therefore notably
remoueth this scruple whiles he confirms the righteousness of faith, even by
the doctrine of the law.

Furthermore, whereas Paul makes the law consent with faith, and yet
opposes the righteousness of that, The law has a twofold acception.
against ye righteousness of this, the reason thereof must be known. The law
has a twofolde acception. For sometime it signifies all that doctrine was
delivered by Moses, sometimes but that part which was proper to his ministry:
namely, which is contained in precepts, rewards, and punishments. For Moses
generally had this office, that he might instruct the people in the true rule
of godliness. Which thing if it be true, it behooved him to preach repentance
and faith: but faith is not taught, unless the promises of Gods mercy, and the
same free promises be propounded or set before the people: therefore it behooved
him to be a Preacher of the gospel: which thing he did faithfully as
appears by diverse places. And to the end he might inform the people unto
repentance, it was his part to teach what manner of life were acceptable to God:
and that he has comprised in the precepts of the law. Now to the end he
might put into the minds of the people a love of righteousness, and again,
inserte a hatred of sin, promises and threatenings were to be added: which
might declare, how there are rewards laid up for the just, and horrible
punishments for the wicked. Now also it was the duty of the people to consider
by how many ways they were accursed, and how far they were from that, that
they could merit God by their works: so they being in despair of their own
righteousness might flee unto the haven of Gods goodness, and that is unto
Christ himself. This was the end of Moses ministry.

And now because the promises of the gospel are only read here and there in
Moses, and the same also very obscurely: but the precepts and rewards
appointed for the keepers of the law appear eftsoons: worthily is this
office properly and peculiarly given unto Moses, to teach what true
righteousness of works is: secondarily, to show what reward remains for the
observation, and what punishment for the transgression thereof. In this respect
Moses himself is compared with Christ in John: where it is said, The law
was given by Moses, grace and truth is fulfilled by Christ. And so often as
the law is taken so stricktly, John 1.17.
Moses is covertly opposed unto Christ: and therefore we are then to consider
what the law contains in it self, being separate from the gospel. That
therefore which is said here of the righteousness of the law, must be
referred not unto the whole office of Moses, but unto this part, which
peculiarly in a manner was committed unto him.

Now I come unto the words, For Moses describes. Paul has Graphei, in
latin, scribit, in english he writes, Apheresis is y^ taking away of a letter
or syllable from the beginning of a word. Leuit. 18.5.
but it is the figure Aphaeresis, for the word describit, id est, he
describes. And the place is taken out of Leuiticus, where the Lord promises
eternal life to them shall keep his law. For thou see that Paul also has
so taken it, not of a temporal or transitory life only, which pleases a
many. And Paul reasons thus from that place, seeing no man can obtain
righteousness prescribed in the law, but he that fulfilleth exactly every
part thereof: and all men have always been far from that perfection: in vain
does any seek for salvation this way. Israel therefore did amiss, which
thought he could obtain the righteousness of the law, from the which we are
all excluded. See how he argues from the promise it self, that it profits
us nothing, namely, because of the impossible condition.

What a foolish toy is it then, to allege legal promises, to establishe the
righteousness of works? For a sure curse abides for us and the^: so far
is it off that salvation should come thence unto us. The more abominable is
the sottishnes of Papists, who think it sufficient to prove merits, by bare
promises. It is not in vain (quoth they) that God has promised life to his
worshippers: but in the mean while they see not, that it is therefore
promised, that the sense of their transgressions, might put into al men ye
fear of death: and so they being forced by their own want, might learn to
flee unto Christ.

6 But the righteousness which is of faith.) This place is such as may
greatelye trouble the Reader: and that for two causes. For both it seems to
be improperly wrested of Paul, and also the words seem to be changed into
another sense. But concerning the words we shall see what is to be said of
them: First let us consider the application. For it is a place of Deuteronomie,
where (as in the former place) Moses speaks of the doctrine of the law:
Deuteronomy. 30.12.
and Paul draws it unto the promises of the Gospel. This knotte may be
well untied, thus, Moses in that place shows the facilitye or easiness of
coming unto life, because the will of God was not now hid nor set a far
off from the Jews, but was laid before their eyes. If he spoke of the law
only, it had been a frivolous argument: seeing the law of God, being put
before our eyes, is nothing more easy to be done, then if it were set a far
off. Therefore he notes not the law only, but in general all the doctrine
of God, which comprehends under it the Gospel. For the word of the law by
it self, is never in our heart: no not the least syllable thereof, until it be
put in, by the faith of the Gospel. Secondly, yea even after regeneration, the
word of the law shall not properly be said to be in our heart: because it
requires perfection, from the which the faithful themselves are far off.
But the word of the Gospel has his seat in the heart, although it fills
not the heart: for it offers pardon for the imperfection and want. And Moses
altogether in that Chapter (as also in the fourth) studieth to commend unto
the people the singular love of God, because he had received them into his
tuition and government: which commendation could not be taken from the bare
law. Neither lets it, that Moses preaches there of reforming the life unto
the rule of the law: for the spirit of regeneration is coupled with the
righteousness of faith. Therefore he collecteth the one out of the other:
because the observation of the law, is of the faith of Christ. Neither is it
to be doubted but this sentence depends upon that principle, the Lord shall
circumcise thine heart: which he had put down a little before in the same
Chapter.

Wherefore they are easily refuted, who say that Moses entreats there of good
works. Indeed I confess that to be true: but I deny it to be absurd, that
the observation of the law should be drawn from this fountain, that is, ^^om
the righteousness of faith. Now the opening of the words is to be sought for.
Say not in thy heart, who shall ascend etc. Moses names heaven and the Sea, as
places furthest off, and hard for a man to come unto. But Paul, as though
there were some spiritual mystery hidden under these words, draws them unto
the death and resurrection of Christ. If any allege, that this interpretation
is too much wrested, and too subtle, let him know the mind of the Apostle
was not, curiously or exactly to handle the place of Moses: but only to apply
it unto the treatise of the present cause. He does not therefore recite
syllable by syllable what is in Moses: but he uses a polishing, whereby he
applies the testimony of Moses more nearly to his purpose. He spoke of
p^aces are not to be come unto* Paul has expressed those places, which are
most of all hidden from our eyes, and yet are to be ^ee^e of our faith.

Wherefore if you take these to be spoken by the way of amplification or
polishing, thou can not say that Paul has violently and unaptly wrested the
woods of Moses: but rather thou will confess that without any damage to the
sense, he has notably alluded unto the words, heaven and Sea. Now let us
expound the words of Paul simply. Because the assurance of our salvation
depends upon two principles* namely, whiles we understand that life is
purchased for us, and death conquered to us. With both which, he teaches our
faith is supported by the word of the Gospel. For Christ by dying has
swallowed up death: by rising again he has gotten life in his power.

Now in the gospel the benefit of Christ's death and resurrection is
communicated unto us; then there is no cause that we should seek further for
any thing. Therefore that it might appear the righteousness of faith is
abundantly sufficient unto salvation, he teaches that those two members,
which only are necessary unto salvation, are contained in it. Who then shall
ascend into heaven? Is as much as if he said, who knows whether that
inheritance of eternal and celestial life abides for us? Who shall descend
into the deep? As if thou said, who knows whether eternal death of the
soul also follow the death of the body? Both which doubts he teaches to
be taken away by the righteousness of faith: For the one should bring Christ
down from heaven, Christ in his humane nature has taken possesion of the
heavens for the faithful.
the other from death should bring him back again. For the ascension of
Christ into heaven, ought so to establish our faith of eternal life, that he
in a manner draws Christ himself out of the possession of the heavens, that
doubts whether the inheritance of heaven, be prepared for the faithful, in
whose name and cause he is entered in thither. Likewise, seeing he took upon
him the great horrors of Hell, that he might deliver us thence, to call it
into question, whether the faithful be still subject to this misery, is to
make his death void, and in a manner to deny it.

8 But what says it. That negative speech which the Apostle has hitherto
used, did serve to take away the impediments of faith: it remains therefore
that he declare the manner of obteining righteousness, unto the which end this
affirmation is added. And whereas there is an interrogation interposed, when
they might all have been spoken together in on course of speech, that is done
to procure attention. And also his meaning is to show, what a great difference
there is between the righteousness of the law and the Gospel: seeing that
shows it self a far off, it does drive away all men from coming unto it:
but this offering it self at hand, does familiarly inuit us unto the fruition
of it. The word is near thee. First of all this is to be noted, that least
the minds of men being carried away by vain circumstances, should err from
salvation, the bounds of the word are prescribed unto them, within the which
they ought to keep themselves, For it is as if he should command them to
be content with the word only, and admonish them that in this glass the
secrets of heaven are to be seen, which would both dasill their eyes with
their brightness, and astonishe their ears, and also make the mind it self
amassed. Therefore the godly receive an excellent consolation out of this place,
touching the certaynetie of the word: namely, that they may as safely rest
therein, as in the most present beholding of things, or as in any thing is
present and in hand. Secondly it is to be noted, that such a word is
propounded by Moses, wherein we have firm and sure trust of salvation. This
is the word of faith. Justly does Paul take that: for the doctrine of the
law, does not pacyfie and quiet the conscience: neither does it minister unto
the conscience those things wherewith it ought to be content. Yet in the
mean while he excludes not the other parts of the word, no not the
precepts of the law: but his mind is to put down remission of sins for
righteousness, and that without such exact obedyence as the law requires.
Therefore the word of the gospel, wherein we are not commanded to merit
righteousness by works, but to embrace it by faith, being freely offered,
suffices to pacify men's consciences and establish their salvation. And the
word of faith by the figure Metonymia, is put for the word of promise, that
is for the gospel: because it has a relation with faith. For the contrariety
whereby the law is discerned from the gospel must be understood. And out of
this note of distinction we gather, as the law requires works, so the
gospel requires nothing else, but that men bring faith to receive the grace of
God. This parcel which we preach, is therefore added, least any should
suspect Paul to dissent from Moses. For he testifies that in the ministry
of the Gospel he agrees with Moses: seeing he also did not place our
felicity any other where then in the free promise of Gods grace.

9 So that if thou confess. This also is rather an allusion then a proper and
natural interpretation. For it is like that Moses by the figure Synecdoche did
use the word mouth, Synecdoche, is when by one thing another is understood.
for face or countenance. But it was not unseemly for the Apostle to allude
unto the word mouth to this sense, when the Lord publishes his word before
our face assuredly he calls us unto the confession thereof. For wheresoever
the word of the Lord is there it ought to fructify: and the fruit, is the
confession of the mouth. Whereas he puts confession before faith, it is the
figure Anastrophe, very usual in the Scriptures. For the order had been
better, Anastrophe, is an inuersion of words when yt is first should be last,
etc.
if faith of the heart being put in the first place, confession of the mouth
which proceeds thence, had been added. And he does confess the Lord Jesus
aright who adorneth him with his virtue, acknowledging him to be such one, as
he is given of the father, and described in the Gospel.

And whereas resurrection only is named, we must not so take it, as though
his death were in no place: but because Christ by rising again made up our
salvation. For albeit our redemption and satisfaction was accomplished by his
death, by the which we are reconciled unto God: yet the victory against sin,
death, and Satan, was gotten by his resurrection. Hence also came
righteousness, newnes of life, and the hope of blessed immortality. And
therefore oftentimes resurrection only is set before us for our confidence of
salvation, not that it should lead us away from his death, but because it
testifies the effect and fruit of his death: to be brief, his resurrection
contains in it his death. Whereof we have said somewhat in the vi. chapter.
And also that Paul requires not only an historical faith, but he
compriseth the end thereof in the resurrection. For we must remember
wherefore Christ rose again: namely, that in raising him, the counsel or
advise of God the father was, to restore us all to life. For although Christ
had this power of himself to take his soul again, yet notwithstanding, this
work for the most part in the scripture is ascribed unto God the father.

10 For with the heart man believes unto righteousness. This place may further
us to the understanding of the justification of faith. For it declares that
we are thereby justified, that we embrace the mercy of God offered unto us in
the Gospel: hence therefore is it, that we are just, because we believe
that God is gracious unto us in Christ. But let us note, that the seat of
faith is not in the head but in the heart: and yet I will not contend about
that matter, in what part of the body faith rests: but because the word
heart, is almost always taken for a serious and sincere affection, What faith
is.
I say faith is a firm and effectual confidence, and not a bare knowledge
only. With his mouth man makes confession unto salvation. It may seem
marvelous, why he should now attribute a portion of our salvation unto
confession, having so often before this testified* that we are saved by faith
only. But thereby it may not be collected, that confession is the cause of
our salvation: only his mind is to show, how God does perfect our salvation:
namely, whiles he causes faith with he has put into our hearts, to appear
forth by confession. Yea his mind was simply to note which is true faith, The
nature of a true faith.
whence this fruit proceeds, least any should pretend a vain title of
faith for it: for true faith ought so to kindle the heart with the study of
Gods glory, that the flame thereof may appear forth. And surely, he that is
justified, even now already has obtained salvation: therefore the faith of
the heart makes no less unto salvation, then the confession of the mouth.
Thou see he has so distinguished, that he refers the cause of
justification unto faith: and in the second place shows, what is necessary
for the consummation of salvation. For neither can any believe but he must
confess with his mouth: and there is a necessity of perpetual consequence,
not which may ascribe salvation unto confession. But let them see, what they
can answer unto Paul, who at this day proudly boast unto us an imaginary
faith, which being content with the secrecy of the heart, leaves out
confession of mouth, as a superfluous thing. For it is too childishe to say
there is fire there, where there is neither flame nor heat.

11 For the scripture says, every one that believes in him shall not be
ashamed. 12 For there is no difference between the Jew and the Grecian, for
he that is Lord over all, is rich unto all, that call on him. For whosoever
shall call upon the name of the Lord shall be saved. 11 For the scripture says.
having noted the causes why God did justly reject the Jews, he returns to
affirm or prove the calling of the Gentiles: which is the other part of the
question, wherein he is now conversant. Because therefore he had declared the
way whereby men come unto salvation, and the same is no less common and open
for the Gentiles then the Jews: Now adding first an universal sign, he
does plainly extend it to the Gentiles: secondly he also calls the
Gentiles by name unto it. And he repeateth that testimony which he had
already alleged out of Esaias, that his sentence might have the more
authority: and also that it might appear how well the Prophecies spoken of
Christ do consent with the law.

12 For there is no difference or respect etc. If confidence or faith only be
required, and whersoeuer the same shall be found, there again the love of God
shall show forth it self to salvation: then shall be no difference or respect
of kindred or nation. And he adds a most firm reason, for if he who is the
Creator and maker of the whole world, be the God of all men, he will show
himself loving to all, who shall acknowledge and call upon him as God. For
seeing his mercy is infinite, it cannot be chosen, but that it should extend it
self to all, who crave or seek for the same. Rich, is taken in this place,
actiuely, for bountiful and beneficial. Where we must note that ye richnes of
our father can not be diminished or decreased by his bounty and liberalite,
and therefore that we have nothing the less, albeit he in rich others with
the manifold treasures of his grace. The riches of God cannot be decreased.
Therefore there is no cause why we should envy one another prosperity, as
if thereby we lost or wanted any thing. And albeit this reason of itself was
strong enough, yet he confirms it by the testimony of the Prophet Joel:
because the universal particle being expressed he includes all men together.
But the readers shall perceive much better by the circumstance that that which
Joel utters does agree with this place: Joel. 2.32. Acts. 2.24.
and likewise that in the Acts: Both because in that place he does prophecy of
Christ his kingdom, and also having foretold that the anger of God should
burn exceedingly in the midst of this his threatening, he promises salvation
to all who shall call upon ye name of God. Whereupon it follows, that the grace
of God does pearce even to ye very deapth of death so far forth as it be
sought for thence, that it is not to be denied the Gentiles.

14 How then shall they call upon him in whom they have not believed? and how
shall they believe in him of who^ they have not heard? and how shall they hear
without a Preacher. 15 But how shall they preach except they be sent?
according as it is written: How bewtifull are the feet of them who bring
tidings of peace, who bring tidings of good things. 16 But all have not obeyed
the gospel, for Isaias says, Lord, who has believed our speech? 17 Therefore
faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the word of God. Here I will not
busy the reader over long in reciting and refuting other men's opinions. Let
every man use his own judgment, and let it be lawful for me freely to say
what I think.

Therefore that you may understand what is the end of this Gradation,
consider first, Gradation is when the speecht is so distinguished by degrees
that that which ends one member begins the next.
that there was a mutual conjunction betwixt the calling of the Gentiles and
the ministry of Paul, which he did perform and execute among them: so that
the approbation of the one did depend upon the approbation of the other. Now
it behooved Paul to make the calling of the Gentiles manifest and without all
doubt or question, and also to show a reason of his ministry, least that he
should seem to publishe the grace of God amiss, in that he did withdraw or
take from the children of God, the bread which was properly appointed for the^,
and give it to dogs. And therefore he does both these things together. But the
coherencie and agreement of his words will not de perfectly understood, before
yt every particular part thereof be expounded in order. This his proceeding is
as much in effect, as if he should say, that both Jews and Gentiles declare
and show that they believe in God, by calling upon his name: because the true
calling upon ye name of god cannot be, except there were first a right
knowledge of him. Furthermore, faith comes by the word of God. But the word
of God is preached in no place but by the special providence and appointment
of God. Therefore where the invocation of God is, there is also faith: where
faith is, there was also first the seed of the word, Where preaching is, there
is also the calling of God, or there men are called of God. Now where there is
so effectual and fruitful a calling of God: there is an evident and
infallible toke^ of god his love. Whereby it is apparent, yt the Gentiles are
not to be debarred or excluded the kingdom of God, whom God has admitted into
the fellowship and participation of salvation. For as the preaching of ye
Gospel is the cause of their faith, so God his sending is the cause of
preaching, whereby it pleased him to provide for their salvation after this
manner. Now let us examine particularly, that which follows.

14 How shall they call, etc. Paul's mind is to join ye invocation of God with
faith, as indeed they are things nearly linked and joined together: for he
who calls upon God does (as it were) commit himself into the only haven of
saftie: To flee unto God in prayers is the safest haven of all.
and that which is the most surest kind of refuge, he does like a son
repose or lay himself as it were in the bosom of a most good and loving
father, that by his care he may be protected, by his indulgencie and love he
may be cherished, by his bounty he may be relieved by his virtue he may be
stayed and vpholden. Which thing no man can do, who before has not so
certain a persuasion of god his fatherly love toward him settled in his mind:
that he dare boldly hope or look for any thing at his hands.

Therefore it is necessary that he who calls upon God should assure himself
to receive aid and help from him. For Paul speaks here of that Invocation
which pleases God. For hypocrites call upon God, but not to their salvation,
because they call upon him without any sense or feeling of faith. Whereby it is
evident how foolish all the School men be, who offer themselves doubtfully to
God, not being stayed by faith. Paul is of a quite contrary mind, who takes
this as a principle granted: namely, that we cannot pray aright unless we be
certainly persuaded of the success. Neither does he set down here an
intricate or doubtful faith, but ye certainty or assurance which our minds
conceive of his fatherly love and goodness, whiles by the Gospel he reconcileth
us to himself and adopteth us for his sons. By this confidence only we have
access to him: as it is also to ye Ephe. Ephesi. 3.12.
And on the other side gather y^ that only is true faith, which of if self
brings forth the invocation of god. For it cannot be, but that he should
continually aspire unto the goodness of God, by all prayers or supplications,
who once has tasted of the same.

How shall they believe in him of whom etc. The sum and sense of these words
is this: namely, that we are after a sort dumb until the promise of God open
our mouth to pray. Which order also he notes in the prophet Zach. in these
words: I will say to them, Zacha. 13.9.
you are my people, and they shall say to me, thou art our god. For it is not
our parts to feign and imagine what manner of God we list. Therefore we must
have the true and lawefull knowledge of him, such as is set down in his word.
And if any man shall suppose God to be good by his own sense and imagination,
God must be known and worshipped according to his word
that shall be no sure and stable faith, but a wavering and wandering
imagination. And therefore the word is necessarily required to the true
knowledge of God. Here he has set down no other word then yt which is
preached, because this is ye ordinary means which the Lord has appointed for
the dispensatio^ thereof: But if any man shall hereby contend to prove that
God could not otherwise then by the means of preaching, infuse, or power his
knowledge into men, we deny that to be the meaning of the Apostle, who had
respect only to the ordinary dispensation of God, and would not prescribe
any law or limitation to his grace.

15 How shall they preach except they be sent? He means that it is an
argument and pledge of the love of God, when he does vouchsafe any nation
with the preaching of his Gospel, and that there is no preacher thereof, whom
he has not stirred up by his special providence: and therefore there is no
question, but God does visit that nation, where his gospel is preached. But
because Paul does not here handle ye lawful calling of every man to yt
function, it should be needles to use any long spech thereof in this place. Only
it may suffice for to remember thus much, Namely, The gospel comes not by
chance unto any people.
that the Gospel does not fall down and as it were by chance like rain out
of the Clouds: but is brought by the hands and ministry of men, whether it
is sent from above.

As it is written, How beautiful, etc. Thus we ought to apply this testimony
of Esaias, and Nahum to this present matter: Esaias. 52.7. Nah. 1.17.
The Lord offering hope of deliverance to his people, sets forth the
coming of them who should bring the gladsome tydinges thereof, with a
singular commendation. Thereby therefore he has declared that the office or
ministry of the Apostles is to be had in no less price and estimation, by
which the tidings of eternal life is brought unto us. And thereupon it
follows that it comes from God, for as much as there is nothing to be
desired or praise worthy in this world, which does not proceed and come from
his hand.

Here also we learn how greatly the preaching of the Gospel is to be
desired, and how highly it is to be esteemed of all good men, which is
commended in such sort by the mouth of God. Neither is it to be doubted but
that God speaks gloriously of the incomparable price of this treasure, that
all men's minds may be awaked and stirred up to seek for the same greedily. By
this word feet understand in this place their coming, by the figure
metonymia.

16 But all have not obeyed the Gospel. This perteyneth nothing to that
argument which Paul prosecuteth and follows in this gradation. And therefore
he does not repeat it in the conclusion which follows strayghtwayes: but
yet it was very necessary and expedient for Paul to join this also in steed
of a preoccupation, least that where as it was said, that the word does
always ordinarily go before faith, even as the seed is before the corn, any
man should reason or draw an argument from the contrary part, and infer,
that faith must needs follow, wheresoever the word is. For so might Israel
glory, who never wanted the word. Though ordinarily the word does always go
before faith, yet faith does not always follow where the word is. Iere. 53.1.
and John 12.38.
Therefore it was meet and requisite for him to declare this in his way or
passage, yt many are called who are not chosen. And heriteth a place out of
Esai and John, where the Prophet being about to publishe that excellent
oracle of the death and kingdom of Christ, Does first with admiration and
wonder speak of the pawcitie and fewness of believers, which in spirit
appeared such to him, as forced him to cry out: Lord who has believed our
report, that is to say, the words which we have preached.

For where as the Hebrewe word shemugnah signifies speech passiuely, the
Grecians have expounded it acoen and the Latins sermonem, albeit improperly,
yet not in any obscure or doubtful sense. Now we see why this exception was
added by the way to wit, that no man should think faith does necessaryly
follow wheresoever the preathing of the word does flourishe.

Notwithstanding he notes the reason afterward when he adds, To whom is
the arm of the Lord revealed? For he signifies that there appears no
profit or fruit of the word, but whilst God does shine upon us by the
bryghtnesse of his spirit, and so is the inward calling distinguished from
the outward voice of man. Which inward calling is only effectual, and
proper to the elect. Whereby it is evident, how foolyshly some men reason,
that all are indifferently elected and chosen, because the doctrine of
salvation is universal, and God does indifferently inuit all men unto him.
For the generality of the promise alone of it self, and by it self does not
make salvation common and general to all: But rather this peculiar revelation
whereof the prophet makes mention, restrayneth and tyeth it only to the
elect.

17 Therefore faith comes by hearing, etc. By the conclusion we see what
Paul did respect in framing that his gradatio^: Namely to show that
wheresoever faith is, there God has already given a manifest and evident
sign of his elecion.

Secondly, that he has powered out his blessinge by the ministration of the
Gospel, that he might lighten the minds of men by faith, and by the same faith
also might prepare them to call upon his name, wherein salvation is promised to
all. And that by this means it was testified how the Gentiles were admitted
by him into the fellowship of the eternal inheritance. And this a worthy and
excellent place concerning the virtue and efficatie of preaching, because he
does testify that faith proceeds and springs from it. He confessed
truly of late, that of it self it profits nothing: but where it pleases
the Lord to work, this is the instrument of his power. And truly both the
voice of man is unable by his own virtue to pearce into the soul: and also
(...) who is mortal would be too proud, if he were said to have power to
regenerate us? and also the light of faith is a more high and excellent thing,
then that it can be given and bestowed by man. And yet all this does not
hinder, but God may work effectually by the voice of man, so that he may
beget in us faith by his ministry.

Furthermore we must note, that faith is not grounded upon any other doctrine
then upon the word of God: for Paul does not say that faith does proceed
from every doctrine, Faith is grounded upon the word of God only.
but he restrayneth it by express words to the word of God: which
restraynte were absurd, if faith might lean or stay itself upon the decrees
of men. Therefore all the invention of man must cease, when as the certayntie
of faith is handled: by this means also does that papistical dream and fancy
of intricate and entangled faith fall flat to the ground, which seuereth
and destracteth faith from the word. And much more yt execrable and cursed
blasphemy, which would have the authority of the word to hang wavering and
doubtful, till such time as the authority of the Church does stay and
establish it.

18 But I demand have they not heard? yea truly their sound is gone into
all the earth, and their words into the ends of the world. 19 But I demand
has not Israel known? first Moses says, I will provoke you to envy by a
nation that is not my nation, and I will anger you by a foolish nation: 20 And
Esaias is bold and says, I was found of them who sought me not, I was made
known to them who did not ask after me. 21 But of Israel he says, I have
stretched out my hands daily to a proud and rebellious people. 18 But I say
have they not heard, etc. Seeing that by preaching the minds of men are
indewed with the knowledge of God, which of it self breeds and brings
forth the invocation and calling upon the same God: It remained to be examined
whether the truth of God were ever declared and preached to the Gentiles or
no. For in that Paul turned to the Gentiles upon the sudden, there was no
small offense taken at this his sudden change and alteration. Therefore he
asks this question, whether God had never directed and sent his voice before
to the Gentiles, and performed the duty of a teacher toward the whole world.

Furthermore to the intent he might show how the school is generally free
and open to all, into the which God does gather to him scholars from every
place, he cites the testimony of the prophet, which in appearaunce does
seem to make little to the matter: for the Prophet speaks not there of the
Apostles, but of the dumb works of God. In which he says the glory of God
shines so evidently, Psalm. 19.5.
as that they may be said to have their certain tongue to declare the
virtues of God.

This place of Paul has caused the ancient writers to expound that whole
Psalm allegorically, whose steps the posterity has also followed. So that
without contradiction or controversy the son compared to a bridegroom going
out of his chamber was Christians the Apostles were understood by the heavens:
They who were more religious, and behaved them selves more modestly in the
interpretation of ye scripture, do think yt it was properly spoken of the
building and frame of the heavens, and that Paul did transfer it to the
Apostles by way of allusion. But because I find that the servants of God
handled ye scriptures every where with more reverence, Allusion, is when we in
respect the saying or writing of another, that we also borrow some words
thence, or else touch them in our own words
and that they wauered not hither and thither so licenciously, I cannot be
persuaded that Paul abused this place in such sort. Therefore I take this his
allegation in the proper and natural sense or meaning of the prophet, so that
the argument may be this, namely, that God has made his dietie manifest to the
Gentiles even from the beginning of the world, albeit not by the preaching of
me^, yet by the testimony of his creatures. For although the Gospel was not
the^ hard of among them, yet notwithstanding the whole frame and workmanship of
heaven and earth did speak, and did glorify their author by their preaching.
It appears therefore, that God, even at ye time wherein he contained and kept
the grace of his covenant with in the people of Israel, did not withdraw his
knowledge in such sort from the Gentiles, but that he did always show them
some spark, and light thereof. In deed he made him self more nearly known
and manifest to his chosen people, so that the Jews might be worthily
compared to domestical hearers who^ he taught familiarly by his holy mouth.
Notwithstanding because he did also speak unto the Gentiles a far off by the
voice of ye heavens, by this prea^ble or foresigh the showed yt he would al so
make himself known at the length to the Gentiles. And yet I know not why the
greek interpreter has translated the hebrew word kauam, ph^hoggon, a sound.
For the hebrewe word signinifieth a line sometime in building, and sometime in
writing. But concerning this present plans, seeing it is sure, that the same
thing is repeated twice, it seems unto me that the heavens are brought in,
declaring both by writing and speech ye power of God to all mankind. For by the
word, going forth, the Prophet does admonish us that that doctrine, whereof the
heavens are ye preachers and publishers, is not shut up within the narrow
and straight compass of one land or region, but does sound out into the
uttermost parts or quarters of the world.

19 But I demand, has not Israel known etc. This objection of the contrary
part, is taken from the comparison of the lesser and greater. Paul has
reasoned that the Gentiles are not to be debarred and excluded from the
knowledge of God, seeing that God from the beginning, albeit obscurely and by
shadows, has manifested himself unto them, or at the least has given them
some taste of his truth. What then shall we say of Israel, who was lightened
with a far other light of doctrine? For how comes it to pass, that
profane men, and such as were strangers, should run to the light being
showed them a far off, but the holy stock of Abraham should refuse the
light being familiarly and plainly seen.

For we must always reteyne that distinction: what nation is so renowned or
famous, that it has their Gods approaching so near unto them, Deuteronomy. 4.8.
as thy God at this day comes near to thee?

Therefore it is not from the purpose, and impertinent to the matter to ask
this question, why the knowledge (of God), did not consequently ensue and
follow the doctrine of the law with which Israel was indewed. First Moses
says etc. By the testimony of Moses he proves that if God should prefer
the Gentiles before the Jews, yet there were no absurdity therein. The place
is taken out of that famous Canticle in Deuteronomie, Deuteronomy. 32..21
where God vpbrayding the Jews with their unfaithfulness, does denounce and
threaten this vengeance against them, namely, that he will provoke them to
emulation by taking the Gentiles into his covenant: because that they were
revolted and fallen away to false gods. You have (says he) despised and
rejected me, and transferred and given my right and honor to Idols: and I, to
be revenged of this injury, in like manner will bring the Gentiles into your
place, and will translate that unto them which hitherto I have given unto you.
And that could not be done without the denouncing of the Jews. For here
upon sprang the emulation, of which Moses makes mention, that God did appoint
or take to him self a nation which were no nation, and did raise up a new
people of nothing, who should possess the place from whence the Jews were
cast and removed, even as they, the true God being forsaken, did give over them
selves to Idols.

And although at the coming of Christ they were not fallen to that gross and
exernall Idolatry, it makes nothing for their excuse: seeing they had
profaned the whole worship of God by their inuentio^s: yea at ye last they
denied God the father reueyled unto them in his only begotten son Christ,
which is the highest, and extremest kind of impiety. Mark that these words,
a foolish nation, and no nation are the same in effect: because without the
hope of eternal life there is no essence or being of man properly.

Finally, the beginning and original of life proceeds from the light of
faith. Therefore the spiritual essence or being proceeds from new creation:
in which sense Paul calls the faithful, the work of God, by the which
they are regenerate by his spirit, and reformed to his own image or likeness.

Now by this word, foolish, we gather all things to be mere vanity in
which men be wise without the word of GOD.

20 But Esaias is bold and says. Because this prophecy is somewhat more
plain and clear, to the intent he might procure greater attention, he
foresheweth that it is full of boldness, as if he should say, the prophet
did not speak figuratively or doubtingly, but in plain and evident words,
did avouch the calling of the Gentiles. And that which Paul by inserting or
interposing of a few words, has separated in this place, is to be found
jointly together in the Prophet Esai: Esai. 65.12.
where the Lord denounces that the time shall come wherein he will translate
his grace to the Gentiles: and presently he adds the reason, namely, that he
was weary of the contumacie and rebellion of Israel, which now by over long
continuance was become intolerable to him.

Thus therefore he speaks, They who enquired not of me before, and
neglected my name, now have sought after me: (he uses the preter perfectence
for the future, to set down and note the certainetie of the prophecy) they
who sought not after me have found above their hope and desire. I know that
this place is wholly perverted by some of the Rabbis, as if god did promise
that he would bring to pass that the Jews should repent and return from
their defection or falling away (from God.) But there is nothing more evident,
then that the Prophet does speak of strangers, because it follows by and by
in the text: I said, Behold I am come to a people, who have not called upon my
name. Therefore without question the Prophet does pronounce, that it shall come
to pass, that those should be received into the household of God, by a new
adoption, who beforetime were strangers. That is therefore the calling of the
Gentiles, in which notwithstanding the general type and figure of the calling
of all the faithful does appear. For there is no man who preuenteth the
Lord, but we are all without exception delivered from ye bottomless pit of
death, by his free mercy: where there is no knowledge of him, no desire of
worshipping him, to conclude, no sense or feeling of his truth.

21 But of Israel, etc. The cause is added, why God went to the Gentiles, to
wit, for that he saw his grace to be scoffed at among the Jews. But to the
intent the readers might better perceive that the excecatio^ of the people was
noted in the second member, Paul does expressly admonish that the chosen
people are vpbrayded with their malice: Word for word it is thus. He says
to Israel: But Paul has followed the Hebrewe phrase, because lamed is often
put for min. And he says that he did stretch out his hand to Israel, whom
he did daily inuit unto him, both by his word, and also ceased not to entice
or allure by all kind of gentleness and bountifulness, for he uses these
two means to call men. God does call us unto him, not only by his word, but
also by his lenity, bountifulness, and goodness. etc.
Seeing whiles he does so, he testifies his benevolence toward them.
Howebeit he complayneth especially of the contempt of his word. Which is so
much the more detestable, as God does more evidently declare his fatherly care,
whiles he calls men unto him self by his word. And it is a very significant
and forceable kind of speech, namely, that he streatcheth out his hand,
because in procuring and furthering our salvation by the ministers of his
word: He does reach forth his hands to us, as if a father being ready to
take up his son lovingly into his lap, should stretche out his arms.

And he says daily that it should be no marvel to any man, though he were
weary of doing good to the^, seeing he did avail and profit nothing by his
assiduitie or continual doing good. This is the same figure which is in
Jeremy, where he says that he rose up early in the morning to admonish them.
Ie. 7.13. and 11.7.
Furthermore their infidelity is set forth by two most fit names: for this
participle Apeithounta I think good to translate stubborn or rebellious: and
yet Erasmus, and the old interpreters translation which turn it, not
believing, is not altogether to be misliked. But seeing the Prophet accuses
the people of stubbornness, and afterward adds that they did err in ways
which were not good: I doubt not but the meaning of the Greek interpreter,
was to expound the Hebrew word Sorer by two words: First, calling them a
disobedient and rebellious people, afterward a gainesaying people. For because
their contumacie did show and bewray it self herein, namely that the people
did stubbornly reject the holy admonitions of the Prophets, with an untamed
pride and bitterness.

CHAP. 11.
1 I Demand then, has God cast away his people? God forbid: for I also am an
Israelite, of the seed of Abraham, of the tribe of Benjamin. 2 God has not
cast away his people which he knew before. Know ye not what the scripture says
of Elias, how he makes request unto God against Israel, saying: 3 Lord, they
have killed thy Prophets, and dug down thine altars, and I am left alone,
and they seek my life. 4 But what says the answer of God to him? I have
reserved to my self, seven thousand men, which have not bowed the knee unto
Baal. 5 Even so then at this present time there is a remnant, through the
election of grace. 6 And if it be of grace, it is no more of works: or else
were grace no more grace. But if it be of works, it is no more of grace: or
else were work no more work.
I Demand then. etc. That which he has hitherto said of the cecitie and
obstinacy of the Jews, might seem to tend unto this, as though Christ by his
coming had translated the promises else where, the Jews being put out from
all hope of salvation. Therefore he preuenteth that objection in this place:
and so moderateth that he had said before of the reiection of the Jews, that
no man should think the covenant which GOD made in old time with Abraham, was
now abrogated: or that God had so forgotten it, that the Jews now should be
utterly estranged from his kingdom, as the Gentiles were before the coming of
Christ. He denies that, and will surely straightwayes show it to be false.
Neither is this the question, whether God has rightly, or unrightly rejected
his people. For in the former Chapter it has been proved, that when the people
through a preposterous zeal did reject the righteousness of God, being justly
punished for their pride, they were worthily blinded, and at length cut off
from the covenant. So that now the cause of their reiection is not in
disputation: but the question is of another matter, namely, although they have
deserved such vengeance of God, whether yet the covenant which God made in old
time with the fathers, be abolished, which covenant, that it should through
any infidelity of men be ouerthrown, were absurd. For Paul reteineth this
principle, seeing the adoption of God is free, and is founded upon God only,
and not upon men, it does stand firm, what incredulity soever of men
conspire to overthrow it: this knot must be loosed, least the truth and
election of God should be thought to depend upon the dignity of men. For I my
self am an Israelite. Before he enter into the cause, by the way he proves
in his own example, how absurd it is to think that nation is utterly
forsaken of GOD. For he was an Israelite from the first beginning, not a
proselite, The nation of ye Jews is not utterly cast off.
or newly received into the common wealth of Israel. And seeing he was
woorthely counted amongst the special servants of God, it is an argument
that the grace of God did rest in Israel. He therefore takes the conclusion as
proved, which yet he will afterward open by a necessary discourse. Whereas
besides the title of an Israelite, he calls himself the seed of Abraham,
and also expresses his tribe, it is to the end, he might be counted for a
natural Israelite. Phil. 3.4.
As to the Philippians: whereas some think it to serve unto the commendation
of the mercy of God, that Paul came of the tribe of Benjamin, which was almost
cut off, that seems to be forced and far fetched.

2 God has not. It is a negative answer, and with a moderation. For the
Apostle, in denying precisely the people to be rejected, had been contrary to
himself. But by adding a correction, he teaches yt it is such a kind of
reiection, as the promise of God is not thereby made void. So the aunsweare is
distributed into two parts, namely, that God has not, contrary to the faith
of his covenant, rejected the whole progeny of Abraham: neither yet is the
effect of the adoption extant in all the sons of the flesh, because the
secret eleccion goes before. So the general reiection could not make, but some
seed might be saved: for the visible body of the people was so rejected, yt
no member should fall away from the spiritual body of Christ. Objection.
If any demand, whither circumcision were not a common pledge of the grace
of God to all the Jews, so that they ought all of the^ to be counted amongst
the people of God: the answer is at hand, because the external calling by it
self, is ineffectual without faith, that honor is justly taken from the
faithless, Answer.
which they refuse being offered. So there remains a special people, in whom
God shows a testimony of his co^stancy: and Paul brings the original of
constancy, from the secret election. For here God is not said to respect
faith, but to stand to his purpose, that he might not reject that people, whom
he knew before.

And here again that is to be noted which I admonished before, namely, that
by the word foreknow, Foreknowledge in God is not taken for a bare and naked
knowledge of a thing to be.
is not understood a certain (I know not what) speculation or beholding,
whereby God did foreknowe what every one would be, but his good pleasure,
whereby he choose those unto himself for sons, who because they were not yet
borne, could not insinuate themselves into his favor. So to the Galathians,
he says they were known of God, Gal. 4.9.
because he prevented the^ with his favor, that he might call them to the
knowledge of Christ. Now we understand, although the universal calling does
not bring forth fruit, yet the faith of God is not fallen away, but always he
co^serueth a Church, so long as the elect remain alive: for albeit God does
indifferently inuit the whole people unto him, yet he does not inwardly draw
any, but such as he knows to be his, and has given to his son: whom also
he will keep faithfully unto the end. Know you not. Seeing there were so few,
who of the Jews believed in Christ, it could hardly be, but by the smalnesse
of the number, they should gather that the whole stock of Abraham was rejected.
And this cogitation also would creep in, namely, that in so deformed a ruin
there appeared no sign of Gods grace. For seeing adoption was the sacred bond
whereby the sons of Abraham being gathered under the faith of God, were
retained in the same, except the same had fallen away, it is no way like that
the people could have been so miserably and unhappily scattered. That Paul
might turn away this offense, he uses a very fit example. For he shows how
in the time of Elias, there was such a waste, so that now there was no
appearance of a Church, and yet when there appeared no footstep of the grace
of God, the Church of God did lie so hid (as it were) in a grave, that the
same was woonderfully preserved. It follows therefore, they do naught who
esteem the Church by their sense. The Church must not be esteemed according to
our sense.
And surely if that excellent Prophet, who was endued with such plenty of the
spirit, when he would by his own judgment esteem the people of God, were so
deceived: what shall befall us, whose greatest sharpness, if we be compared
with him, is but mere dullness? Wherefore let us decree nothing here rashly,
but rather let this abide fast in our hearts, that there is a Church nourished
by the secret providence of God, when there appears none to our eyes. And
withal let us remember, that they deal foolishly, and proudly, who define the
number of the elect according to the measure of their sense. For God has a
mean, unknown to us, easy to himself, whereby he does woonderfully keep
his elect, when al things seem lost. And let the Readers mark this, that
Paul does here, and else where, diligently compare the state of his time, with
the old condition of the Church, which makes greatly to the confirmation of
our faith, whiles we consider, nothing does happen unto us at this day, which
the holy fathers have not had experience of in old time. For we know how
hard an engine, newnes is, to trouble weak minds, touching ye parcel, in
Elias, in the translation I have retained the phrase of Paul, because it may
signify as much, as in the history, or in the things done by Elias: although
I think rather that Paul spoke so, according to the manner of the Hebrews: In
Elias, for, in the history of Elias.
because Beth which answeareth the greek En, is often taken for de of. How he
makes request unto God against Israel. This surely was an argument, how much
Elias esteemed of the Lord, yt he doubted not, for his glory to constitute
himself an adversary of his own nation, and to wish the utter ruin thereof,
because he thought the religion and worship of God, was perished in it. But
therein he was deceived, that he condemned the whole nation, himself only
excepted, of ye impiety, which he would have had so severely punished.
Furthermore, in ye same place which Paul cites, there is no imprecatio^ or
wishing, but a bare co^playning. 1. Re. 19.10.
But because he so complains, yt he dispaireth of the whole people, no doubt
but so he did bequeath them to destruction. Let us note the^ what Elias
preached: namely, yt when impiety, had every where prevailed, and in a manner
ouerspread the whole land, he thought he had been left alone.

4 I have reserved to my self. Howsoever you take a finite number, for an
infinite, assuredly the Lord would note a great multitude. Seeing therefore the
grace of God prevailed so much in things most desperate: 1. Reg. 19.18.
let us not lightly condemn all those, whose piety does not appear openly
unto us. And withal let this be thoroughly printed in us, that although
ungodliness rage every where, and horrible confusion does thrust it self in
all abroad: yet the salvation of many abides shut up under the seal of GOD.
But least any under this pretense, should cocker their slouthfulnes, as many
do seek lurking places for their vices, from the secret preservation of God,
we must mark again, Who are saue^.
that they are said to be saved who abide sound and undefiled in ye faith of
God. And also the circumstance of judgment is to be noted, namely, that those
are they abide safe, who have not so much, as by outward dissimulation
prostrated their bodies to the woorshippe of Idols. For he does not only give
unto them the purity of mind, but also that they have kept their bodies
undefiled from all uncleanness of superstition.

5 Even so then at this present time. He applies the example unto his time:
and to the end he might make al things like, he calls them a remnant, namely
in comparison of that great number, whose eyes were set upon ungodliness.
Although together alluding unto that testimony of Esaias he alleged before, he
shows that yet in a miserable and confused desolation, the faith of God
shined: because there remained some remnant. And that he might confirm that
more surely, he does precisely ca^ll those, remnauntes, who being left by the
grace of God, do testify that the election of God is immovable: as the Lord
said to Elias, when the whole people was fallen to Idolatry, that he had
reserved those seven thousand. Whereby is gathered, that through his benefit
they were preserved from perishing. Neither does he simply preach grace, but
now also he calls us unto election, that we might learn reverently to depend
upon the secret counsel of God. One proposition therefore, is, that but a
few are saved, in comparison of the great number of them, take unto themselves,
the name of the people of God. Another, that those are saved whom he has
chosen, without respect of merit. For election of grace, after the Hebrew
manner, is put for free election.

6 If by grace now then not of works. This is an amplification taken from the
comparing of contraries: for such is the case between the grace of God, and
the merit of works, that he which mainteyneth the one, overthrows the
other. Again, if no consideration of works can be admitted in election, which
does not obscure ye free goodness of God, which he would have so greatly
commended unto us therein: let those frenzy persons, which make ye dignity
which God foresaw in us, ye cause of election, see what they will answer unto
Paul. For whither you shall give place unto works to come or past, this
sentence of Paul will always cry out against you, which says that grace
leaves no place for works. Paul does not here dispute only of our
reconciliation with God, neither of ye means or next causes of our salvation,
but he ascends higher,, namely, why God before the world was made, some being
rejected, did only choose other some. And he denies that God was brought
hereunto by any other cause, then his mere pleasure. Look how much is given
unto works in justification, so much is taken from grace.
For if any place be given unto works so much he proves to be taken from
grace. Whereby it follows, that the foreknowledge of works is wickedly mixed
with election. For if God have chosen some, and rejected other some, as he
foreknew them to be worthy or unworthy of salvation: now ye merit or wages of
works being put down, the sole grace of God shall not reign, but shall only
be in half part, cause of election. For as Paul reasoned before in the
justification of Abraham, where wage is paid, there grace is not freely given:
so now he takes an argument from the same fountain, if works come in to be a
cause, when God adopteth a certain number of men unto salvation, then wage is
due: and therefore it is not a free benefit. And although he speak here of
election: yet because it is a general reason which Paul uses here, it ought
to be extended unto the whole cause of our salvation: yt we might know, it is
so often said there is no merit of works, as our salvation is attributed to
the grace of God: or rather that we might believe the righteousness of works is
so often brought to nothing, as grace is named.

7 What then? Israel has not obtained that he sought: but the election has
obtained it, the rest have been blinded. 8 As it is written, God has given
them the spirit of slumber, eyes that they should not see, and ears that they
should not hear unto this day. 9 And David says, let their table be made a
snare, and a net, and a stumbling block, even for a recompense unto them. 10
Let their eyes be darkened that they see not, and bow down their back always.
7 What then? Because he was occupied here in a hard question, he makes a
demand as though he doubted. Yet by this kind of doubting, he goes about to
make the answer which follows more certain: for he insinuates yt no other
ca^ be given. And that is, namely, that Israel in seeking salvation labored in
vain: because he went about it by a preposterous study. Although he make here
no mention of the cause: yet seeing he had expressed it before, assuredly he
would also have it understood in this place. For his words are as much as if
he said, now it ought not to seem strange, that Israel in striving unto
righteousness, has profited nothing. And thence is that brought to pass
which he adds straightwaies of election. For if Israel has obtained,
nothing by merit: what have others obtained, whose cause or condition was no
better? Whence comes so great difference amongst equals? Here who does not
see, it is election only which makes the difference? And the signification of
this word is doubtful. For it seems unto some to be taken collectiuely for
the elect, Election put for the elect themselves.
that the parts of the contrariety may agree among themselves: whose sentence
I dislike not, so that also they grant unto me, that there is somewhat more in
this word, then if he had said the elect: namely, that he might infer, how
there was none other cause of obteyning, then election: as if he said, not they
who labor trusting to their merits, but they whose salvation depends upon
the free election of God: for he does precisely compare that remnant which was
saved by the grace of God, with all Israel, or the whole body of the people.
Whereby it follows that the cause of salvation rests not in men, but in the
mere good pleasure of God. The rest have been blinded. As the elect only are
delivered from perishing by the grace of God, so, who so are not elected, must
needs remain in blindness. For this is the meaning of Paul, that touching the
reprobate, the beginning of ruin and condemnation is hence, that they are
forsaken of God. The testimonies which he brings, although they are rather
gathered out of diverse places of the scripture, then taken out of one place,
yet all of them seem to be strange from his purpose, if you weigh them more
nearly by their circumstances. For every where you may see excecation and
hardening to be mentioned, as the scourges of God, whereby he punished the
offenses of the wicked already committed. But Paul here contendeth to prove
by them, that they are blinded, not who have already deserved it, by their
wickedness, but which were reprobated of God, before the creation of the world.
This knot thou may thus briefly loose, that the original of wickedness, which
so provoke the fury of God, is the peruersity of nature, forsaken of God.
Wherefore not without cause has Paul cited these testimonies of eternal
reprobation, which proceeds thence as the fruit from the tree, and river
from the fountain. Surely the godless for their sins, by the just judgment
of God are punished with cecitie: but if we demand the fountain of their
perishing, we must have recourse thither, that they being accursed of God, can
get and bring nothing by all their deeds, sayings, and counsels, then
malediction and curse. Yet the cause of eternal reprobation is so secret, that
nothing else remains for us, The cause of eternal reprobation is a deep
secret.
then to wonder at the incomprehensible counsel of God, as at length we
shall see by the conclusion. And they do foolishly, who as soon as there is
speech of the next causes, under pretense of the^, go about to cover this
first cause, which is hidden from our sense: as though God had not freely
before the fall of Adam determined what he thought good of all mankind,
because he does condemn his corrupt and wicked seed, secondarily because he
does recompense to every one particularly, the reward of their wickedness
which they have deserved.

8 God gave unto them the spirit. Esaias 6.9. Mat. 13.14 John 12.^0. Acts 23.26.
I doubt not but ye place of Esaias is cited, which Luke says in the Acts was
alleged of him, yet the words being a little altered. Neither does he here
recite ye words are had with ye Prophet, but only he gathers this sentence,
namely, that they are endued from above with the spirit of bitterness, yt they
might remain dull in seeing and hearing. Indeed the Prophet is commanded to
harden the heart of ye people, but Paul does pearce unto the fountain,
namely, that a brutishe dulnes does possess all the senses, after that men are
delivered into this madness, that they sharpen themselves, with poysonable
prouocations against the truth. For he does not only call that the spirit of
giddiness, but also of compunction, namely, where a certain bitterness of gall
does declare it self: yea also where there is a fury in rejecting the truth.
And he says the reprobate are made so foolish by the secret counsel of God,
yt they being amazed can judge nothing. For in yt they are said, by seeing not
to see, thereby the dulnes of al their senses is noted. And Paul adds of his
own until this day: least any should except, that that prophecy was
fulfilled long ago, and therefore was sinisterly drawn to the time of the
Gospel, he preuenteth this objection, declaring how that excecation which is
described there, was not for one only day, but did continue together with the
incurable pertinacie of the people until the coming of Christ.

9 And David says. In this testimony also of David, there is some changing of
the words, but which does not violate the sense. Psalm. 69.23.24.
For thus he says, Let their table be made a snare before the^, and their
prosperity their ruin. There is no mention of recompense or retribution. In
substance they agree sufficiently. There the Prophet wishes unto the godless,
yt whatsoever thing is otherwise to be wished for, and wholesome, might turn
to their ruin and destruction. And that he notes by their table and
prosperity. Secondly he bequeatheth them into the cecitie of spirit, and
eneruation or weakening of strength: the one whereof he signifies by the
darkening of their eyes, the other by the bowing of their back. Furthermore,
it is no marvel though it be extended almost unto the whole nation, seeing we
know that not only the chiefest were enemies unto David, but also the common
people was against him: so that it may easily appear, how those things which
are read there, For spiritual sense, the Author has Anagoge, which is, when
one ascends from an earthly and base matter, unto an heavenly and high
meaning.
do not serve only unto a few, but unto a multitude. Yea if we consider
whose Image David was, there shall also be an easy spiritual sense in the
contrary member. Seeing then this imprecation abides for all the adversaries
of Christ, that their meat should be turned into poison to them (as we see
the Gospel is unto them ye savor of death unto death) let us embrace the grace
of God with humility and fear. Add also that seeing David spoke of the
Israelites, who were begotten of Abraham according to ye flesh, and who then
obtained the first place in the kingdom, Paul does fitly appply his testimony
unto this matter, least the excecation of a great part of the people, should
seem new or strange.

11 I demand then, have they stumbled that they should fall? God forbid. But
by their fall salvation comes unto the Gentiles, to provoke them to follow
them. 12 Wherefore, if the fall of the^ be the riches of the world: and the
diminishing of them, the riches of the Gentiles, how much more shall their
abundance be? 13 For I say unto you Gentiles, in as much as I am the Apostle
of the Gentiles, I magnify mine office. 14 If by any means I might provoke
them of my flesh, to follow, and might save some of them. 15 For if the casting
away of them, be the reconciling of the world: what shall the receiving be,
but life from the dead. 11 Have they stumbled? etc. Thou shall trouble thy
self greatly in this disputation, unless thou observe that the Apostle
sometime speaks of the whole nation of the Jews, A note for the better
understanding of ye whole disputation.
sometime but of particular men. For thence comes that diversity, that
sometime he says the Jews were banished from the kingdom of God, cut off
from the tree, and by the judgment of GOD, thrown into destruction: other
some time again he denies the^ to be fallen from grace, but rather to abide
in the possession of the covenant, and to have place in the Church of God. So
then according to this distinction he speaks now. For seeing the Jews for
the most part did reject Christ, so that, that peruersitie did in a manner
possess the whole nation, and there appeared but few amongst them of a
better mind. He demands, whither the nation of the Jews had so stumbled,
that it were for ever to be dispaired of, neither were there any hope of
repentance left. And here he woorthily denies the salvation of the Jews
to be past hope, or that they are so cast off, of the Lord, that there is no
restitution to be looked for, or that the covenant of grace is utterly
extinguished, which God once made with them: seeing there remained always in
that nation, a blessed seed. That his meaning is thus to be understood it
appears by this, namely, that before he joined most sure ruin unto
excecation, and now makes hope of rising again: which two cold not agree in
one. Then they are fallen, and fallen to destruction, who were obstinately
offended at Christ: yet the nation is not so fallen, yt it should follow of
necessity, who so is a Jew he is lost, or fallen away from God. But their fall
is salvation to the Gentiles. The Apostle in this place notes two things:
namely, that the fall of the Jews turned to the salvation of the Gentiles: but
to this end, that they might be kindled with a certain jealousy, and so
bethink themselves of repentance. Surely he respected the testimony of Moses
which he had already cited: where the Lord threatens Israel, that as he was
provoked of them through false Gods unto emulation: so also by the law of
retaliation he would provoke them with a foolish people. The word that is used
there, notes ye affection of emulation and jealousy: namely, that we burn,
when we see another preferred before us. Then if the counsel of the Lord be,
that Israel should be provoked unto emulation, Israel is not therefore fallen,
that he should be thrown into eternal destruction: but that the blessing of
God, The Jews are not therefore rejected that they should utterly perish.
which was contemned of them, might come unto the gentiles: to the end that
they also at length, might be stirred to seek the Lord, from whom they are
fallen. But there is no cause why the readers should greatly weary themselves
in applying the testimony: for Paul does not urge the proper se^ce of the
word, but only alludeth unto the vulgar and known manner. For as emulation
provoke the wife being rejected from her husband for her fault, that she
should study to reconcile herself: so now he says it may come to pass, yt
when the Jews shall see the Gentiles placed in their room, they being
touched with the sorrow of their diuorcement, should seek for reconciliation.

12 Wherefore if the fall of them. Because he had taught, that after the Jews
were divorced, the gentiles entered in their steed: least he should make the
salvation of the Jews odious unto the gentiles, as though the salvation of the
gentiles, stood upon ye destruction of ye Jews: he preue^teth ye false
opinion, and puts down the contrary sentence, namely, yt nothing serves
more to promote the salvation of the gentiles, then if the grace of God did
floorish and abou^d greatly with the Jews. Which thing yt he might prove, he
uses an argument from ye less. If their fall could raise up the Gentiles, and
their diminishing inritch them, how much more shall their fulness? For that was
done against nature, but this should come to pass by the order of nature.
Neither does it hinder this reason, that the word of God came unto the
Gentiles, If the Jews received the gospel, it should be so far from
hindering, that it should greatly further the faith of the Gentiles.
after the Jews by refusing of it, had (as it were) vomited it. For if they
had received it, their faith had brought much more fruit, then their
infidelity brought by this occasion. For so both the truth of God had been
confirmed, because it had appeared to be fulfilled in them: and they also by
doctrine had brought many, whom by their stubbornness they rather turned away.
And he had spoken more properly, if he had opposed rising of the gentiles
against the fall of the Jews. Which I therefore note least any should seek here
for the elegancie of speech, or be offended at the rudenes of speech. For these
are spoken not to frame the tongue, but the heart.

13 For I say to you Gentiles. He proves by a notable reason, that the
Gentiles shall loose nothing, if the Jews returned again into favor with God.
For he shows that the salvation of them both is so joined together, that by
one and the same work it may be promoted. For thus he speaks unto the
Gentiles, notwithstanding I am an Apostle peculiarly appointed for you, and
therefore ought in a special sort procure your salvation committed unto me,
and (as it were) all other things laid apart, to seek that only: yet I shall
do my duty faithfully, if I can win any unto Christ of mine own nation.
And that shall be to the glory of my mynisterie, and so for your wealth. For
whatsoever did serve to set forth the mynisterie of Paul, it was an ornament
to the Gentiles: whose salvation was the end thereof. And here also he uses
the verb Parazelosai, to provoke. That the Gentiles might seek for ye event
of Moses prophecy, such as he describes, Deuteronomy. 32.22.
when they should understand it to be profitable for them.

14 Might save. How the minister is said to save.
Here note how the minister of the word is said in his manner to save those,
whom he has brought unto ye obedience of faith. For the dispensation of our
salvation must be so moderated, that we know all the virtue and efficacy thereof
to be in God, and give unto him due praise: yet that we know also preaching is
an instrument to bring to pass the salvation of the faithful: which although
it can profit nothing without the spirit of God, yet the same spirit woorking
inwardly it does mightily show forth his virtue.

15 For if the reiection. Some do lewdely corrupt this place which many count
to be obscure: in my judgment it ought to be so understood, that it is another
argument taken from the comparing of the less and greater, to this sense, if
the casting off of the Jews could do so much, that it should give cause to ye
reconciling of the gentiles: of how much more force shall their receiving be?
Ought it not even to raise from the dead? For Paul persisteth still in this,
that the gentiles have no cause of envy, as though, the Jews being received
into favor, their estate should be the worse. He reasons therefore, that
seeing God has woonderfully brought life out of death, and darkness out of
light, it is much more to be looked for, that the raising again of a people as
it were clean dead, should quicken the gentiles. Neither lets that which
some allege, namely, that reconciliation differs not from resurrection, as
we do here understand resurrection, namely, whereby we are translated from the
kingdom of death into the kingdom of life. For although the thing be one, yet
there is less and more weight in the words, which suffices to the force of
the argument.

16 For if the first fruits be holy, so is the whole lump: and if the root
be holy, so are the branches. 17 And though some of the branches be broken
off, and thou being a wild olive tree, was graft in for them, and made partaker
of the root, and fatnes of the olive tree: 18 Boast not thy self against the
branches: and if thou boast thy self, thou bear not the root, but the
root thee. 19 Thou will say then, the branches are broken off, that I might be
graft in. 20 Well: through unbelief they are broken off, and thou stand by
faith: be not high minded, but fear. 21 For if God spared not the natural
branches, take heed, least he also spare not thee. 6 For if the first fruits.
Now by comparing the dignity of the Jews with the Gentiles, he takes from
these, pride, and pleases or pacifieth those as much as he ca^. For he shows
how the gentiles do no way excel the Jews, if they pretend any prerogative of
honor that is their own: yea if they did strive therein, they should be left
far behind. In which comparison we must remember, that man is not compared
with man, but nation with nation. Therefore if they be compared together between
the^ selves, herein they shall be found like that they are both the sons of
Adam: this only is the difference, yt the Jews were separated from ye
gentiles, that they might be a peculiar people to the Lord. Therefore they were
sanctified by the holy covenant, and adorned with peculier honor, wherwithal
the Lord did not voucsafe the gentiles at ye time: but because little virtue of
the covenant appeared then, he bids us look unto Abraham and the
Patriarchs, with whom assuredly the blessing of God was not in vain or void.
He therefore gathers, that hereditarie holiness descended from them to all the posterity: which collection could not hold, if he spoke of the persons
only, and rather had not regard unto the promise. For it follows not
straightwaies because the father was just, therefore he passes over his
honesty into his son: but because the Lord sanctified to himself Abraham
upon this condition, that his seed also should be holy: How the whole nation
of the Jews is said to be sanctified in Abraham.
and so put sanctity not only into the person of Abraham, but also into the
whole kindred: thereupon Paul does not reason amiss, that all the Jews were
sanctified in their father Abraham. Finally, to prove that, he brings two
similitudes: the former being taken from the ceremonies of the law: and the
other taken from nature. For the first fruits which were offered, did sanctify
the whole lump: likewise from the root, the goodness of juice is dispersed
into the branches: But the same reason have posterities with their parents of
whom they come, which the lump has with the first fruits, and branches with
the root. Therefore it is no marvel, though the Jews be sanctified in their
father Abraham. Here shall be no difficulty, if thou do understand
sanctity to be nothing else, then spiritual nobility of stock, and the same
not proper to nature, but which did proceed from the covenant. I confess it
shabe truly said, that the Jews were naturally holy, because ye adoption was
hereditary amongst them: but now I speak of the first nature, according to the
which we know all are cursed in Adam. Wherefore the dignity of the elect people
(to speak properly) is a supernatural privilege.

17 And though some of the branches. Now he touches the present dignity of
the Gentiles, which is no other, the^ that should be of branches, if any being
taken from some other place, were grafted into some noble tree. For the
original of the Gentiles, was (as it were) of a wild and barren olive: because
they found nothing in their whole petegrie but malediction. Therefore
whatsoever glory they have, that is of the new grafting and not of the old
stock: there is then no cause why the Gentiles should boast themselves of any
honor of theirs, above the Jews. Add also, that Paul does prudently
mittigate the bitterness, not saying, the whole top of the tree was cut off,
but certain of the branches were broken: as God did now and then take some
among the gentiles, who^ he might graft in the sacred and blessed stock.

18 But if thou do boast thy self, thou do not bear the root. The
gentiles cannot contend with the Jews of the dignity of their kindred, but
they must strive with Abraham: which were too bad, seeing he is instead of a
root, on the which they are borne and moved. Look therefore how absurd it
should be for the branches proudly to boast themselves against the root: so
absurd it were for the gentiles to glory against the Jews: namely in respect
of the excellency of kindred. For Paul would have it always weighed, whence the
beginning of salvation is. And we know, after Christ by his coming had pulled
down the partition wall, the whole world was replenished with that grace,
which God before had laid up with an elect people. Whereby it follows, that
the calling of the gentiles is like to a grafting, neither did they otherwise
grow up into the people of GOD, then as they took root in the stock of
Abraham.

18 Thou will say then. In the person of the gentiles he pronounces whatsoever
they could pretend for themselves: and that was such, that it should have
been so far from puffing them up, that rather it should give unto them,
matter of humility. For if the cutting off, of the Jews, was through
unbelief, and the grafting in of the Gentiles by faith: what remains, but
that by acknowledging the grace of God, they might thereby be prepared to
modesty and submission? What kind of fear true faith does begette in us.
for this aryseth from the nature of faith, and is proper in it, that it should
begette in us the humbling of our selves, and fear. But understand that fear,
which is not contrary to the assurance of faith: For Paul would not have our
faith to waver, or to change with any doubting, much less would he have us
to be overthrown or to tremble. What kind of fear then shall this be?
namely as the Lord bids us bestow our selves in the consideration of two
things, so it is meet a twofold affection should proceed thence. For he
would have the miserable condition of our nature to be still considered of us,
the same can bring forth nothing but horror, wearines, anxietie, and
desperation: and so it is meet we should be utterly thrown down and broken,
that at length we might mourn to him. Yet that horror holds not from the
consideration of our conceit, but our minds trusting to his goodness may abide
calm: yt wearines hinders not, but we may enjoy full consolation in him: yt
anxietie and desperation lets not but we obtayn sure joy and hope with him.
Therefore he does nothing else but oppose this fear of the which he speaks as
a preservative against proud contempt: because as every one takes more unto
him then is meet, so he is too secure, and at the length insole^t against
others: therefore so far forth we are to fear, least our heart being lift up by
pride do advance it self. But he seems to cast a dout of salvation, whiles
he admonishes them to take heed, least they also be not spared. I answer,
seeing this exhortation serves to the taming of the flesh, which always is
insolent, As we are not to doubt of salvation, so we must neither be secure nor
insolent.
yea even in ye sons of God, it derogateth nothing, from the certainetie of
salvation. But chiefly we are to note, and remember that I said of late, namely
that the speech of Paul is not so much directed against private men, as against
the whole body of the Gentiles: amongst whom there might be many vainly
puffed up, professing rather, the^ having faith. For their cause Paul (not
amiss) threatens cutting off to the Gentiles: as we shall see afterward
again.

21 For if he spared not the natural branches. This is a most strong reason
to beat down all security. For the reiection of the Jews ought never to be
remembered, but it should pearce and shake us with horror. For what was it did
destroy them, but that through the retchles security of ye preeminence they
had gotten, they contemned the judgment of God? they were not spared when they
were natural branches: what then shall become of us being wild and foreign,
if we wax proud above measure? But this cogitation, as it prepares us unto
distrust of our selves, so it causes us that we cleave faster and more surely
to the goodness of God. And here again it appears more certaynely, that
the speech is generally directed unto the body of the Gentiles, because this
cutting off, of the which he speaks, could not agree unto private men, whose
election is immutable, namely being founded upon the eternal purpose of God.
Therefore Paul denounces against the Gentiles, if they advance them selves
against the Jews, that there is prepared a reward for their pride, because
God will again reconcile to himself that former people, with whom he made a
diuorcement.

22 Behold therefore the lenity, and severity of God: toward them which
have fallen, severity: but toward thee lenity, if thou do abide in his
lenity. Otherwise thou shall also be cut off. 23 And they, if they abide not
in their unbelief, shall be graffed in. For God is able to graffe them in
again. 24 For if thou wast cut out of the Olive tree, which was natural to
thee, and wast graffed contrary to nature, in a right olive tree: how much
more shall they which are by nature, be graffed in their own olive tree? 22
Behold therefore. By putting down the thing it self, yet he does more
clearly and amply confirm, that the Gentiles have none occasion to be
proud. They do see in the Jews an example of Gods severity, which ought to
fear them: but in them selves they have a testimony of his grace and goodness,
whereby they ought to be provoked unto thankfulness only, and to praise the
Lord and not themselves. These words therefore are as much as if he said, if
thou do triumph at their calamity, first remember what thou wast, for ye
same severity of God did hang over thy head, but that thou wast delivered by
his free mercy. Secondly consider also what thou art now: for thou shall not
otherwise be saved, then if thou acknowledge the mercy of God with humility: but
if thou forgeting thy self, do insolently triumph, the same ruin does abide
for thee into the which they are fallen. For it is not enough to have once
embraced the grace of God, unless through the whole course of life, It suffices
not to have begun well.
thou do follow his calling. For they who are illuminated of the Lord must
always think of perseverance, seeing they abide not in the goodness of God, who
after they have sometime answered his calling, at length begin to despise ye
kingdom of God: and so by their unthankfulness deserve to be blinded again.
Furthermore he does not one by one speak unto every one of the godly, but (as
we said before) he compares the Gentiles together with the Jews. In deed it
is true, that every of the Jews did receive the reward of their incredulity,
when they were banished from the kingdom of God, and who so of the Gentiles
were called, they were the vessels of the mercy of God: but in the mean while
the counsel of Paul is to be holden. For he would have the Gentiles to depend
upon the eternal covenant of God, that they might join their salvation with
the salvation of the elect people. Again least the reiection of the Jews
should breed offense, as though their old adoption were void: he would have
the^ terrified by ye example of punishment, yt they might reverently have that
judgment in admiration. For whence comes so great licenciousnes of curious
disputations, but yt we do almost neglect those things, with ought worthily to
instruct us unto humility? and because he desputeth not of every one of the
elect particularly, but of ye whole body, a condition is added, if they shall
abide in his lenity. In deed I confess, so soon as any abuses the goodness
of God, he is worthy to be deprived of the offered grace: but improperly
should this be spoken of any of the godly particularly, that God had therefore
mercy on him, when he chose him, if so that he did abide in his mercy. For the
perseuera^ce of faith, which makes perfect ye effect of the grace of God in
us, proceeds from election. Paul therefore teaches, This is a necessary
watchword in all ages.
that the Gentiles are received into the hope of eternal life, upon this
condition, that by their thankfulness they should hold the possession of it.
And surely that horrible defection of the whole world which followed
afterward, does plentifully testify how this admonition was not in vain. For
when God had almost in a moment so watered far and wide with his grace, that
religion flourished every where, shortly after the verity of the Gospel
vanished, and the treasure of salvation was taken away. And whence came so
sudden a change, but because the Gentiles were fallen from their calling?
otherwise thou shall also be cut off. Now we understand in what sense Paul
threatens unto them cutting off, whom before he confesses to be graffed into
the hope of life by the election of God. For first, albeit this can not happen
to the elect, yet they stand in need of such exhortation, to tame the pride of
the flesh: which as it is in truth contrary to their salvation, so ought it
to be terrified with the fear of damnation. As christians therefore are
illuminated by faith, they hear to their assurance, that the calling of God
is without repentance: but as they carry the flesh about with them, which
wantonly kicketh against the grace of GOD, by this speech they are taught unto
humility, take heed thou be not cut off. Howebeit that resolution which I
brought is to be remembered, namely that Paul speaks not here of ye particular
election of every one, but opposes the Jews to the Gentiles: and therefore in
these words he does not so much speak unto the elect, as unto such as did
falsely boast them selves to have gotten the place of the Jews. Yea he
speaks unto the Gentiles to geather, and generally the whole body, wherein
many were only in title faithful and the members of Christ. Whereas the
demand is made of particular men, how any may be cut off from the grafting,
and how after the cutting off he may be graffed in again: set before thee a
threefolde form of graffing, A threefolde for me of grafting, and a twofolde
form of cutting off to be considered.
and a twofolde form of cutting off. For the children of the faithful are
graffed in, to whom the promise is due by the covenant made with their
fathers: secondly they are also graffed in, who conceive the seed of the
gospel in them, but which either takes no root or else is choked before it
come unto fruit: thirdly the elect are graffed in, namely who are illuminated
by the immutable purpose of GOD unto eternal life.

The first sort are cut off, when they refuse the promise given to their
fathers, or else do not receive it, through their unthankfulness. The
second, When the seed of the Gospel withers and is corrupted in them. The
peril of which evil seeing it hangs over all men, in respect of their
nature: we must confess that this admonition which Paul uses, does in some
sort appertain unto the faithful, least they should cocker them selves in
slothfulness of the flesh. But concerning the present place, it ought to
suffice us, that the same punishment which God executed upon the Jews, is
denounced against the Gentiles, if they shall become like unto them.

23 For God is able. This were a cold argument with profane men. For
howesoeuer they grant power unto God, yet because they behold it a far off,
as though it were included in heaven, they do for the most part deprive it of
his effect. But because the faithful, as often as they hear the power of God
to be named, do behold it as a present work, he thought this reason
sufficient to pearce their minds. Add also that he takes this as a maxim
granted, namely that God did so punish the unbelief of the people, that yet he
forgate not his mercy: as else often, after he had seemed to have banished the
Jews from his kingdom, he restored them again. And by comparison he
shows, how much more easily the present state of things might be undone,
then it was done: namely how much more easy it is that the natural branches,
if they were put in their place, whence they were cut, should take substance
from their own root, then wild and barren branches should do it of
another. For the same proportion was between the Jews and the Gentiles.

25 For I would not, brethren, that ye should be ignorant of this mystery,
least ye should be arrogant in your selves: that cecitie is partly come to
Israel, until the fulness of the gentiles be come in. 26 And so all Israel
shall be saved. As it is written, the deliverer shall come out of Sion: and he
shall turn away the ungodliness from Jacob. 27 And this shall be my covenant
to them, when I shall take away their sins. 25 I would not have you
ignorant. Here he prepares his auditors unto greater attentio^, whiles he
professes that he will utter a thing which otherwise is secret. Neither does
he that without cause: for he goes about to conclude this exceeding hard
question, in a brief and plain sentence: and yet he opens that, no man
would ever have looked for. But the causall particle, least ye should be
arrogant in your selves, does declare what his purpose is now: namely to bridle
the insolency of the Gentiles, least they should wax proud against the
Jews. Furthermore, this admonition was very necessary, least the falling
away of that people, should trouble the weak above measure, as though the
salvation of them all were for ever to be despaired of. Although the same at
this day is no less profitable for us, to the end we might know, that the
salvation of a number left, which the Lord at length will gather unto him
self, lies hid as it were sealed with a signet.

And so often as longer delay shall put us in despair thereof, let us remember
the name of mystery: whereby Paul clearly admonishes, that the manner of
their conversion, shall neither be common nor usual. And therefore they do
lewdly, who shall go about to measure it by their own sense. For what is more
peeuishe, then to count that incredible, which is removed from our sense?
Seeing it is therefore called a mystery, because it is incomprehensible until
the time of revelation. Furthermore it is opened to us as to the Romans, that
our faith being content with the word, might supporte us with expectation,
until the effect it self come to light. That cecitie has partly. I suppose
the word partly, neither simply to respect the time, nor multitude: but I
understand it to be put, for, in a sort. By which particle he seems unto
me, only to go about to temper a word otherwise bitter or sharp by it
self. And the word, until, does not infer the proceeding or order of time,
but rather is as much as if it were said, that the fullness of the Gentiles,
etc.

The meaning then shall be, that God did so in a sort blind Israel, that whiles
they refuse the light of the gospel, it might be translated to the gentiles:
and they might occupy the possession was empty. Therefore this cecity serves
the providence of God, to work the salvation of the gentiles which he had
ordained. What is meant by the fulness of the Gentiles.
And the fulness of the Gentiles is taken for a great concourse. For it was not
then as before, that some few Proselites did assemble themselves to the Jews:
but there was such a change, that ye Gentiles almost made the substance or
body of the church.

26 And so all Israel. Many understand this of the people of ye Jews, as
though Paul said, ye religion should be restored again amongst the^ as before:
but I extend ye name of Israel unto all ye people of God, to this sense, when
ye gentiles shall be come in, the Jews also shall turn from their defection
unto the obedience of faith: and so the salvation of the whole Israel of GOD
shall be fulfilled, which Israel must be gathered of them both: yet so, that the
Jews have the first place, as the first borne in the house of God. This
interpretation does therefore seem unto me more convenient, because Paul
here goes about to note the consummation of the kingdom of Christ, which is
not included in the Jews, but co^prehendeth the whole world. In the same
manner, to the Galathia^s he calls ye church consisting together of Jews and
gentiles, the Israel of God, by that, Gal. 6.16.
opposing ye people gathered from the dispersion, to the carnal sons of
Abraham, who were fallen away from his faith: as it is written. By this
testimony of Esaias he does not confirm the whole sentence, but one member
only: namely that the sons of Abraham are partakers of redemption. For if
any take it, that Christ was promised and offered to them, but because they did
refuse him, they were deprived of his grace: the words of the Prophet
express more, namely that there is some number left, which after it repents,
shall enjoy the grace of deliverance. And yet Paul cites not word for
word, that is read with Esai, Esai. 59.20.
the redeemer (quoth he) shall come to Sion, and they which shall repent from
iniquity in Jacob, says the Lord. But it becomes not us to be too curious
herein. For this is to be regarded, how fitly the Apostles apply unto their
purpose, whatsoever probations they bring out of the old testament: seeing they
coueted nothing else, then as it were by the finger to point out, that the
readers might he led unto the fountain.

Furthermore, although in this prophecy, deliverance be promised unto the
spiritual people of God, under whom the gentiles are contained: yet, because
the Jews are the first begotten, that which the Prophet denounces, must
needs be chiefly fulfilled in them. For in that the Scripture calls all the
people of God Israelites, that is ascribed to the excellency of that nation,
which God preferred before all others. Secondly, he says that he which shall
redeem, shall come, namely, unto Sion, having respect unto the old
covenant. He adds also, that he shall be redeemed in Jacob, which shall
turn from his transgression. In which words God does plainly challenge unto
himself a certain seed, that the redemption might be effectual in the elect
and peculiar nation.

Esaias. 59.20.
And albeit the phrase of speech which the Prophet uses did serve better to the
purpose: namely, Shall come to Syon: Yet Paul made no religion in the matter,
to follow the common received translation, where it is said the redeemer shall
come out of the hill of Syon. And there is also like reason of the second
part, He shall turn iniquities from Jacob. For Paul thought it sufficient,
only to respect this, (because the proper office of Christ is to reconcile
unto God a people that is a reuolter from the Lord, and covenant breaker) that
undoubtedly there was some conversion to be hoped for, least they should all
perish together.

27 And this is my covenant unto them, when I shall take away their sins.
Notwithstanding Paul had briefly touched, in the former prophecy of Esai,
the office of the messiah, yet that he might advertise the Jews, what they
were principally to hope for of him, he purposely adds these few words out
of Jeremy to the same end. Iere. 31.33. and Heb. 8.8. and 10.16.
For in the former place is not read that a new covenant should come. This
also appertains to the confirmation of the cause he has in hand. For that
which he spoke of the conversion of the people, in so obstinate a
stubbornness, might seem incredible. Therefore he remoueth this impediment,
by saying the new covenant consists in the free remission of sins. For it
may be gathered out of the words of the prophet, that God has no more to do
with an Apostata people, but so far as he shall as well remit the crime of
their faithlesnesse, as other sins.

28 As concerning the Gospel they are enemies for your sakes: but as touching
the election: they are beloved for their fathers sake. 29 For the gifts and
calling of God are without repentance. 30 For you also were faithless toward
God, but now have obtained mercy through their unbelief: 31 So they now are
become unbelievers, because ye have obtained mercy: that they also may obtain
mercy. 32 For God has shut all under belief, that he might have mercy on
all. 28 As concerning the Gospel. He shows how that which was evil in the
Jews, did not serve to the end that they should therefore be contemned of the
Gentiles, unbelief was ye chief crime in them. And Paul shows they were so
for a time through the providence of God blinded, that a way might be made for
the gospel unto the Gentiles: and yet they not for ever excluded from the grace
of God. He confesses therefore that presently they were alienated from God,
by occasion of the gospel, that this way, that salvation which was laid up
with them might come unto the Gentiles: and yet God not unmindful of that
covenant which he made with their fathers, and wherein he testified that in
his eternal counsel he loved that nation. And this he proves by a notable
sentence: namely, that the grace and calling of God cannot be void. For this
is the meaning of these words. The gifts and calling of God are without
repentance. He has put gifts and calling by the figure Hypallage, for the
benefit of calling: neither ought this to be understood of every particular
calling, Paul in this disputation speaks of the general calling of a whole
nation, and not of the particular calling of every one.
but of that whereby God adopted the posterity of Abraham into covenant:
seeing the disputation was specially of this, as a little before under the name
of election he noted the secret counsel of God, whereby the Jews were
distinguished from the Gentiles. For this is to be observed, that the question
is not of ye private election of every one, but of the common adoption of an
whole nation, which for a time in outward appearance might seem to be fallen,
but not cut down by the roots. Because the Jews were fallen from their
prerogative, and salvation promised the^, that there might be some hope of the
remnant, Paul proves that the counsel of GOD stands firm and immutable,
whereby he vouchsafed once to choose them unto himself for a peculier people.
If then it cannot be that the Lord should fall from that covenant which he
established with Abraham, I will be the God of thy seed: he has not utterly
taken his favor from the people of the Jews, Genesis 17.7.
he does not oppose the Gospel to election, as though they were contrary one
to the other: for whom God has chosen, those he calls: but because the
Gospel was suddenly besides the expectation of the world published to the
Gentiles, he worthily compares this grace, with that old election of the
Jews, which so many ages before was manifested. Election therefore is named of
antiquity, because in that part of the world is past, God did chose unto
himself one people. He says for the fathers, not as though they gave any
cause of love, but for that the grace of GOD descended from them to the
posterity, according to the form of the covenant, Thy God, and of thy seed.
How the gentiles have obtained mercy by ye unbelief, it is already declared:
namely, God being angry with the Jews for their infidelity, conuerteth his
favor unto the Gentiles. And whereas it is straight ways added, they became
incredulous for the mercy showed to the Gentiles, it is something hard: yet
there is no absurdity in it, How it is said the Jews became unbelievers
through ye mercy showed to the gentiles.
because Paul does not set down the cause of their excecation or blinding,
but only shows that that was taken from the Jews, which GOD translated to
the Gentiles.

Furthermore, least the Gentiles should think that they obtained that by the
merit of their faith, which the Jews lost through their incredulity, there
is only mention made of mercy. The sum therefore is, because God would
show mercy upon the Gentiles, by this occasion the Jews were deprived of the
light of faith.

32 For God has shut up. etc. A notable sentence whereby he declares there is
no cause why they should despair of others, which have some hope of salvation
for whatsoever they are now, they were as al others are: so the^, if through ye
only mercy of god they have escaped forth from unbelief, they ought to leave
place unto ye same mercy for others also. For as concerning gyltines he makes
ye Jews equal with ye gentiles, yt both of them might understand, the way to
salvation is open to others as well as unto them. For there is one only mercy
of God which saves: and yt may offer it self unto them both. This sentence
therefore answeareth that testimony of Ose, which he cited before: Ose. 9.25.
I will call that my people was no people. Moreover, his meaning is not that God
does so blind al men, as though their incredulity were to be imputed to him:
but by his providence he has so disposed it, that all should be guilty of
incredulity, and so he might have them subject to his judgment: to this end
verily that all merits being buried, salvation might be of his only goodness.
Here therefore Paul intends two things. First, that there is nothing in any
man, wherefore he should be preferred before others, besides ye mere grace of
God. And secondly, that God in the dispensation of his grace is not let, but
he may bestow the same upon whom he will. There is an Emphasis in this word
mercy, for it signifies that God is tied to none, and therefore does save all
freely, because all are in like sort lost. Furthermore, their dotage is too
gross, who gather from hence that all shall be saved. For Paul means simply
that as well Jews as gentiles, are saved no other way then by the mercy of
God: least he should leave unto any some matter of complaint. And sure it is
this mercy is offered indifferently unto all, but which seek it by faith.

33 O the deepenes of the riches, and wisdom, and knowledge of God, how
incomprehensible are his judgments, and his ways past finding out. 34 For
who has known the mind of the Lord? Or who has been of his counsel? 35
Or who has given to him first, and it shall be restored him again. 36 Because
all things are of him, and by him, and for him. To him be glory for ever Amen.
33 O the deepenesse. Here first of all the Apostle bursteth forth into a
speech which voluntarily arises from the consideration of the works of God
with the faithful. Secondarily, he does by the way restrain the boldness of
impiety, which is wont to murmr against the judgments of God. Therefore
when we hear, O the deepenes. It cannot be said how available this
admiration ought to be, to beat down the temeritie of the flesh. For after
he had disputed out of the word and spirit of the Lord, at length being
overcome with the highness of so great a secret, he can do nothing but
wonder and cry out, yt these riches of the wisdom of God are deeper, then
our reason is able to pearce into them. If therefore at any time we enter into
talk of the secret counsels of God, let this bridle be put always before our
wit and tongue, that when we have spoken soberly and within the bounds of the
word of God, at length our disputation end with an admiration. Neither ought we
to be ashamed, if we be no wiser then he, who being rapt even into the third
heaven, had seen secrets not to be opened unto man: yet here could find no
other end, then so to humble himself. Whereas some resolve the words of Paul
thus. O the deep riches and wisdom, and knowledge of God: as though the
nowne deep were put for a common Epitheton, expounding riches for liberality:
it seems unto me to be wrested. Therefore I doubt not but he extolleth the
deep riches of wisdom and knowledge in God. How incomprehensible. By diverse
words according to the usual iteration of the Hebrews, he expresses the same
thing. For having spoken of judgments, Way is put for the reason or manner of
Gods judgment.
he adds ways for the rules or reason of doing, or order of governing of his
judgments. And still he persisteth in his exclamation: wherein the more he
extolleth the highness of the secrets of God, the more he frayeth us from the
curiosity of searching. Let us learn therefore to search after nothing in
the Lord, but which he has revealed by his scriptures, for otherwise we enter
into a labyrinth, whence there is no easy passage: for it is to be noted that
here the question is not of every the mysteries of God, but of those which
being laid up within himself, he will have only to be wondered at and
reverenced of us

34 For who has known the mind of the Lord? Here he begins as it were
by laying hands on them, to bridle the boldness of men, least they should
murmr against the judgments of God, and that he does by two reasons. The
first is, that all men are altogether blind to consider the predestination of
God, by their own sense: and to dispute of a thing that is unknown, is
temeritie and wickedness. The second reason is, that we have no cause to
complain of God, seeing no man can say, that God is a debtor unto him: but on
the contrary all men are bound unto him for his bountifulness.

Let every one therefore remember to keep his mind within this compass,
least in seeking after predestination, he be carried above the revealed will of
God: seeing we hear that man can judge no more herein, then the blind in
darkness. Which nevertheless makes not to shake the certainty of faith,
which arises not of the dexterity of man's wisdom, but of the only
illumination of the spirit. What moderation must be used in speaking of the
mysteries of God.
For even Paul himself in another place, after he has testified, that all
the mysteries of God do far exceed the capacity of our understanding,
straightwayes adds, that the faithful understand the mind of the Lord:
because they have not received the spirit of this world, but the spirit
which is given them of God: by the which they are taught of his goodness,
which otherwise is incomprehensible. Therefore as we are not able by our own
strength to find out the secrets of God: so by the grace of the holy spirit
we have access into the sure and clear knowledge of them. Now if it be our
parts to follow the spirit our guide, wheresoever the same leaves us, there
we are to stay, and as it were stand still. If any covet to know more, then
he has revealed, he shall be over come with the brightness of that
inaccessable light. Esaias. 40.13. 1. Cor. 2.06,
That distinction which I brought of late, between the secret counsel of
God, and his revealed will in the scripture, is to be remembered. For albeit
all the doctrine of the scripture, in highness, exceed the wit of man, yet is
not the way thereunto shut up against the faithful, which do reverently, and
soberly follow the spirit for their guide. But there is another consideration
of his secret counsel, the depth and height whereof cannot by searching be
come unto.

35 Who has given to him first. Another reason, whereby the righteousness of
God is mightily defended against all the accusations of the wicked. For if no
man has by his merits bound God unto him, then none can justly expostulate
with him, because he has not received a reward. For he that will force any
to do him good, must needs show his merits, whereby he has deserved so at
his hands. This is then the meaning of the words of Paul, God cannot otherwise
be charged with unrighteousness, unless it be said that he gives not to
every one their own: but it is evident that none is defrauded of his right by
him, seeing he is bound to no man. for what man can boast of any work of
his, whereby he has merited his favor? And this place is worthy to be
noted, wherein we are taught, that it is not in our power, by our good works
to provoke the Lord to save us: but he preuenteth us being unworthy, by his
mere goodness. For he does not only show what men are wont to do, but
what they are any way able to do. If so be yt we would diligently examine our
selves, we should not only find, that God is not indebted to us, but that
we altogether are subject to his judgment: so that we have not only deserved
no favor at his hands, but also are more then worthy of eternal death. And
Paul does not only gather, that he is no debtor unto us, because of our
corrupt, and contaminated nature: but also though man were perfect, yet he
denies that he could bring any thing at all before GOD, whereby he might
win his favor: for so soon as man begins to be, even by the right of
creation he is so bound unto his Creator, that he has nothing of his own.
In vain therefore shall we go about to take from him his right, that he may
not freely, according to his pleasure, deal with his own woorkemanship, as
though there were a mutual regard of some thing received and bestowed.

36 because all things are of him and by him. This is a confirmation of the
former sentence. For he shows, it is far off, that we should be able to
glory in any good thing of our own, against God, seeing we were created by
him of nothing, and in him have our present being. Hereeby he gathers it to
be meet, that our being should be directed to his glory. For how unorderly
a dealing were it, that the creatures which he has made and conserueth,
should be otherwise employed then to the setting out of his glory? I know
this particle eis auton, to be taken sometimes, for en auto, yet abusiuely. But
seeing the proper signification serves best to the present argument, it is
better to retain it, then to flee unto that which is improper. The sum is,
that the whole order of nature is euerted and overthrown, if the same GOD
which is the beginning of all things, be not also the end. To him be
glory. Now he does boldly take unto him the proposition as though it were
proved, for an infallible proposition: namely, that the glory of God ought
every way abide immovable. For it shall be a cold sentence, if you take it
generally: but the force consists upon the circumstance of the place:
namely, that God does challenge unto himself an absolute authority, and that
in the estate of mankind, and all the world, nothing is to be sought for but
his glory: Whereupon it insueth, that those cogitations are absurd, and far
from reason, yea they are mad, whatsoever they be, tend to ye diminishing of
his glory.

CHAP. 12.
1 THerefore I beseech you brethren, by the mercies of God, that ye give your
bodies a lively Sacrifice, holy, and acceptable unto GOD, which is your
reasonable service. 2 And fashion not your selves to this world: but be ye
changed in the renewing of your mind: that ye may prove what is the good will
of God, acceptable and perfect.
AFter that Paul has handeled those things, at the which it was meet he
should begin, in the erecting the kingdom of God: namely, that righteousness
is to be sought for of God only, that salvation must come unto us by his
only mercy, that the sum of al good things, is laid up for us, and daily
offered in Christ only: Now very aptly he passes unto ye reformation of
manners. Seeing by that healthful knowledge of God and Christ, the soul is
as it were regenerate, into a celestial life: and by godly exhortations and
precepts, the life it self is after a sort framed and fashioned. For in vain
do thou go about to show the practice or study of composing and ordering
the life, if first thou do not show unto men yt the original of all
righteousness is in God, and Christ: which is to raise them from the dead. And
this is the principal difference of the Gospel, and Philosophy. For albeit
the Philosophers do entreat of manners very excellently, and with great
commendation of wit, yet notwithstanding whatsoever beauty appears in their
precepts, it is like a fair building of an house without a foundation: because
the principles being omitted they propound a maimed doctrine, not unlike a
body without a head. Neither is the manner of teaching used in Popery much
unlike. For although by the way they make mention of the faith of Christ, and
the grace of the holy spirit, yet it is apparent how they come nearer unto
profane philosophers, then unto Christ and his Apostles. And as the
Philosophers before they put down laws touching manners, entreat first of ye
end of goodness, and search out the original of virtues, whence afterward
they draw, and derive all duties: so here Paul sets down the original
whence all the par^es of holiness follow: namely, that we are redeemed of
the Lord to this end, that we should consecrate our selves and all our
members to him. But it is necessary to examine every part.

1 I beseech you by the mercies of God. We know that godless men do
exceedingly abuse unto the dissolutenes of the flesh, whatsoever is spoken in
the scripture, of the goodness of God. Again Hypocrites, as though the grace of
God extinguished the study of a godly life, and opened the door of boldness
to sin, they do maliciously as much as in them is, obscure the knowledge of
it. But this contestation or beseeching does teach, that men can never
seriously woorshippe God, nor be sufficiently provoked unto his fear and
obedience, until they know how much they are indebted unto his mercy. The
Papists count it enough if by terror they wrest from men, a certain (I know
not what) forced obedience. But Paul, that he might bynd us unto God, not
with a servile fear, but with a voluntary and cheerful love of
righteousness, allureth us by the sweetness of his grace wherein our salvation
is contained: and withal he charge us with ingratitude, unless, having
experience of so bountiful and liberal a Father, we study again to dedicate
our selves wholly to him. And so much the more efficacy has Paul in this his
exhortation, as he excels all others in setting forth the grace of GOD. For
that heart must needs be harder then iron, which through the doctrine he taught
above, is not inflamed with the love of God, whose bountifulness toward him
he feels to be so plentiful. Where then are they which think, that all
exhortations unto honesty of life are taken away, if the salvation of men be
reposed in the only grace of God: seeing a godly heart is not so much
prepared unto the obedience of God by any precepts, or others, as by the
serious meditating upon the goodness of GOD toward him? Here also we may
see the lenity of the Apostles spirit, who had rather deal with the faithful,
by admonitions and friendly beseechinges, then by severe commandments:
because he knew he should profit more this way, with those are tractable.
That ye give your bodies. This is then the entrance of the right course unto
good works, if we understand that we are consecrated to the Lord. For
thereupon it follows, that we must cease to live to our selves, to the end
all the actions of our life, might tend to his obedience. Therefore here are
two things to be considered. First, that we are the Lords, Two things to be
considered.
secondly, that therefore we ought to be holy: because it is unseemly for the
holiness of God, that any thing should be offered to him, which was not first
consecrated to him. This being put down, it follows, we must meditate of
holiness all our life long: yea it is a kind of sacrilege, if we fall to
uncleanness: because it is nothing else, then to profane a sanctified thing.
And every where a marvelous propriety of words is kept. First, he says,
our body must be offered in sacrifice unto GOD, whereby he insinuates, that
we are not now in our own power, but altogether brought into the power of
God. Which cannot otherwise come to pass, unless we renounce our selves, and
so deny our selves. Secondly, by adding of Epithetons, he declares what kind
of sacrifice that must be. For by calling it living, he signifies, we are
offered to the Lord of this condition, that our former life being killed in
us, we might be raised up unto newnes of life. Under the name of sanctity or
holiness, he notes that of the which we said, it is proper to the
sacrifice: for then it is a sacrifice indeed, when sanctification goes
before. The third Epitheton, when he admonishes that our life is then framed
aright, when we direct this our sacrifice unto the pleasure of the Lord. And
also it brings unto us a rare consolation, in that he teaches our study is
pleasing and acceptable to God, when we resign our selves over to innocence
and holiness. By bodies he means not only bones and skin, but the whole
mass whereon we consist: and he has used that word, whereby he might best
by the figure Synecdoche, set forth all our parts. For the members of the
body are instruments to execute our actions by. Otherwise he requires of us,
not only integrity of body, but also of spirit, as he does to the Thessa.
1. These. 5.23.
Whereas he bids offer or present, therein is an allusion unto the
sacrifices of Moses, which are offered at the Altar as in the sight of GOD:
howebeit he declares how ready we ought to be to receive the
commandments of GOD, that without all delay we may obey them. Whereby we
gather that all they do nothing else but err and wander miserably, whose
purpose is not to worship the Lord. (...)
Here also we see what Sacrifices Paul commends to the Christian Church.
For being reconciled by the only sacrifice of Christ, through his grace we
are al made priests, to dedicate our selves and all that is ours to the glory
of God.

There remains no sacrifice of reconciliation, and it were great contumely
done against the cross of Christ to erect any. Your reasonable service. I
think this clause was added, the better to explicate and confirm that went
before: as though it were said, if you mind from your heart to serve God, give
your selves for a sacrifice to god, for this is ye right service of God, from
ye which who so departs, are but perverse worshippers. If God be then
worshipped aright, when we examine all things to his rule, let all faygned
worshippings go: which he does worthily abhor, because he esteems more of
obedience the^ sacrifice. In deed the inventions of men please them, and they
brag (as Paul says in another place) a vain show of wisdom: But we
hear what the heavenly judge denounces of the contrary by the mouth of Paul.

For by calling that a reasonable service, which he commands, whatsoever
we go about without the rule of his word, he rejects as foolish,
sottish, and temerous enterprices.

2 And fashion not your selves to this world. World put for the wisdom and
manners of men
This word world, albeit it has many significations, here is taken for the
wisdom and manners of men, whereunto (not without cause) he forbids us to
be conformed. For seeing the whole world is set on mischief, it is meet we
should put off whatsouer is humane, or belonging to the old man, if we will
truly put on Christ. And least that be doubted on, he shows it by the
contrary, when he bids us be transformed into the newness of mind. For
these are usual contrarieties of the Scripture, whereby a thing is more
clearly expressed.

And note here what kind of innovation is required of us: namely, not of the
flesh only, as the Sorbonites, which take this word for the inferior part
of the soul: but of the mind which is the most excellent part of us, and
whereunto the Philosophers ascribe the principality. For they call it
Hegemonicon, that is, the prince or principal spirit, and reason is feigned
to be a very wise Queen. Howebeit, Paul does throw her out of her throne:
and so, brings her to nothing, whiles he teaches that we must be renewed
in mind. For howsoever we flatter our selves, yet that sentence of Christ is
true, that man must be borne again which will enter into the kingdom of
God. Seeing both in mind and heart we are altogether void of the
righteousness of God.

That ye might prove what is the will of God. Here thou have the end
wherefore, we ought to put on a new mind: namely, that both our own and all
other men's counsels, and desires being rejected, we might intend upon the
only will of God, the knowledge whereof is true wisdom. And if the
renouation of the mind be necessary unto this, that we might prove what is
the will of God: Hereby it appears how contrary it is unto God. The
Epithetons are added, do serve unto the commendation thereof, that we might
strive thereunto with greater alacrity. And surely to bring our peruersitie
into an order, it is necessary that the true praise of righteousness and
perfection be ascribed unto the will of God. The world persuadeth it self,
that those works it has done, are good: Paul he cries out on the contrary,
that we must examine by the commandments of God, what is right, and good.

The world delights it self, and takes great pleasure, in his own
inventions: but Paul affirms, that nothing pleases God, save that which he
commands. The world, that it might find perfection, slydeth from the word
of God unto new inventions: Paul putting perfection in the will of God,
shows how they are deluded with a false imagination: if any pass that mark.

3 For I say by the grace which is given unto me, to every one of you, let no
man stand high in his own conceipte above that which is meet for him, but
let him be wise unto sobriety: as God has given to every man the measure of
faith, 3 For I say by the grace. If thou do think that the particle causall
is not superfluous, then this sentence shall agree well with the former. For
seeing now, he would have our whole study consist, in seeking for ye will
of God, the next thing was, to draw us from vain curiosity. Yet seeing the
particle causall is often superfluous with Paul, thou may take it for a
simple affirmation: for so also the sense will stand very well.

But before he command, he says, he has authority given him, to the
end they might hearken unto him, no less then unto the voice of God himself:
for his words are as much in value, as if he said, I speak not of my
self: but being an imbassadour of GOD, I bring unto you the commaundenientes
he has enjoined me. Grace puc for Apostleship.
By grace (as before) he means his Apostleshyp, whereby he commends the
goodness of GOD therein, and withal insinuates, that he did not temerously
intrude himself, but that he was chosen by the calling of God. So then he
getting unto himself authority, by this preface, does bind the Romans with
a necessity of obeyng, unless they would contemn GOD in the person of his
minister.

Then follows the precept, whereby he both draws us, from the searching of
those things, which do nothing but trouble men's minds, for they do not
edify: and also forbids least any should take more upon him, then his
capacity and calling will bear. And withal admonishes, that we only
think and meditate those things, which may make us sober and modest. For so I
had rather understand it, then according to that Erasmus does translate it,
that no man think proudly of himself. Both because this sense is somewhat
further fetched, and that other agrees better to the text. This sentence,
Besides that is meet for him to understand. Declares what he meant by the
former word Huperphronein: that is, to be insolent, or think above measure
of himself: namely, that we exceed the measure of wisdom or being wise, if
we busy our selves about those things, of the which it is not meet we
should be careful. To be wise unto sobriety: is to be given unto those
studies, whereby thou perceiuest thou may learn and be taught modesty. As
God has given every man. Vnicuique vt diuisit deus. Here is the figure called
Anastrophe, or inuersion of words, for, as to every man God has given. And
here verily is the manner of that sober wisdom he spoke of, expressed. For
seeing there is a diverse distrybution of graces, then every man proposes unto
himself the best mean or measure of wisdom or being wise, What it is to be
wise unto sobriety.
when he keeps himself within the compass of that grace or gift of faith,
which is given unto him. So then there is a superfluous seeking of wisdom,
not only in superfluous things, and things unprofitable to be known: but
also in those, the knowledge whereof otherwise is profitable: when we respect
not what is given unto us, but temerously and boldly exceed the measure of our
understanding, which importunity, God will not suffer unrevenged. For we may
see oftentimes, with what trifles they are carried about, who, through foolish
ambition lift up themselves beyond those bounds are set for them. The
substance is, this is a part of our reasonable sacrifice, when every one by a
gentle and tractable spirit, does yield himself to be ruled and ordered of
God. Finally, when he opposes faith against humane judgment, he restrains
us from our own likinges, and withal purposely adds the measure, that the
faithful should also humbly keep themselves, within the compass of their
defect.

4 For as in one body we have many members, and all members have not the same
office: 5 So we being many are one body in Christ, the members one of
another. 6 Seeing that we have diverse gifts, according to the grace given
unto us: whether prophecy, according to the proportion of faith. 7 Or
ministration in his ministry, or he which teaches in doctrine. 8 Or he
which exhorts in exhortation: or he which gives in simplicity: or he that
rules, in diligence: or he that has mercy in cheerfulness. 4 For as in one
body. Now he confirms that same, which he said before of limiting the
wisdom of every one according to the measure of faith, by the calling of all the faithful. For we are called of this condition, yt we should as it were grow
up into one body: seeing Christ has ordained that society and connection
amongst all the faithful, which is amongst the members of a man's body: and
because men could not come into such an unity by themselves, he is made the
bond of that conjunction. Seeing then that reason which is seen to hold in a
man's body ought to be also in the society of the faithful: by that
similitude he proves, how necessary it is for every one to consider what is
convenient for his nature, capacity and calling. Furthermore this similitude
has diverse parts, chiefly after this manner it is to be applied unto the
present cause, that as the members of one body have distinct offices, and all
things distinct, The application of the similitude taken from the members of a
man's body.
for no member either holds all offices together, or takes unto him the
offices of others: so has God given unto us diverse gifts, by which discretion
or diversity he has ordained what order he would have to be kept amongst
us: that every one should govern himself according to the measure of his
gift, and should not intrude himself into the offices of others: neither
should one covet to have all things together, but being content with his
state, should willingly abstain from usurping other men's turns. Howbeit when
in express words he notes that communion which is amongst us, withal he
insinuates, how great diligence, there ought to be in every one, to bestow
those gifts they enjoy, to the common profit of the body.

6 We having gifts. Paul does not simply now preach of the mainteining of
brotherly love amongst us: but he commends modesty, which is the moderatour
of our whole life. The diversity and in equality of gifts, is the bond of
mutual communication
Every man coueteth to have so much, yt he might not stand need of any help of
his brethren: but this is the bond of mutual communication, whiles no man has
sufficient for himself, but is constrained to borrow of others. I confess
therefore that the society of the godly cannot stand, but whiles every one
being content with his own measure, does impart unto his brethren of those
gifts ^ee has received, and again does suffer himself to be helped by
other men's gifts. But Paul his meaning was chiefly to beat down that pride
which he knew to be grafted in men, and least any man should be grieved
that al things are not given unto him: he admonishes, that not without the
good counsel of God, every one has his part given unto him: because it is
necessary for the common benefit of the body, that none should be so
furnished with the fullness of gifts, least he should securely despise his
brethren. Here then we have the principal scope, whereunto the Apostle
tends: namely, that all things are not meet for all men, but the gifts of
God are so disposed, that every one might have his finite portion: and every
one ought so to intend, in bestowing his gifts to the edification of the
Church, that no man having left his own function, should take upon him
another man's. For by this decent order, as it were due proportion, the
incolumitie of the church is saved: when every man does so bestow that he has
received to the common profit of others, that he does not hinder others, He
which peruerteth this order, fights against God by whose ordinance it is
ordained. For the difference of gifts did not spring from the will of men, but
because it has pleased the Lord so to dispose his grace.

Whether Prophecy. Now by bringing in certain particulers for example, he
shows how every man ought to be occupied in his gift, as in keeping his
station. For every gift has his end proposed, from the which to decline, is
to corrupt the gifts themselves. And whereas the speech is somewhat confused,
we may so compose it, that the conclusion begin here. He therefore which has
the gift of prophesiyng, let him examine it to the proportion of faith: he
that has an office, let him use it to administration: he that has doctrine,
let him use it to teach etc.

They who shall behold this mark, shall conveniently keep themselves within
their bounds. Howbeit this place is diversely taken. For there be some which
by prophesiyng understand the faculty of divination, which was of force
about the beginning of the Gospel in the Church: as it pleased the Lord then
to set forth the dignity and excellency of his Church by all means.

And they think that that which is added, according to the porportion, is to
be referred unto all the branches. But I had rather follow them, who extend
this word further, namely unto a peculiar gift of revelation, that a man do
rightly and learnedly play the part of an interpreter in opening the will of
God.

Therefore prophesying at this day amongst Christians is almost nothing else,
What prophesiyng is amongst christians.
the^ a right understanding of the scripture, and singular gift of expounding
the same, since all the old prophesies, and oracles of God have been finished
in Christ, and his Gospel. For in this sense Paul has put it, when he
says, I would ye could speak with tongues: 1 Cor. 24.^.
but rather that ye did prophecy. We know in part, and we prophecy in
part. And it appears not, that Paul's meaning is here, 1. Cor. 13.9.
only to recite those marvelous graces, whereby Christ adorned his gospel at
the first: but rather we see that ordinary graces only, and such as abide
continually in the Church, are reckoned. Neither do I think that reason to
be firm, which is objected, namely, that the Apostle need not to have said
that, to those who by the spirit of God could not call Christ Anathema.

For seeing in another place he testifies, that the spirit of the Prophet
is subject to the Prophet, 2. Cor. 14.32.
and he bids him that spoke first, to hold his peace if any revelation be
made to another that sits by: after the same manner he may here admonish
those who prophecy in the Church, that they should apply their prophesiyngs
to the rule of faith, least at any time they err from the line. Faith put for
the principles of religion.
Under the name of faith he signifies the first principles of religion,
whereunto what so ever doctrine is found not agreeing, even thereby it is
condemned for false. In the other branches there is less difficulty. He
that is (quoth he) ordained a minister let him discharge his duty by
ministering, that he may be answearable to his name. As straightwayes he
commends unto teachers, under the name of doctrine, sound edification, in
this sense, he that excels in doctrine, let him know that the end thereof
is, that the Church be truly taught, and let him study this one thing, that
he may make the Church wiser by his doctrine.

For he is a doctor or teacher, who forms or instructs the Church by the
word of truth. He that excels in the gift of exhorting, let him regard
this end, that he may exhort effectually.

And although these offices have great affinity, yea and also connection
between them selves: yet they cease not therefore to be diverse. No man can
exhort without doctine: yet is not he that teaches strayghtwayes endued with
the gift of exhorting. Now no man prophesies, or teaches, or exhorts, but
he ministers: but it is sufficent if we keep that distinction, which we
see in the gifts of God, and know to be meet for the order of the Church.

8 He which gives in singleness. Out of these latter branches we see
plainly, that here is declared unto us, what is the lawful use of the gifts
of God. By giuers, of the which he speaks here, he understands not those
which give of their own, but Deacons, who were appointed for the distribution
of the public gods of the Church. By those show mercy, he understands
widows, and other ministers, who according to the custom of the old Church
were ordained to see unto the sick. For they are two diverse offices, to
minister necessary things unto the poor, and to bestow their labor in
seeing to them. Howebeit to the first he assigns simplicity, whereby
without fraud, and parcialitie, they should faithfully distribute those
things are committed to them: of these he would have obedience showed with
cheerfulness, least by their morositie (as it often comes to pass) they
spoil their offices of grace or graciousnesse. For as nothing more comfort
him is sick, or afflicted by any other manner of way, then when he sees the
minds of men cheerful, and ready to help him: so if he see unwillingness
in their countenance of whom he is helped, he will take it to his reproach.

Although he properly call those rulers, to whom the ministration of the
Church was committed (and they were Seniours, who ruled and governed others,
and exercised the censure for manners) yet that which he says of them, may
generally be applied unto all kind of Superiors. For it is no small care is
required of those, who are to provide for the safety of all, neither is a
slender diligence looked for of them, who ought to watch night and day, for
the health of all men. Although the estate of that time, shows that Paul did
not speak of all Superiors, because then there were no godly magistrates: but
of the Seniours who were the correctours of manners.

9 Let love be without dissimulation: avoiding that is evil, and cleaning to
that is good. 10 Being ready to love one another with a brotherly love,
preventing one another with honor. 11 Not lither in business, fervent in
spirit, serving the time. 12 Rejoicing in hope, patiente in tribulation,
perseuering in prayer. 13 Communicating to the necessity of the Saints,
following after hospitality. 9 Let love be without dissimulation. Now, he
being about to speak of particular duties, very fittely he begins at
charity, which is the bond of all perfeccion. And concerning that, he
commands (as it is often necessary) that all dissimulations laid a part,
it might proceed from pure synceritie of mind. For it is a hard matter to
say, how wise for the most part all men are to counterfeyte Charity, It is
no charity unless it be sincere, and without dissimulation.
which in deed they have not. For they do not only deceive others but also
them selves, whiles they persuade them selves, that, they are beloved very well
of them, whom they themselves do not only neglect, but also in truth
reiecte. Therefore Paul here denounces that only for Charity, which is
void of all dissimulation: and every man may easily bear witness him self,
whither he have any thing in the secret of his heart, that is against
Charity. These words of good and evil, which follow straightwayes in the
text, have not a general signification: but he has put evil for that
malicious iniquity, whereby men are hurt: and good, for that bountifulness,
whereby they are helped. And here is an usual antithesis of the scripture,
when vices are first forbidden, and virtues then commanded.

In the participle Apostugountes, that is avoiding or putting away, I neither
have followed, Erasmus, nor the old interpreter, who have turned it, hating,
but (in my judgment) the meaning of Paul was, to express somewhat more: and
the vehemency in the word avoiding or putting away, does better answer the
contrary member: where he does not only bid that we should be bountiful,
but also cleave unto it.

10 Being ready to love one another. He can not persuade himself that he
has ever said enough in showing the feruencie of that love, wherewith we
ought to embrace one another. For he both calls it brotherly, and the
affection thereof storgen, which of the Latins is called mutual pit amongst
kinsfolks. And such ought that to be, wherewith we embrace the sons of
God. Which thing that it might come to pass, he adds a precepte very
necessary for the preserving of good will or benevolence, that every one for
his part give honor unto his brethren. For there is no more effectual poison
to ye estranging, or alienating of the minds of men, then, when any thinks
he is despised. If by honor, you understand all kind of duty, I am not
greatly against it: howebeit I like the first interpretation better. For as
nothing is more contrary unto brotherly concord, then contumely growing of
pride, when others being neglected, every one aduaunceth him self: so
modestye is the best nourse of love, whereby it comes to pass, that every
one honors others.

11 Not lither in business. This precept is given us, not only because the
life of Christians ought always to consist in doing, but because oftentimes our
own profit being neglected, we ought to bestow our labors upon our
brethren, yea though they be not always good, but often most unworthy and
unthankful.

Finally because in many duties we ought to forgette our selves, unless we be
earnest with our selves, and diligently strive to shake off al slothfulness,
we can never be truly prepared unto the obedience of Christ. And whereas it is
added, fervent in spirit. He shows how we may obtain that we spoke on
before. For our flesh (like an Ass) is always lither or slouthful, and
therefore had need of spurs: and it is only the feruencie of the spirit,
that corrects our slouthfulnes: therefore the study of doing good requires a
zeal, which the spirit of God kindeleth in our hearts. Why then, (will some
say) does Paul exhort unto this feruencie? I answer, although it be the
gift of God, yet it is the part of Christians, that sluggishnes being shaken
off, they receive that flame which is kindeled from above: as it often comes
to pass, that the motion of the spirit is choked and extinguished by our
injury. Hereunto also apperteineth the third, that we may serve the time, for
as the course of this life is short, so the opportunity of doing good is soon
past: therefore we ought more cheerfully make speed to the doing of our
duty. So in another place Paul bids redeem the time, because the days
are evil. The meaning may also be, that we might know to apply our selves to
the time, wherein there is great force. Howbeit Paul seems unto me to set
that against intermission, ceasing, or leaving off, which he commands of
serving the time. Furthermore because in many old copies, Curio, is read, which
word although at the first sight it seems strange, I dare not altogether
reject. If so be ye reading be accepted, I doubt not but the mind of Paul
is, to refer all those duties are done to our brethren, and whatsoever
serves to the mainteynance of charity, to the worship of God, that he might
make the faithful more willing.

12 Rejoicing in hope. These three are both joined together amongst them
selves, and also in a manner they seem to appertein unto that, Serving the
time. For he does best apply himself unto the time, and uses the occasion to
run on courageously, who puts his joy in the hope of the life to come, and
bears tribulations patiently. Howesoeuer it be (for it is no great matter,
whither you join them together, or separate them) first he forbids us to
set our hearts upon the present good things, and in earth and earthly things
to seek our joy, as though our felicity were there: but he bids us erect
our minds to heaven, where we may inioye perfect and full joy. If our rejoicing
shall be contained in the hope of the life to come, thereuppon shall patience
grow in adversity: because no abiding or suffering of sorrow can oppress that
joy. Therefore these two depend one of another, joy conceived of hope, and
patience in adversity. For no man will cheerfully, and with a quiet mind,
submit himself to bear the cross, but he who has learned to seek for his
felicity out of the world, that with the consolation of hope, he may mitigate,
Joy conceived of the life to com and patience coupled together.
and qualify the bitterness of the Cross. But because both these are far
above our strength, we must be earnest in prayer, and beseech GOD continually,
that he suffer not our hearts to faint, fall to the ground, and or to be broken
with adversity. Finally, Paul does not only prouok us to prayers, but plainly
requires perseverance of us: because we have a continual warfare, and daily
new conflicts arise, to the bearing whereof, yea even the strongest are
unmeet, unless they now and then gather new strength. Howbeit that we faint
not, the best remedy is, the continuance of prayer.

13 Serving the necessities of the Saints, etc. He returns unto the duties
of charity, the chiefest whereof is to do good unto those of whom we look
for no recompense. Because therefore it almost comes to pass, that they
chiefly are despised, who above others are oppressed with poverty, and stand in
need of help (for yt is thought to be lost, which is bestowed upon the^) God in
a special manner commends them unto us. For then we are truly charitable in
deed, when we help our poor brethren, for no other cause, then to exercise
our bountifulness. Now hospitality is not the last kind of charity: that
is, benevolence and liberality which is showed toward strangers, because
they chiefly are destitute of al things, and are far from their friends. We
see then, that every one ought by so much the more to be cared for of us, as
they are commonly more neglected of men. Note also the propriety of speech, in
that he says we must communicate to the necessities of the saints: whereby he
insinuates, that we ought, so to relieve the want of our brethren, as though
we succored our selves.

And he commands specially to help the saints. The faithful are specially
to be succored.
For although our charity ought to extend it self unto all men, yet it ought
with a singular affection to embrace those, are of the houshoulde of faith, who
are joined unto us in a nearer manner.

14 Bless them which persecute you. Bless (I say) and curse not. 15 Rejoice
with them that rejoice, and weep with them that weep. 16 Be of like affection
one toward another: not thinking arrogantly of your selves, but applying your
selves to base things. Be not wise in your own opinions. 14 Bless them,
etc. Once I would have the reader admonished of this, that in every precept
he do not curiouslye seek for a precise order: but to be content, here to
have scattered precepts whereby he may be prepared unto all the parts of a
holy life: and those also drawn out of that principle, which the Apostle put
down in the beginning of the chapter.

Straightwayes he will give charge of not requiting injuries done. Here now
he requires somewhat that is more hard, namely that we wish no harm to our
enemies: but howesoeuer they vex us, and deal discourteously with us, to wish
unto them all prosperity, and to pray unto God for the same. Which meekness
as it is more difficulte, so it is more seriously to be labored for. For the
Lord commands nothing, wherein he requires not our obedience. Neither is
any excuse to be admitted, if we be void of that sense, whereby the Lord
would have us to differ from the wicked, and children of this world. In deed
I confess, it is a hard thing, and altogether contrary to the nature of man:
howebeit nothing is so hard, but it is overcome by the power of GOD, which
shall never be wanting to us, if we be not negligent to call for it.

And although thou can scarsly find one, which has profited so much in the
law of GOD, that he can fulfill this precepte: yet none can boaste him self
to be the son of GOD, or glory in the name of a Christian, who has not
partly put on this mind, and daily fights with the contrary affection.

I said this was harder, then to remitte vengeance when any is hurt. For some
although they withholde their hands, and are not themselves carried with the
fury of hurting, yet they could wish that destruction or damage might
otherwise happen to their enemies. Yea and if they be so calm, that they
wish no harm: yet scarcely one in an hundredth will wish him to be safe of
whom he has received injury: Yea a good part burst forth into cursings. But
God by his word, does not only bridle our hands from evil works: but
also tameth the bitter affections of our heart. And not that onely^, but also
would have us careful for the health of those: who by hunting us wrongfully,
bring destruction upon them selves.

Erasmus was deceived in the word Eulogein: because he observed not that it
was opposed against cursings, Our patience must appear not only in not wishing
evil, but also in wishing good to our enemies.
and maledictions. For Paul in both of them would have God to be a witness
of our patience, how not only we bridle the fury of our wrath in our
wishes, but also by praying for their remission we testify that we are sorry
for them, whiles they perish wilfully.

15 Rejoice with them rejoice, etc. In the third place he puts a general
sentence, that the faithful embracing one another with a mutual affection,
do accounte the estate one of another common unto them. And he recites the
parts or the kinds in the first place, that they should rejoice with them
that rejoice, and weep with them that weep, For so the nature of true love
requires: that every one had rather mourn with his brother, then through
pleasure or idleness, to behold his sorrow a far off. The substance then
is, that we apply our selves one to another as much as may be: and what
condition so ever come, that every one take upon him the feeling of another
man's estate, whither to sorrow with him in adversity, or to rejoice with him
in prosperity. And truly not to be glade at the felicity of ones brother is
envy: and not to sorrow at his adversity, is inhumanitie. Let then that
likelines or mutual conbination of affection be amongst us, which may together
conform us unto all affections.

16 Not being high minded. In Greek the Apostle speaks both more
significantly, and more fitly for the Antithesis. Not cogitating (quoth he)
h^^h things, whereby he understands that it is not the part of a Christian
man, ambitiously to aspire unto those things, whereby he may excel others,
neither to have proud spirits: ^^trather to meditate modesty and meekenes.

For herein we excel before the Lords, and not in pride, or contempt of our
brethren. A pre^ep^ very aptly added unto those want before, for there is
nothing in (...) divides that unity was spoken of: then whiles we advance
our selves, and to the end we may come to some higher place, look somewhat a
loft.

This word, to them of the lower sort. I take in the neuter gender, that the
Antithesis may become place. Hee^^ therefore all ambition is condenmed, and
e^ation of mind, which insinuates it self under the (...) of magnanimity.
Seeing moderation or rather submission is the chiefest virtue of Christians,
which had rather always give honor unto others, then steal it from them.
Hereunto is that like which follows: for there is nothing more inflameth the
minds of men then the opinion of their own wisdom. His mind therefore is,
that that being laid a part, we would also hear others, and obey their
counsayles. For whereas Erasmus turns phr^nimous arrogant, that is coacted
and cold: A notable salve against arroga^cie.
because Paul should repeat the same thing twice, without any vehemency:
howebeit this is the best remedy to cure arrogancy, that me^ be not too wise
in their own opinion.

17 Rendering to no man, evil for evil: providing good things before all
men. 18 If it may be, as much as in you lies, have peace with al me^. 19 Not
revenging your selves, beloved: but give place unto wrath. For it is written,
vengeance is mine, I will repay, says the Lord. 17 Rendering to no man. It
differs in a manner nothing from yt which follows straightwayes: save that
vengeance is somewhat more, the^ this kind of recompense of ye which he
speaks here. For sometime we recompense evil for evil, yea where we exact not
the requiting of an injury, as if we give them hard entertainment, who do us
no good. For we are wont to estimate every man's merits toward ^s, or else how
they may deserve at our hands, yt we might bestow out duties upon the^, to who^
we are already bound, or of whom we look for some thing. And again if any
have denied us their help, when we were in need, recompencing (as they say)
like for like, we help them no more, then we were helped of them, when we
were in need. There be other such like examples, wherein, evil is recompensed
for evil, without manifest reuengen^^ ^oulding good things. I dislike not the
translation of Erasmius, ^o^ely, therefore preparing: Yet I chose rather to
(...)* word for word. Because every man is too much given to his own profit, or
too too prouide^t in eschewing his own damages, Paul seems to require
another care, and attention. The meaning is, we must diligently do our
endeavor, that by our probitie and hones^^ all men may be edified. For as the
inno^^cie of conscience ^^ necessary for one selves before God: so the
integrity of repore, is not to be neglected before men. For if God oughe to be
glorified by our good works, so much is wanting to his glory, as men see
nothing praise worthy in us, Yea the glory of God is not only obscured, but he
is also dishonored. For what so ever we offend, the unlearned draw it to the
reproach of the Gospel. Howebeit when we are commanded to provide good things
before men, we must also note to what end. For the end is not, that men might
have us in admiration, and praise us: for Christ does seriously drive away this
desire from us, when he bids us that al men being excluded, we should take
God for the only witness of our good deeds: but that our minds being lift up
unto God, they might give the praise to him, that by our example others might
bestirred unto the study of righteousness, and finally that they might receive
a good and sweet savor of our life, whereby they might be allured unto the
love of God. And if so be that we be evil spoken of, for the name of Christ,
yet we give not over to provide good things before men: but then is that
fulfilled, 1. Cor. 6.9.
that we are counted as liars and yet we are true. etc.

18 If it be possible, as much as in you lies. Tranquillity, and a manner of
life so composed, that it may make us be beloved of all men, is no common gift
of a christian man. Hereunto if we will give our endeavor, we must be endued
not only with great equity, but also with great commodity, and facility of
manners: which may not only conci^^ate or get unto us those be upright, and
good, but also may turn the hearts of the wicked.

Howbeit here is a twofolde caution or head to be taken that we covet not in
such sort to be gracious, A watchworke for all those seek to be gracious unto
men.
that we refuse (so often as necessity shall require) to take upon us the
hatred of any, for Christ's sake. And surely we may see many, who, whiles for
the pleasantness or sweetness of manners and tranquillity or quietness of mind
they are amiable unto all, yet for the Gospelles sake they have their nearest
friends, their greatest enemies. The second caution is, that our facility
degenerate not into assentation or flattery, that for quietness sake we would
flatter the sins of men. Because therefore it can not always be obtained, that
we should have peace with all men, he has added two particles, Wherefore and
when peace man be broken.
by the way of exception, if it may be, and as much as in us lies

Finally this must be estimated by the office of piety and charity, that we
do not break peace but being constrained through one of these. For we must
so for quietness sake tolerate and suffer many things, pardon offenses,
favorably remit the severe rigor of the law, that yet we be prepared, (as
often as need shall require) to sight courageously. For it can not be that
the soldiers of Christ, should have a perpetual peace with the world, whose
prince is Satan.

19 Not revenging your selves, beloved. That evil which he corrects here,
is more grievous then the former, whereof he made mention of late, as we have
admonished, howbeit both of them arise out of the same fountain: namely, too
much love of our selves, and natural pride, which makes us very favorable to
our own vices, but most severe toward others. Because therefore that disease
does beget almost in all men, a furious desire of revenging, when they are
touched but a little: here he commands, how grievously so ever we be
hurt, that we our selves go not about to revenge our selves, but commit it to
the Lord.

And because they are not easily bridled, who once have bin taken with this
unbridled affection, by a sweet speech he does (as it were) lay hands upon
us, that he might restrain us, whiles he, calls us beloved. This the^ is
the precepte, that we neither revenge, nor seek to revenge ye injuries done.
The reason is added because we must give place to wrath. And to give place unto
wrath, is to yield unto the Lord the power of iudgeing, which they take from
him, that take upon them reuengement. Wherefore if it be a great sin to vsurp
the turn or course of God, the^ is it not lawful to revenge: for so we prevent
ye judgment of God, who will have this reserved to himself. And wtall he
insinuates, yt they who patie^tly expect his help, shall have God their
reue^ger: but they who prevent him, leave no place for the help of God.
Moreover he does not only here forbid, yt we execute reue^geme^t our selves, with
our own hands, but also yt our heart should be tempted with any such desire* it is
therefore superfluous to distinguish between publik and private reue^geme^t. For
he is no more excusable, who with an evil mind, and desirous of reuengme^t,
seeks the help of ye magistrate, the^ he who deuiseth what way he may revenge
by himself. Yea reuengme^t is not always to be desired of God, as we shall see
straightwaies: because if our prayers proceed from a private affection, and not
from the pure zeal of ye spirit, we do not so much procure ye Lord to be our
judge, as we make him the minister or executioner, of our wicked concupiscence.
Therefore we do not otherwise give place unto wrath, the^ when with quiet minds
we expect a fit time of deliverance: in the mean while wishing yt they who are
now our adversaries, by repe^ting may become our friends. For it is written.
Deuteronomy. 32.35.
He brings a poofe taken out of ye song Moses, where ye Lord denou^ceth
himself, to be the reue^ger of his enemies. And those are ye enemies of god,
who vex his servants without cause. He ye touches you (quoth ye Lord) touches
the apple of mine eye. Let us therefore be content with this consolation, yt
neither they shall escape unpunished, who trouble us without a cause: neither
shall we by suffering make our selves more subject, or more open for the
injuries of ye wicked: but rather we shall give place unto yt Lord, (who is out
only reue^ger and deliverer) yt he may help us. Although it is not lawful yea
even to desire vengeance of God for our enemies: but rather we are to pray yt
they may be converted and become friends: and if so that they proceed in
their wickedness, that shall happen unto them, which happenth unto other
contemners of God. For Paul does not therefore cite this testimony, as though
we might straightwayes be on fire, so soon as we are iniuried, and even as the
affections or heat of the flesh shall require, to desire of God yt he would be
the revenger of our injuries.

But first he teaches that it is not our parts to revenge, unless we will
take unto our selves the office of God: secondly he notes that we are not to
fear least the wicked should rage more furiously, if they see we bear
patiently: for it is not in vain that God does take unto him self the office
of revenging.

20 Therefore if thy enemy hunger, feed him: if he chirste give him drink.
For in so doing thou shall heap coals of fire upon his head. 21 Be not
overcome of evil, but overcome evil with good. 20 Therefore if thy. Now he
declares how we may truly fulfill those precepts of not revenging, and
recompencing evil: namely, if we do not only abstain from doing injury,
but also do good unto those do hurt us. For that is a certain kind of
indirect retaliation or requiting, when we turn our beneficence away from
those have hurt us. Under the name of meat and drink, understand thou all
kind of duties. According therefore to thy ability, what so ever thy enemy
stands in need of, whither riches, counsel, or labor, thou ought to help
him.

Furthermore he calls him our enemy, not whom we hate, but who hates us.
And if so be they are to be helped according to the flesh, much less is
their health or salvation to be hindered by contrary imprecations. Thou shall
heap coals of fire. What profitte comes of doing good to those that hate us.
Because we are not willing to loose both charges and labor, he shows what
fruit shall come, if we do courteously entertayne our enemies. By coals some
understand destruction, which is returned upon the head of the enemy, if we
do good to him is unworthy, and behave our selves toward him, otherwise then
he is worthy: for so his fault is doubled. Others had rather understand it,
that his mind is allured to love us again, when he perceives how courteously
he is intertayned. I take it more simply, that his mind shall be inclined to
one part* For surely either thy enemy shall be mollified by thy benefits, or if
he be so barberous, that he will be nothing meeked, yet shall he burn and
boil with the testimony of his conscience, which shall feel it self
overwhelmed with your bountifulnes.

21 Be not overcome of evil, etc. This sentence seems to be put in stead
of a confirmation. For here altogether we have to fight with peruersitie, which
if we go about to requite, we must confess we are overcome of it: on the
contrary if we recompense good for evil, by that deed we show the invincible
constancy of our mind. And surely this is a notable kind of victory, whose
fruit is not only conceived in mind, but also felt in deed: the Lord
giving such success unto their patience as yt they could not wish better. On
the contrary, he which shall go about to overcome evil with evil, may
chance ouermatche his enemy in maliciousnes, but to his own destruction: for
in so doing he fights for the devil.

CHAPTER. 13.
1 Let every soul be subject to his higher powers. For there is no power but
of God: for the powers which be, are ordained of God. 2 Therefore he which
resists the power, resists the ordinance of God: and they which shall
resist, shall get unto them selves judgment.
1 LEt every soul, etc. that he does so diligently handle this place, yea
and that whiles he deals with the institution or fashioning of a christian
life, thereby appears he was constrained thereunto by some great necessity:
which seeing the preaching of the Gospel does always bring with it, at that
time chiefly it was like to bring it. For thereby always tumultuous spirits,
who think the kingdom of Christ, can not be sufficiently advanced unless all
earthly powers or authorities be suppressed: neither that they can enjoy the
liberty given by him, Causes moving Paul to entreat of obedience to
Magistrates.
except they shake off every yoke of humayne subjection. Howebeit this error
did possess the Jews above others, who thought it unmeet that the progeny
of Abraham, whose kingdom flourished before the coming of the Savior, should
now after his manifestation abide in servitude. And there was also another
thing, which did no less alienate the Jews then the Gentiles from their
princes: namely, because they did not only all of them abhor from piety, but
also with most infestuous or deadly minds, did persecute religion. Therefore
it seemed an absurd thing, to acknowledge them for lawful Lords and princes,
who went about to take the kingdom from Christ, the only Lord of heaven and
earth. For these causes it is like, Paul was moved, that with greater care he
might confirm the authority of Magistrates. And first of al, he puts down
a general precept, where in summarily be comprehends that, he is about to
speak of: then afterward he adds those things which make unto the
exposition, and confirmation of the precept. He calls them high powers, not
the highest powers, as though they obtained the highest empire or rule, but
which excel above other men. In respect therefore of subjects, and not in
respect of them selves, one being compared with another, Magistrates are so
called. And verily by this word the Apostle seems unto me, to go about to
take away the curiosity of men, who are often wont to enquire by what right,
they which are in authority, came by their power: but to us it ought to
suffice, that they do rule. For they have not ascended unto this estate by
their own strength, but they are placed by the hand of God. And whereas he
names every soul, thereby he takes away all exception, least any should
pretend an immunitie or freedom from the common subjection.

For there is no power, but of God. A reason why we should be subject to
Magistrates.
A reason why we should be subject unto Magistrates, because they are ordained
by the ordinance of God.

For if it be the Lords pleasure so to govern the world, he goes about to
inuert the ordinance of God, and so resists God him self, who so despises
or rejects the authority or higher power: seeing to contemn his providence,
who is the author of civil government, is to fight against him. Furthermore,
understand that authorities or powers are of God, not as the pestilence, How
the higher powers are of God.
hunger, war, and such like punishments of sin, are said to be of him:
but because he has appointed them for the lawful and right administration of
the world. For albeit tyrannies, and unjust dominations, in as much as they
are full of deformity, are not of the ordinary government: yet nevertheless
the right of government, is ordained of God for the health of mankind.

Therefore seeing it is lawful both to repel wars, and also to seek
remedies against other euilles: the Apostle commands the authority and
government of Magistrates, to be willingly, and cheerfully received and
reverenced of us, as profitable unto mankind. For we can not properly call
those punishments which God lays upon men for their sins, ordinances, but
those means which he has purposely set down for the conservation of a
lawful order.

2 And they which shall resist. Because none can resist God, but to their own
destruction, he threatens that they shall not escape unpunished, who so oppose
themselves in this respect against the providence of GOD. Therefore we are to
take heed least we fall under this sentence. By judgment I understand not
only that punishment, which is executed by the Magistrate, as though he
would have said, they are justly punished that rebel against authority: but
also every vengeance of GOD, what way so ever it come. For he teaches
generally, what end abides for those fight against God.

3 For princes are not a terror to good works, but to evil. Will thou then
not fear the power? do good, and thou shall have praise of it. 4 For he is the
minister of God, to thy wealth. But if thou have done any evil, fear: for he
bears not the swoorde in vain. For he is the minister of God, to take
vengeance on those, which do evil. 3 For princes. Now also he commends unto
us the obedience of princes by that profit comes of them. Therefore this
particle causal gar, that is, for, is to be referred unto the first
proposition, and not unto the last sentence. Finally, The commodity for which
God has ordained magistrates.
this is the commodity: namely, that God by that means will provide for the
tranquillity of good men: and for the brideling of the way wardnesse of evil
men: in which two things the saftie of mankind is contained. For unless the
fury of godles persons be met withal, and innocent men be defended from
their lust, all things shall forthwith come to naught. If this then be the
only medicine, whereby mankind is delivered from destruction, it ought to be
diligently conserved of us, unless we will profess our selves to be ye
public enemies of mankind. And whereas he adds. Will thou not fear? do
good, Thereby he insinuates, there is no cause why we should be afraid of the
Magistrate, if that we be good: yea, The duty of the magistrate.
that this is a secret testimony of an evil conscience, and one devising
some mischief, if any go about to shake off, or put from him that yoke.
Howbeit here he speaks of the true, and as it were the natural duty of
the Magistrate: from the which, although they oftentimes which bear rule, do
degenerate: yet ye obedience is to be given them, which is due unto princes.
For if an evil prince be the scourge of the Lord, to punish the sins of the
people, let us remember it comes to pass through our fault, that the
excellent blessing of God, is made a curse unto us.

Therefore let us not cease to reverence the good ordinance of God: which thing
we shall easily do, if we impute unto our selves whatsoever evil is in it.
He therefore shows here, to what end Magistrates are ordained of the Lord:
whose effect should always be extant, if through our fault, so noble and
healthful an institution, were not corrupted. For seeing princes do never so
abuse their power in vexing the good and innocent, but in their tyranny they
reteyne some show of a just domination: there can be no tyranny, which in
some respect is not a defense to conserve the society of men. Here also he
has noted two parts, of the which, yea even the Philosophers themselves have
thought the best composed administration of a common wealth to consist: namely,
the rewarding of good men, and the punishing of evil. The word praise has
here a large signification, after the manner of the Hebrews.

4 For he is the minister of God, to thy wealth. Here, even the Magistrates
themselves may learn what is their calling. For they rule not for their own
cause, but for the common profit, neither are they endued with an infinite or
unlimited power, but such as is tied to the health of their subjects. Finally,
they are bound unto God and men, in their principality. For because they are
the substitutes of God, and do his business, they shall give account vno him.

Secondly that ministry which God has committed to the^, respects the
subjects: wherefore they are also debtors unto the^. And private men are
admonished, that this is of the bountifulness of God, to defend them from the
injuries of wicked persons, by the sword of princes. For they bear not the
sword in vain. The other part of the office of Magistrates, is that they ought
to repress the lasciviousness of wicked men, which wyllingly do not suffer
themselves to be governed by laws: and to take such punishment as the
iudgemen of God requires for their wickedness: For he does plainly denounce
them armed with the sword, not for a vain show only, but that they might
smite evil doers.

Moreover, this saying the revenger of wrath, is as much as if it were said,
the executour of the wrath of God. And that he proves by the use of the
sword which the Lord has given into their hands. A notable place to prove
the authority of the Magistrate. For if God in arming the Magistrate has also
commanded him to use the sword: so often as he punishes the guilty with
death, by exercising the vengeance of God, he obeys his commandments.
Therefore they contend with God, who think it an abomination that the blood
of wicked men should be shed.

5 Wherefore we must needs be subject, not only for fear of punishment:
but also for conscience. 6 And for this cause pay ye tribute, for they are the
ministers of God, serving for the same purpose. 7 Give to every man therefore
his duty, tribute, to whom tribute is due, custom to whom custom, fear to
whom fear, honor to whom honor belongs. 5 Wherefore we must needs be
subject, Now by the way of collection, yet with a kind of polishing, he
repeateth that which he cammaunded in the beginning touching the obedience is
to be given to Magistrates: namely, how they are to be obeyed, not only for
the cause of man's necessity, The duties of subjects toward magistrates.
but also that we may obey God. For he has put this word wrath for vengeance
or reuengement, which the magistrate may take for the contempt of his dignity
or calling: as though he had said, we must not therefore obey because we
cannot freely resist the mighty and those are armed: as injuries are wont to
be borne which cannot be repelled: but voluntaryly we are to take upon us that
subjection, whereunto our conscience is bound by the word of God. Therefore
albeit the Magistrate were unarmed, and a man might provoke and contemn him
freely, to wit, with out punishment for it, yet is it no more to be attempted,
then if we saw present vengeance to be at hand for it. For it is not the
part of a private man to take the regiment from him, whom the Lord has
placed with authority over us. This whole disputation is of civil
gouernmente. Therefore in vain go they about by this place to establishe
their abominable tyranny, which exercise authority over men's consciences.

6 And for this cause pay we tribute. By occasion he makes mention of
tribute, the reason whereof is taken from the office of Magistrates. For if it
be their parts to defend and conserve in safety the tranquillity of good
men, and to oppose themselves against the godless practices of the wicked:
that they can not do unless they be helped by power and firm helps.

Tributes therefore are well and worthily paid, for the maintenance of so
necessary charges. Concerning the manner of customs and tributes, this is no
place for any larg discourse: neither is it our parts to prescribe princes,
how much they should bestow on every thing, or call them to a reckoning: Yet
is it meet they should remember, whatsoever they have of the people, it is as
it were common goods, not an instrument of private lust and riot. For we see to
what use Paul appoints those tributes are paid: namely, that princes might
be furnished with strength to defend their subjects.

7 Give to every man therefore his duty. The Apostle seems to me here to go
about to comprise summarily in what things the duties of subjects toward
Magistrates consist: namely, that they have them in estimation and honor, that
they obey their statutes, laws, and judgments: that they pay tributes and
customs. Under the name of fear, he notes obedience: by customs and
tributes, he means not only, freight paid for carriage and taxes, but also
other revenues. And this place confirms that I said before, we must obey
kings and every other superior, not because we are constrained, but because
it is an acceptable obedience to GOD. For he will not only be feared, but
also be honored with a voluntary obedience.

8 Owe nothing to any man, but to love one another. For he that loves another
has fulfilled the law. 9 For this, thou shall not commit adultery, thou shall
not kill, thou shall not bear false witness, thou shall not lust: and if
there be any other commandment, it is in few words comprehended in this
saying, thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self. 10 Charity works no ill to
his neighbor. Therefore the fulfilling of the law is charity. 8 Owe nothing
to any man. There are some which think this is not spoken without a taunte:
as though Paul answered to their objection, who contend that Christians are
ouercharged, as who should say other precepts then the precepts of charity
were enjoined them. And surely I deny not but it may be taken ironice, to
wit, tauntingly: that he might grant unto those admit no other law, then of
charity, their request. But in another sense. Yet had I rather take it simply,
because I think Paul's meaning is to refer this precept of the authority of
Magistrates, (least it should be thought of any to be but weak) unto the law
of charity, as though he had said, when I require you to obey, I require
nothing else but that which all Christians ought to perform by the law of
charity. For if you would have the godly to be safe (which thing not to will
were cruel) you must study that laws and judgments may be of strength,
and the governors of the laws, by whose benefit peace redoundeth to al, may
have an obedient people. Therefore he violateth charity, if any bring in
anarchia, liberty, such as when there is no magistrate every man does his
pleasure, after which does straightwaies follow a perturbation of al things.
For he that loves another has fulfilled the law. The counsel of Paul is
to revoke all the commandementes of the law unto love, that we may know, how we
then rightly obey the commandments, when we keep charity: and this, that we
refuse no labor which may make to the keeping of charity. So he confirms
very well that he commanded touching the obedience is to be given to
magistrates, wherein the greatest part of charity both consist. But here many
are troubled, and cannot well unfold themselves out of this difficulty: namely,
that Paul says the law is fulfilled if we love our neighbor: for so there is
no mention of the worship of God which ought not to be omitted. But Paul has
not respect unto the whole law: he speaks here only of those duties which
are commanded us of the law toward our neighbor. And surely that is true,
the whole law is fulfilled, when we love our neighbors, because true love
toward men, proceeds not but from the love of God, and is a testimony as
well as an effect thereof. Yet Paul here makes mention only of the second
table, for the question was only of that: as though he had said, he has done
his duty toward all the world, which loves his neighbor as himself. That
cavil of Sophisters is childish which go about to draw justification of
works out of this sentence. For Paul says not what men do, or do not, but
he speaks under a condition, which thou shall no where find to be
fulfilled. And when we say men are not justified by works, we denis not but
the keeping of the law is true righteousness: but because no man does nor
has performed it, we say all men are excluded from it, and therefore the only
refuge is in the grace of Christ.

9 For that thou shall not commit adultery. Hence it cannot be gathered what
commandments are in the second table: seeing in the end also he adds, and if
there be any other commandment. For he omitted the commandment of honoring
parents: And it may seem very absurd, that that should be omitted, which
chiefly apperteined to the purpose. But what if therefore he did omit it, least
he should obscure his argument? but as I dare not affirm yt, so I see nothing
wanting here, yt might serve to his purpose: namely, seeing God would nothing
else by all his commandments, then that he might instruct us unto charity, and
how by all means we are to strive thereunto. And yet the quiet reader will
easily confess, that Paul would prove by comparisons, how the whole law
tends to this, that mutual charity might be maintained amongst us: and this
is to be understood which he omitted, that obedience toward magistrate^ is
not the last part of nourishing peace, and conseruing brotherly love.

10 Love works no ill to his neighbor. He shows by the effect, that under
charity are contained all things, which are delivered in all those precepts.
For he that is endued with true charity will never study to hurt his brother.
What else does the whole law forbid, then that we should do no injury to our
neighbor? Furthermore, this must be applied unto the present purpose: for
seeing Magistrates are the governors of peace and equity: who so coueteth
that every man may have his own, and would have all men live in safety, he
must defend as much as lies in him the estates of Magistrates. The enemies of
government give liberty of hurting. Whereas he repeateth again that love is
the fulfilling of the law, understand it (as before) of that part of the law,
which respects the society of me^. For the first table of the law which is
concerning the worship of God, is not touched here.

11 And this also, seeing we know the season, because it is time that we
should now awake out of sleep: (for now is our salvation nearer then when we
believed.) 12 The night is past the day is come nigh: Let us therefore cast
away the deeds of darkness, and let us put on the armor of light.

13 Let us walk honestly, as in the day, not in ryoting and drunkenness,
neither in chambering and wantonness, neither in strife and enuing. 14 But put
ye on the Lord Jesus Christ, and make no provision for the flesh, to fulfill
the lusts thereof. 11 And this also. Now he takes in hand another place of
exhortation: namely, because the beams of eternal life have begun to shine
unto us as it were in ye morning, we must do that which they are wont to do,
that walk in ye midst of ye light, and in the sight of men. For they take
diligent heed, least they commit any filthy and unseemly thing: because if
they fall, they see they are subject to too many witnesses* but we which always
stand in ye sight of god and angels, and who^ Christ the true son of
righteousness inuiteth to his sight, ought much rather take heed of all
uncleanness. The meaning therefore of the words is this. Seeing we know it is fit
time, yt we should awake out of sleep, let us cast off whatsoever is of the
night: let us shake off al ye works of darkness, seeing the darkness it self is
now driven away: and studying the works of light, let us walk as it is meet
in the day time. The words are interposed, must be included in a pare^thesis.
Moreover because here is an allegory, it is necessary to note, what every part
does signify. By night, he understands the ignorance of God, wherein who so
are holden, they err and sleep as it were in the night. For the faithless
labor of these two evils, because they are blind and sottish or dull. And
this sottishnes or masednes he sets forth a little after by sleep, What is
meant by night and by light.
which is (as he says) the image of death. By light he understands ye
revelation of ye truth of God, by the which the son of righteousness Christ
appears to us. He uses this speech to awake, for to be armed and prepared to
do those things which the Lord requires of us. Works of darkness are put
for filthy and wicked works: because as he says the night is without shame.
The armor of light, for honest, sober and chaste works, such as the day is
wont to serve unto. And he uses rather this word armor then works, because
we must fight for the Lord.

But this parcel in the beginning of the verse: namely, and this also, is to
be read by it self. For it depends upon the former doctrine: as in latin
we say, adhaec vel preterea. Moreover, or furthermore. He says, ye time or
season is known to the faithful, because the day of Gods calling and
visitation requires new life and new manners, as for exposition sake he
adds afterward, it is time to arise. For it is not Chronos but Kairos, by
which word is noted the occasion or fit time. For now is our salvation
nearer. This place is diuersty wrested of the interpretours, many refer the
word, believed, unto the time of the law, as though Paul said, ye Jews
believed before Christ came, which interpretation I refuse as hard and coacted:
And surely to restrain a general doctrine to some small part of the Church
were absurd.

In all that congregation, whereunto he wrote, what one Jew was there? Then
this speech should not agree unto the Romans. Moreover, the comparison of
night and day (in my judgment) takes away this doubt. This therefore seems
unto me to be the simple meaning, now is our salvation nearer then when we
began to believe: that it might be referred unto the time which went before
faith. For seeing this aduerbe has an indifferent signification, this
proposition of ye Apostle seems much more convenient: as appears by that
which follows.

12 The night is past the day approaches near. This is ye occasion he made
mention of a little before. For albeit the faithful as yet are not received
into the full light: yet very well he co^parath the knowledge of the life to
come, which shines unto us by the gospel, unto the morning. Day, here, as in
many other places is not put for ye light of faith (otherwise he would not say
it draws near, but it is present, yea now it shines as in ye midst of his
course) but for that brightness of the celestial life, whose beginnings are
now seen, in the gospel. The sum is, as by the spring of the day we gather,
that the full light of the sun is at hand, even so as soon as God begins
to call us, we gather that we ought to intend upon the coming of Christ. He
says, the night is past, because we are not so overwhelmed with a thick mist
as the faithles are, in whom there appears no sparkle of life, but the hope
of resurrection is set before our eyes by the Gospel. Yea the light of faith,
whereby we know the brightness of the celestial glory is at hand, ought to
stir us up that we freeze not here upon this earth. But a little after,
where he bids us walk as upon the day light, he keeps not the same
metaphore: because he compares the present state, wherein Christ shines unto
us, to the day. But by diverse ways he goes about to exhort sometimes unto the
meditation of the life to come, sometimes unto the reverence of the sight of
God.

13 Not in rioting and drunkenness. He has put down here three sorts of
vices, of the which he has noted every one by two names, to wit, intemperancie
and excess in living or in diet: carnal lust and that uncleanness is joined
to it: envy and strife, If these vices have such filthiness in them, that
even carnal men are ashamed to commit them in the sight of men, it is meet
we should always absteyne from them which walk in the sight of God, yea then
when we are sequestered from the sight of men. In the third pare although
contention goes before emulation, yet there is no doubt but the mind of Paul
is to admonish that contentions and strifes proceed forth of this fountain:
for whiles every one seeks to excel, and enuieth another. And ambition is the
cause of both evils.

14 But put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ. This Metaphor is very usual in the
Scripture, in those things which make either to the adorning or deforming of
man: both which is seen in apparel. For a filthy and torn garment
dishonesteth a man, a handsome and clean garment does greatly beautify him.
To put on Christ, here signifies to be every way defended by virtue of his
spirit, whereby we are made apt unto all the parts of sanctity or holiness.
For so the image of God is restored in us, which is the only ornament of the
soul. For Paul has respect unto the end of our calling, because GOD
adopting us does graffe us into the body of his only begotten son, and
verily upon this condition, that we putting from us our former life, may
become new men in him. Wherefore in another place also he says the faithful
put on Christ in baptism. Make no provision for the flesh. So long as we carry
our flesh about, we cannot altogether cast away the care thereof: Gal. 3.27.
for our conversation is so in heaven, that we may soiourne in earth.

Therefore the things apperteyning to the body are to be cared for, How we
should use the things of this world.
yet no otherwise then helps for our peregrination, not that we should forget
our country. Yea profane men have said, a few things suffice nature: yet the
appetites of men are insatiable. He therefore which coueteth to fulfill the
lusts of his flesh, must needs not only exceed, but be drowned into a huge
and deep gulf. Paul laboring to restrain the concupiscences of men,
admonishes that this is the cause of al intemperance, when no man is content
with the sober and lawful use of things: therefore has he prescribed this
order, that we may serve the necessity of our flesh, and not pamper the
lust thereof. So shall it come to pass, that we may use this world as not
using it.

Chap. 14.
1 HIm that is weak in faith receive, not unto doubtfulnes of disputation. 2
He that believes let him eat every meat; but he that is weak eats
herbs. 3 Let not him that eats despise him that eats not: and let not him
which eats not condemn him which eats: for the Lord has received him. 4
Who art thou that iudgest another man's servant? He stands or falls to his
own Lord. Yea he shall stand: for God is able to make him stand.
HIm that is weak. Now he passes unto a precept very necessary for
Ecclesiastical instruction: that they which have profited more in the doctrine
of Christ, might apply the^ selves to the ruder sort, and bestow their strength
to support their weakness. For amongst ye people of God, there are some
weaklings, who unless they be handled with great courtesy and gentleness, they
are discouraged, and at length revolt from religion. Which thing even at yt
time chiefly (as it is like) did happen: seeing the churches were mixed of
Jews and Gentiles; of whom some having been long accustomed with the
observations of the law of Moses, and nousled therein from their infancy, were
not easily drawn from the^, othersome seeing they had learned no such thing,
did reject ye yoke they were not acquainted withal. And because man is prone
to fall from diversity of opinions unto brawlings and co^tentions, ye Apostle
shows how they which vary so in opinions, might live quietly amongst
themselves. And he prescribes ye best way, namely, yt they which are strong,
bestow their labor to support ye weak: and they which have profited more to
bear with the ruder sort. For if God make us strong above others, he does it
not that we should oppress the weak: neither is it ye point of Christian
wisdom to be insolent above measure, and to conte^ne others. In this sort
therefore he directs his talk toward those are more skilful, and already
confirmed, who are by so much ye more bound to help their neighbors, as they
have received a larger gift of the Lord. Not unto doubtfulnes of disputation.
The speech is defective: because the word should make up the sense is wanting:
yet it is sure ye Apostle would nothing else, then yt the weaker sort should not
be wearied with unmeet disputatio^s. The proposition he now handles is to be
kept in memory. For because many of the Jews did cleave yet unto the shadows
of the law, he confesses it was fault worthy in the^, yet he requesteth it
might be borne withal for a time: for to urge them more hardly, were to
hazard their faith. He calls then those questions contentions, which either
trouble, or plu^ge with doubts, ye mind not yet sufficiently established.
Although it were meet to extend this further, namely, unto intricate and
curious questions, whereby weak consciences without edification are disquieted
and troubled. Therefore we must regard what questions every one is fit to
bear, and our doctrine must be tempered for the capacity of every one.

2 He that believes, etc. Amongst diverse readings what Erasmus has followed
I see not. For he has made the sentence lame, which otherwise is perfect in
the words of Paul: and has improperlye for an article Relative, put, Alius
quide^ credit, to wit, one verily believes, neither ought it to seem hard or
wrested, yt I take the Infinitive for the Imperative: because this kind of
speech is very usual with Paul.

He calls those therefore believers, who are endued with the assurance of
conscience: to these he grants the indifferent use of all things. In the
mean while he that is weak eats herbs, and absteyneth from those things
whose use he thinks not lawful for him. If the common reading be better
liked, the sense shall be: It is not right that he which freely eats all
meats, because he believes he may do it, should examine, those are yet
weak and tender in faith, by the same rule. To translate them sick (as some
have done) is ridiculous.

3 He which eats, let him not despise. Wisely, and fitly he meets with the
faults on both sides. For they which are strong have this fault, that they
despise and also deride, as superstitious persons, those are scrupulous in
things of no great importance: on the contrary these can scarsely stay
themselves from rash judgment, that they should not condemn that which they
embrace or conceive not: whatsoever therefore they see to be done against their
own opinion, they count yt for evil. Therefore he dissuadeth those from
contempt, and these from too much frowardnes. And the reason which he adds,
because it apperteineth unto both sorts of men, it is to be applied unto both
members. When you see (says he) a man lightened with knowledge, thou have
testimony enough yt he is received of the Lord: if thou do then either
contemn or condemn him, thou do reject him whom the Lord has received.

4 Who art thou that iudgest another man's servant. etc. As thou should deal
uncivilly, ye proudely amongst men, if thou would bring another man's
servant under thy rules, and examine all his deeds by the live of thy will:
so thou take too much upon thee, if thou condemn any thing in the servant
of God, because it pleases not thee. For it is not thy part to prescribe him
what he should do, or what he should not do: neither need he to live
according to thy rule. And whereas he takes from us the faculty of judging,
it apperteyneth as well unto the person as unto the deeds.

Wherein yet there is great diversity. For the manne whatsoever he be, we
ought to leave him to ye judgment of God. As for his deeds we may not
determine of the^ according to our own estimation: but according to the word
of God. For that judgment which is taken from the word of God is neither
man's judgment, nor unfit. Paul therefore here would drive us from all
temerous and rash judgment, How we should judge of the deeds of men.
whereinto they fall which dare judge of the deeds of men besides the word of
God. He stands or falls to his own Lord. As though he said, the Lord
properly has this authority to reprove or accept that the servant does:
therefore he is injurious to the Lord, who so goes about to take this
authority unto him. Whereas he adds, yea, he shall stand. Thereby he
commands us not only to absteyne from condemning, but also exhorts unto
courtesy and humanity, that we should always hope well of him, in whom we
decerne any portion of true godliness. Seeing GOD has put us in hope, that he
will fully confirm them, and bring them on to perfection, in whom he has
begun the work of his grace. For in that he reasons from the power of GOD,
he does it not simplye, as though he said, God can do it, if he would:
but he joins the will of God with his power, as the manner of the Scripture
is. And yet he defines not here, any perpetuity: as though they must needs
stand unto the end, whom God has once erected: but only admonishes, that
we should hope well, and that our judgments should lean this way: as he
also teaches in another place, saying, Phil. 1.6
he which has begun in you a good work, will perform it to the end. To
be short, Paul shows to what side the judgments of such men ought to
sway, in whom, charity does floorishe or abound.

5 This man verily esteems one day above another day: another man counts
all days alike. Let every man be fully persuaded in his own mind. 6 He that
regards the day, to the Lord he regards it: and he that regards not the
day, to the Lord he regards it not. He that eats, eats to the Lord, for
he gives God thanks: and he that absteineth, absteineth to the Lord, and
gives God thanks. 5 This man verily. He spoke a little before of religion in
the choice of meats: now he brings in another example of the difference of
days: both which proceeded from Iudaisme. For seeing that the Lord in his law,
had made a difference between meats, and pronounced some unclean, whose use
he forbad: and seeing also he had ordained certain festival and solemn
days, commanding the same to be observed: the Jews who had been brought up
in the doctrine of the law, from their childehoode, could not put away the
reverence of days, which they had learned from the beginning, and whereunto
they had accustomed themselves all their whole life: neither durst they touch
those meats, which they abhorred so long. That they were endued with such
opinions, it was of infirmity: for they would have thought otherwise, if they
had attained unto the certain and clear knowledge of Christian liberty. But
in that they restrained them selves, from that which they thought to be
unlawful for them, that was a token of godliness, even as it had been a sign
of boldness and contempt, if they had tasted any thing against their conscience.
Here therefore the Apostle teaches a most excellent moderation, when he
commands every man to be fully assured of his counsel: whereby he gives
to understand, Nothing should be done with a doubting or wavering conscience.
there ought to be in Christians, such a study and care of true obedience:
that they enterprise nothing which they think not, or rather are sure does
please God. And it is altogether to be observed, yt this is the beginning of a
right life, if men depend upon the will of God, and suffer not themselves,
(through a doubtful and wavering mind) to move a finger breadth: because it
cannot be avoided, but our rashness must needs straightwayes burst forth into
contempt, when we dare step further, then we are persuaded may be lawful for
us. But if any man obiecte, Objection.
that error is always doubtful, and therefore such certainty as Paul
requires, can not be sound in the weak: the aunsweare is ready, Answer.
namely, that such are to be pardoned, if they keep them selves within their
compass. For the meaning of Paul is nothing else, but to restrain the
immoderate liberty, whereby very many at a venture thrust themselves into
matters doubtful and unknown. So then Paul requires this choice, that the
will of God might go before all our actions.

6 He that regards the day. etc. For as much as Paul knew certainly, that
the observation of days proceeded from the not knowing of Christ: it is not
credible, that he did whollye defend such a corruption: and yet the words
seem to importe, that he sins not which observes the day. For nothing
can be acceptable unto God, except it be good. Therefore, that thou may
understand Paul's meaning, it is necessary to put a difference between that
opinion which any has conceived of observing days, and the observation it
self, whereunto he byndeth himself. For the opinion is superstitious:
neither does Paul deny that, who under the name of infirmity, has already
condemned it, and will by and by condemn it more plainly. But whereas he
who is holden with that superstition, dare not violate the solemnity of the
day, that is approved of God: because he dare do nothing with a doubtful
conscience. For what should the Jew do, who as yet has not profited so
much, that he should be delivered from the religious observation of days?
He has the word of God, wherein, the observation of days is commended unto
him. A necessity is laid upon him by the law: the taking away of that
necessity is not yet perfectlye known unto him. There remains therefore
nothing else, but that he expecting a larger revelation, should keep himself
within the compass of his capacity: and not to use the benefit of liberty,
before he have embraced the same by faith. The very same is to be
understood of him, that refrayneth himself from unclean meats. For if in
the perplexity of mind he should eat, that were not to receive a benefit
at the hand of GOD: but rather a maleperte thrusting of his hand into things
forbidden. Let him therefore use other things, which he supposes are
granted to him, and let him follow the measure of his own understanding. So
shall he give thanks to the Lord, which he cannot do, except he be
persuaded that he is fed by the benefit of God. Therefore he is not to be
despised, as though by this his sobriety, and Godly fearfulness he
offended the Lord. Neither shall any absurditye follow if we say the
modesty of a weak man is approved or allowed of the Lord, not of merit, but
of grace or favor.

Howbeit because of late he required the certainty of mind, least every one
should rashly take upon him the keeping of this or that at his pleasure, we
are to consider if he do not here rather exhort then affirm: because this
way the Text shall run better, namely, let every manne know the ground or
reason of that he does, for he must give account at the tribunal seat of
God. For whether a man eat meat, or abstain, he ought in both to have
respect unto GOD. And certainly there is nothing more apt, as well to
restrain the liberty of judging, as to correct superstitions, then to cite us
before the tribunal seat of God: and therefore Paul very wisely does propose
a Judge before every one, unto whose will they ought to refer or examine,
whatsoever they do. Neither does the affirmative speech let this acception:
because straightway after he adds, that no man lives or dies to himself,
where he recites not, what men can do, but commands what they ought to do.

And note that he says we then eat and abstain to the Lord, when we give
thanks. Wherefore both the use of meats and also abstinence is impure without
thanksgiving. It is only the name of God, which, whiles it is called upon,
does sanctify us and ours.

7 For none of us lives to himself, and none of us dies to himself. 8 For
whither we live, we live to the Lord, or whither we die, we die to the Lord:
whither we live, or die, we are the Lords. 9 For therefore Christ both died,
and rose again, and revived, that he might be Lord of quick and dead. 7 For
none of us lives. etc. Now he confirms the former sentence, by a reason
taken from the whole unto a part, The will of God ought to be the only rule of
man's life.
namely, that it is no marvel, though the particular actions of our life
ought to respect the Lord, seeing our life it self is wholly to be bestowed
to his glory. For then verily is the life of a Christian man framed aright,
when he has the will of GOD for his mark. And if that thou art bound, to
examine by his will whatsoever than do, then is it altogether sin to take
any thing in hand, which thou think may displease him, yea which thou
art not assured may please him.

To live unto the Lord, does not signify here as in the sixte Chapter, to
be led by his spirit: Romans 6.8. What it is to live unto the Lord.
but to apply himself to his will and beck, and to dispose all those things
he has unto his glory. And we are not only to live unto the Lord, but also
to die: that is, as well our death as life is to be resigned to his will.
Heereunto he adds a notable reason, because whither we live or die, we are
his. For thereuppon it follows, that he has power over life and death. The
use of this doctrine is very large. For so the Lordshippe of life and death is
ascribed unto GOD, that every man might the better bear his estate, as the
yoke imposed by him, for it is meet he should assign to every one his
standing and course. And so we are not only forbidven, rashely to take in
hand this or that without the commandment of God, but also we are
commanded to be patient in all griefs and losses. If therefore at any time
the flesh starte aside in adversity, let us remember, that he, who is not
free, neither has power over himself, does peruerte right and order, if he
depend not upon the beck of his Lord. By this means also is delivered unto
us a rule to live and dye, so that if he prolonge our life by continual
miseries and sorrows, yet we covet not to depart before our time. And again,
if suddenly in the midst and flower of our age he call us away, we be
always ready to depart.

9 For Christ therefore died. This is a confirmation of the reason went before.
For to the end he might prove, that we are to die and liu^ to the Lord,
he said, we are in the power of Christ, whither we live or dye. Now he
shows how woorthily Christ challenges unto himself, this power over us,
seeing he has purchased the same by so great a price. For, by suffering
death for our salvation; he has gotten unto himself a dominion or Lordship
over us, which cannot be destroyed by death: and by rising again he has
received our whole life into his jurisdiction and guard: therefore by his death
and resurrection, he has deserved, that as well in death as in life we should
serve to the glory of his name. Whereas it is said here, he rose again and
revived, it is as much of value, as if it were said, that by his resurrection
a new state of life was obtained to him. And because that life wherein he now
lives, is not subject to any mutation, his kingdom also over us, is eternal.

10 But why do thou judge thy brother? Or also thou, why do thou despise
thy brother? For we shall al appear before the judgment seat of Christ. 11
For it is written, I live says the Lord, and every knee shall bow to me,
and every tongue shall confess unto God. 12 So then every one of us, shall
give account for himself unto God. 13 Let us not therefore judge one another
any more: but rather judge this, that no occasion of falling of offense be
given to your brother. 10 But why do thou judge. Because he had addicted
the life and death of us all unto Christ, thence he passes, to make mention of
that judgment, which the father has given to him, together with the dominion
of heaven and earth. Whence he gathers that it is malapert boldness, if any
manne usurp unto him self judgment over his brother, seeing by such
licenciousnes that authority is pulled away from Christ, which he only has
received of the father. But first by the name of brother he brideleth this lust
of judging. For if the Lord have ordained amongst us the law or ^^^t of
brotherly society, an equality must needs be observed: therefore every one,
taking to himself the person of a judge, shall do naughtily. Secondly he
reuoketh or calls us unto that only judge, from whom no man cannot only,
not take away his authority, but also cannot escape his judgment. As it were
therefore an absurd thing amongst men, if a guilty person which were not
worthy to lie upon ye footestoole should rushe unto the seat of judgment:
so absurd is it that a Christian manne should take unto him self liberty to
judge his brothers conscience. Such in effect is the argument of James,
saying, James 4.10.
he that judges his brother, judges the law: and he that judges the law,
is not a keeper of the law, but a judge. And on the contrary (quoth he) there
is one law giver, who ca^ save and destroy. Tribunal, is attributed unto Christ
for the faculty of judging, as the voice of the Archangel whereby we shall be
cited, is called in another place a trumpe: because as it were with his sound,
1. These. 4.16.
he shall pearce the minds and ears of all.

11 For it is written, I do live. He seems unto me to have cited this
testimony of ye Prophet Esaias, Esaias 45.23.
not so much for ye proof of that sentence of the judgment of Christ (which
was undoubtedly believed of all Christians) as to show that that judgment is
to be looked for of all, with great humility, and submission: which the
words themselves importe. Th coming of Christ to judgment ought humbly to be
looked for of all men.
In his words going before he testified, that Christ only was judge over all
men: now by the words of the Prophet he declares, that all flesh ought to be
humbled with the expectation of that judgment: which is noted by the bowing
of knees. Howbeit, notwithstanding in that place of ye prophet, the Lord does
generally foreshew yt it should come to pass, that his glory should he made
manifest amongst all nations, and his majesty (which then was amongst a few,
and as it were lurked in a corner of the world) should shine every where: yet
if we look into it more nearly, it is apparaunt that the full accomplishment
thereof, is not now extaunt, nor ever was in this world, neither yet is to
be looked for in the ages to come. God reigns now no otherwise their by the
Gospel: neither is his majesty otherwise honored aright, then whiles the
same being known by his word, is reverenced. But the word of God has always
had his enemies which have frowardly resisted: and his contemners which have
scoffed at it, as a trifling and fabulous thing. At this day there are many
such, and evermore with. Hereby appears that this prophecy is indeed begun
in this life: but is not perfected, till that day of the last resurrection
shall come, wherein all the enemies of Christ shall be thrown down, that they
may become the footestoole of his feet.

Furthermore, even that also could not be, except the Lord sat in judgment:
therefore has he well applied this testimony unto the tribunal of Christ. It
is also a notable place to establishe our faith concerning the eternal dietie
of Christ. For it is God that speaks there, and that God, which has once
said, Esaias 42.8.
that he will not give his honor to another. Now then if that be fulfilled
in Christ, which he there challenges to him self only, without doubt he
does manifest him self in Christ. And surely the verity of that prophecy,
appeared then clearly, when Christ gathered unto him self a people out of
all the world, and brought them into the woorshippe of his power, Phil. 2.9.
and obedience of his Gospel. Whereunto Paul had respect when he said, that
God gave a name to his Christ, whereat every knee should bow. And it shall
then fully appear when he shall get upon his seat to judge both the quick
and the dead: as all judgment in heaven and earth is given unto him of the
Father. In the words of the Prophet is, every tongue shall swear unto me: but
seeing an oath is a part of the worship of God, though Paul have here, shall
confess, ye sense varieth nothing. For the meaning of the Lord was simply to
affirm, that all men should not only acknowledge his power, but also by mouth
and external gesture of the body, which he has noted by the bowing of knees,
show forth the confession of obedience.

12 So then every one. This conclusion calls us back unto humility and
submission. Whereupon also he infers straightwayes, that we should not
judge one another: because it is not lawful for us to take upon us the
authority of judging, seeing of necessity we must not only be judged our
selves, but also must give an account. To judge has a twofold acception in the
first place it is put for to ^^condemne, in the second, for to be wary or
circumspact.
And out of the diverse signification of the word judging or to judge, He has
excellently drawn a contrary acception or signification: form the first place
he forbids us to judge by condemning: in the second place he commands
that all the judgment of reason should be applied to the avoiding of
offense. For by the way he reproves those peevish carpers, who bend al their
dexterity and sharpnes of wit unto this, that they may have something to find
fault withal, in the life of their brethren. And therefore be commands that
they rather have regard unto warines or circumspection, because oftentimes
through their negligence, they either precipitate, or force their brethren into
some offense.

14 I know and am persuaded in the Lord Jesus, that there is nothing common of
it self: but he that thinks it to be common, to him it is common or
unclean. 15 But if thy brother be grieved for thy meat: now walk not thou
charitably. Destroy not him through thy meat, for whom Christ died. 16 Let not
your commodity, be evil spoken of. 17 For the kingdom of God is not meat
and drink: but righteousness, and peace, and joy in the holy Ghost. 18 For who
so in these things serves Christ, is acceptable to God, and approved of men.
14 I know etc. That he might prevent the objection of such, as had profited
so far in the Gospel, that they put no difference between meats: he does
first set down, what is to be thought of meats, as they are to be considered
in themselves: What is simply to be thought of meats themselves.
secondly, he adds, what offense may grow in the circumstance of the use of
them. He pronounces therefore, that to aright and pure conscience, no meat is
impure, and that there is no impediment, why we may not purely use the same, if
ignorance and error did not let us: because, if any man imagine an
uncleanness in his meat, he cannot freely use the same. But a little after
he adds, that we are not only to respect the meats themselves, but also
our brethren, before whom we eat. For we are not to count the use of Gods
benefits so common, that it should not be subject unto charity. His words
therefore are as much in value, as if he said, I know all meats are clean,
and therefore I leave them free unto thee, I suffer thy conscience to be loose
from all scrupell: finally, I do not simplye drive thee from the meats
themselves: but the regard of meats being laid a part. I would not have thy
neighbor to be neglected of thee.

In this place he calls that common which is profane, and which is without
al difference used of the wicked: that it might be opposed against those
things, which are peculiarly sanctified for the use of faithful people. He
says that he knows and is persuaded of the purity of all meats, that he
might put it out of all question. He adds in the Lord Jesus: because
through his benefit and grace we obtain this, that all creatures are
sanctified unto us of the Lord, which creatures, were otherwise cursed in
Adam. And withal, his meaning is, to set the liberty given of Christ, against
the servitude of the law, least they should think, they were holden with
that observation, from the which Christ had freed them. In the exception put
down by the Apostle, we are taught, there is nothing so pure, but it may be
contaminated by an impure conscience. For it is only faith and godliness,
which sanctifies all things unto us. And the faythlesse, as they are
inwardelye unclean, so they defile whatsoever they touch. Tit. 1.15.


15 If thy brother be grieved. Now he declares by how many ways the offense
of our brethren, may corrupt the use of good things. And the first reason is,
that charity is violated, if for so light a cause our brother be grieved: for
it is contrary unto charity, Reasons why we should not offend out brethren by
meats.
to give any an occasion of sorrow. A second reason, that whiles the weak
conscience is wounded, the price of the blood of Christ is wasted: for the most
abject brother is redeemed by the blood of Christ, and therefore it is not
meet he should be destroyed for satisfiyng ye belly. And we are too
shamefully given to our lusts, if we prefer meat, a most vile thing, before
Christ. The third reason is, that if the liberty purchased unto us by Christ
be good, we ought to do our endeavor, that it be not evil spoken of, and
worthily dispraysed of men: which comes to pass, when we use the gifts of
God out of season. These reasons therefore ought to move us, that we run not
rashly into offenses for our liberty.

17 For the kingdom of God is not. Now on the contrary he teaches, that we
may without damage abstain from the use of our liberty, because the kingdom
of God does not consist in those things. For those which serve, either to
erect or confirm the kingdom of God, are no way to be omitted, whatsoever
offenses may follow thereon. If so be then, that for charities sake, a man may
cease from the use of meats, Gods honor not hindered, Christ's kingdom not
prejudiced, and religion or piety not violated: they are not to be suffered
who for meats sake trouble the Church. He uses the same arguments to the
Corinthians: saying, meat for the belly, 1. Cor. 6.13.
and the belly for meats: but God shall destroy them both: for neither if we
eat shall we have the more. In which words his meaning is, 1. Cor. 8.^.
briefly to show, that meat and drink are things less worth, then that for
their sakes, the course of the Gospel should be hindered. But righteousness
and peace. He has by the way, opposed these, against meat and drink, not as
though he reckoned all those things, whereon the kingdom of Christ consist:
The kingdom of Christ consists in spiritual things.
but that he might declare how it stands upon spiritual things. Albeit to
say the truth, he has comprehended the sum in few words: namely, that we
being clear in our selves, might be at peace with the Lord, and possess
true joy of conscience, yea and that by the holy Ghost dwelling in us.

Yet notwithstanding (as I said,) he has applied these few to the present
argument: for he that is made partaker of true righteousness, he inioyeth a
most excellent, and inestimable benefit, namely, the quiet joy of conscience.
For he who has peace with God, what can he desire more? Whereas he
joins peace with joy, he seems unto me, to express the manner of that
spiritual joy, for howesoeuer the reprobate droupe, or lift up them
selves, yet the conscience is not otherwise pacified and quieted, then whiles a man feels that GOD is reconciled, and merciful to him: neither indeed is
there any sound or true joy, but which proceeds from that peace. And
although it is necessary, when mention is made of so great things, to
preach the spirit for the Author of them: yet in this place he would
secretly oppose the spirit against external things: that we might know,
how without the use of meats, those things apperteyne unto the kingdom of
GOD, may abide perfect and sound unto us.

19 For who so by these. This reason is taken from the consequent, for it
cannot be, when a man is accepted of God, and approved of men, but the
kingdom of God should live and floorishe in him. Who so with a quiet and
peaceable conscience serves Christ in righteousness, approoueth himself as
well before men as God. Whersoeuer then is righteousness, peace, and spiritual
joy, there is the perfect kingdom of God: so then it stands not upon
corporal things. Furthermore, he says, that that man is acceptable to God,
who obeys his will. And testifies that the same man is also approved of men,
because they cannot, but give testimony to that virtue they see with their
eyes: Not that the wicked do always spare the sons of God: yea rather when
there is none occasion, they pour out reproaches against them, and with feigned
calumniations slander them unworthily: finally by misconstruing their good
deeds, they turn them to reproach. But Paul speaks here of sincere
judgment, which is mixed with no morositie, hatred, nor superstition.

19 Therefore let us follow after such things as concern peace, and mutual
edification. 20 Do not destroy the work of God, for meat. All things
indeed are pure, but it is evil for him that eats with offense. 21 It is
good not to eat flesh, nor to drink wine, nor to do any other thing, whereby
thy brother may fall, or be offended, or be made weak. 19 Therefore let us. He
does what he can to revoke us from the bare consideration of meats, unto those
greater things, which ought to have the first place in all our actions, and so
to ouerrule them. For we must eat to live: and live to serve the Lord. And
he serves the Lord, who through benevolence and courtesy edifieth his
neighbor. For under these, two, namely, concord and edification, almost all
the duties of charity are contained.

And least that should be little esteemed, he repeateth that sentence which
he had put down, namely that corruptible meat is a thing unworthy, for
whose cause the building of the Lord should be destroyed. For wheresoever
there is but a sparkle of godliness, there a man may see the work of God:
which they overthrow, who through their importunity trouble the conscience
that is yet weak. And it is to be noted that edification is therefore joined
unto peace, because sometime they do too much cocker one another, so that they
hurt greatly by their obsequie. Wherefore there is choice to be kept in the
study of obeying, and profit is to be considered, that we may willingly
grant unto our brother, whatsoever serves to the furthering of his salvation.
As Paul admonishes in another place, all things are lawful to me, 1. Cor.
10.28.
but all things are not expedient: and straightwaies after he adds the
reason, because all things do not edify. And it is not in vain that he
repeateth again, not for meat, signifiyng that he requires not an
abstinence wherein there might be a hassarde or loss of Godliness, as he
said of late: although we do not freely eat every meat, but abstain from
the use of certain meats for our brethren sakes, yet the kingdom of God
abides perfect.

20 All things indeed are pure. Where as he says all things are pure, that
is by the way of concession or granting: and whereas he adds, but it is
evil to the man that eats with offense, That is by the way of exception, as
though he said, in deed the meat is good, but the offense is evil. For
meats are given us that we might eat them, without the breach of charity,
he therefore defiles the use of pure meat, who in eating of it violateth
charity. Thereupon he infers that it is good to abstain from all things
which may turn to the offense of our brethren. And he puts down three
words in order, to fall, to be offended, to be weakened. To this sense: Let no
cause of falling be given to your brethren, yea nor of offense, nor of
infirmity. For to be weakened is less, then to stumble or be offended: and to
be offended is less, then to fall. He is said to be weakened, into whose
conscience there is put some wavering or doubting: to be offended, What it is
to be weakened, to be offended and to fall.
whose conscience is shaken with some greater perturbation: to fall, who in a
manner is alienated from the study of religion.

22 Thou have faith? have it with thy self before God. He is blessed, who
judges not himself in that which he examineth. 23 He which judges if he
eat, is condemned: because he eats not of faith. For whatsoever is not of
faith, is sin. 22 Thou have faith. That he might conclude, he shows
wherein the commodity of Christian liberty does consist: whereby appears
that they do falsely brag of liberty, who can not govern themselves in the
use of it. He says therefore, that the knowledge of liberty, seeing it is of
faith, does properly respect God: so then, he who is endued with such
certainty, he must content himself with the peace of conscience before God:
neither is it necessary to come into possession before men. It follows then,
that of set purpose it comes to pass, if we offend our brethren in eating
flesh: because no necessity inforceth us thereto. Besides this, it may easily
appear how wickedly this place is wrested of many, who gather from hence, that
it is not greatly material how any does behave himself in observing foolish
and superstitious ceremonies, so that he keep a pure conscience before God. For
Paul would nothing less, as the text it self does testify: and ceremonies
are ordained to the worship of God, and also they are part of our confession.
Finally, they which pull faith from confession, do take from the sun his
heat. Howbeit Paul here ha^deleth no such matter, but only disputes of ye
free use of meat and drink.

Blessed is he that judges not himself. Here first of all he teaches how we
may lawfully use the gifts of God: secondly, how great an impediment ignorance
is, that we urge not the unskillful, above the measure of their infirmity. But
he puts down a general sentence, which is extended unto all actions.
Blessed (quoth he) is that man, is not guilty of evil to himself: if so be he
do duly examine his deeds. For it comes to pass that many commit
abominable deeds, without any scruple of conscience: but that is, because
their eyes being shut, they temerously put forth themselves, whither the
blind and furious intemperancie of the flesh does lead them. For there is
great difference between numnes or senslesnesse, and judgment: he then that
makes a choice in things, (if after the thing be well considered and weighed
he be not bitten with the testimony of an evil conscience) is happy. For
this peace only can make, that our works please God. By this means that vain
excuse is taken away, which many pretend by ignorance, seeing their error is
entangled with dullness and sluggishnes. For if good intention (as they call
it) were sufficient, in vain were that examination, whereby the spirit of God
here esteems the deeds of men.

23 He that judges, etc. Very well he has expressed in one word, the
affection of a wavering and uncertain mind, what is necessary to be done. For
he that judges wauereth hither and thither, and is holden in suspense between
diverse deliberations, not knowing whereunto to incline. Seeing then the
beginning of a good work is the certainty, and as it were the pleasant
security of a mind that is well stayed before God: there is nothing more
contrary to the approbation of our works, then wavering or doubting. And would
to God, this sentence were well grafted in the minds of men: namely, that
nothing is to be taken in hand, but that of the which the mind is fully
resolved, nothing must be done with a wavering mind.
that it is acceptable to God: men would not keep such a stir in many parts
of their life, or waver, or thrust on themselves with a blind force,
wheresoever their own imagination carries them. For if our life be tied unto
this modesty, that one should not touch a morsel of bread with a doubting
conscience, how much greater circumspection ought to be had in the greatest
things? For whatsoever is not of faith. The reason of this comdemnation:
namely, that every work how excellent and glorious so ever it be, if yet it be
not grounded upon a right conscience, is counted for sin. For God regards not
the outward show, but the inward obedience of the heart. Of yt only depends
the estimation of our works. Furthermore, what kind of obedience is yt, if any
take upon him yt, of the which he is not persuaded, it is approved of god?
where the^ such doubting is, he is justly condemned of preuarication, because
he does against the testimony of his conscience. The word faith is put here,
for a constant persuasion of the mind, Faith for a firm persuasion.
and firm (as I may say) certainty, and that not every assurance, but such as
is gathered of the truth of God. Therefore, wavering and doubtfulnesse do
corrupt all our actions, how bewtifull soever otherwise they be. Now seeing a
godly mind can no where find a sure stay but in the word of God: here all
fained worshippinges, and whatsoever works are deuiced by man's brain, do
vanishe away. For whiles that is condemned, whatsoever is not of faith, that is
rejected, whatsoever is not grounded, and approved by the word of God.
Although this also is not enough, that that should be approved by the word of
God, which we do, except the mind trusting to that persuasion do cheerfully
prepare it self unto the work. Therefore this is the beginning of a right
life, to clean unto the word of God, The beginning of a right life.
and go wheresoever the same does call us, least our minds should waver.

CHAP. 15.
1 WE who are strong, ought to bear the infirmities of the weak, and not to
please our selves. 2 For every one of us ought to please his neighbor, in
that that is good to edifying. 3 For Christ pleased not himself: but as it is
written, the rebukes of those rebuked thee fell upon me.
WE who are strong. Least they who have profited more the^ others in the
knowledge of God, should think it unmeet that more burden should be laid
upon them, he shows how yt strength ought to be bestowed, wherein they
excel others: namely, to support the weak, that they fall not. For as God
appoints those for the instructynge of the ruder sort, to whom he has given
greater measure of knowledge: so look whom he has strengthened, to those he
has commended the weak, that they might be supported by their strength: for
so ought all gifts be communicated amongst the members of Christ. The stronger
therefore any is in Christ, the more he is bound to support the weak. Where as
he says a christian man ought not to please himself, he signifies that he
ought not to direct his study to satisfy himself: as they are wont to do,
who being content with their own iugdement do carelessly neglect others. And in
deed this is a most apt admonition for the present matter, because there is
nothing more hinders or lets our obedience, the^ that every man is so much
addicted to himself, that others being rejected, he follows only his own
counsels and affections.

2 For every on of us. Here he teaches that we are bound unto others: and
therefore that it is our part to satisfy them, and hearken to them: neither is
there any exception, but we must apply our selves to our brethren, when
according to the word of God we may do it to their edification. Here
therefore are two propositions: namely, that we not being content with our
own judgment, and not resting upon our lusts or affections, How we should
apply our selves to our brethren.
ought to do our endeavor, and strive every where, to satisfy our brethren.
The other, that whiles we apply our selves to our neighbor, we ought to have
regard unto God, that our end be their edification. For a great many cannot
be pleased unless thou cocker their lust. So that, if thou will be gracious
with a many, thou must not so much regard their salvation, as to satisfy their
folly: neither may thou respect what is expedient, but what they covet to
their own destruction. Thou must not therefore study to please such, as like
nothing, but that is evil.

3 For Christ pleased not himself. If it be meet the servant should refuse
nothing, that the master takes upon him, it were very absurd, that we would
covet to exempt our selves from this necessity of bearing the infirmities of
others, whereunto, Christ whom we rejoice to be our king and Lord, submitted
himself. For he having omitted the regard of himself, did give himself wholly
hereunto. For in him is truly verified, what soever the Prophet says, Psalm.
69.10. And amongst other things, Psalm. 69.10.
he also puts this down, that the zeal of the Lord has even eaten him
up. And the rebukes of them that rebuked the Lord fell upon him. Whereby he
signifies, that he burned with such zeal of the glory of God, and was taken
with such desire of advancing his kingdom, that having forgotten himself,
he was (as it were) swallowed up of this only cogitation: that he had so
consecrated himself unto the Lord, that it did grieve him at the heart, so
often as he saw the wicked profane his holy name. Although that second part,
of the rebukes of god, may have 2. acceptio^s, either that he was no less
grieved with ye reproaches which the wicked did commit against God, then if he
himself had borne the^ in his own person: or that it vexed him no less to see
God injuriously dealt withal by others, then if he had been the author of it
himself. And if Christ reign in us, as he must needs reign in all his
faithful, this sense or affection shall also flourish in our hearts, yt
whatsoever derogateth the glory of god, shall grieve us no less, then if it
were resident in our selves.

Now then let them go, whose whole hearts delight is to get great honors of
them, who blasphems the name of God, tread Christ under foot, both
contumeliously rent, and also persecute with sword and fire, his gospel. Surely
it is not safe to be so greatly honored of them, of whom Christ is not only
contemded, but also contumeliously handeled,

4 For whatsoever things are written before hand, they are written for our
learning: that through patience, and comfort of the scriptures we might have
hope. 5 And the God of patience, and consolation, give unto you, that ye may
altogether think one thing, according to Jesus Christ: 6 That with one mind,
and one mouth, ye may glorify God and the father of our Lord Jesus Christ. 4
For whatsoever things. This is the application of the example, least any should
think this to be too far fetched, yt he should exhort us to the imitation of
Christ. Yea verily (quoth he) there is nothing in the Scriptures which may not
serve to your learning, and institution of your life. A notable place, wherein
whiles we understand there is no vain, or unprofitable thing contained in
the oracles of God, withal we are also taught to profit in the reading of the
Scripture unto piety, and holiness of life. Whatsoever then is set down in
Scripture, let us labor to learn it. For it were contumely against the holy
spirit, if we should think he has taught any thing, which were not
material for us to know: secondly whatsoever is taught there, let us know, it
does tend to the increase of godliness. The use of the old Testament is not
done away from Christians.
And although he speak of the old Testament, yet is the same to be
understood also of the writings of the Apostles. For if the spirit of God
he every where like it self, there is no doubt but now by the Apostles, as
in old time by the Prophets, he has tempered his doctrine to the
edification of his. Furthermore, by this place phanaticall spirits are notably
overthrown, who brag that the old Testament is done away, and belongs not
at all to Christians. For with what face can they turn Christians from those
things, which Paul testifies to be ordained of God, unto their salvation? And
whereas he adds, that through patience and comfort of the scriptures, we
might have hope, it comprehends not, all the parts of that profit, which
is to be gathered by the word of God: but briefly notes the chief end. For
heereunto specially serve the Scriptures, that they might erect the minds of
men: (Being prepared unto patience, and strengthened by consolations) unto the
hope of eternal life, and keep them in the meditation thereof. The word
exhortation, for the which others translate consolation, is not disliked of me:
but that consolation agrees better with patience, because this arises, out of
that. For then are we prepared to bear adversities patiently, when the Lord
does temper them with consolation. For the patience of the godly, is not that
hardness which the Philosophers command: but that meeknes, whereby we do
willingly submit our selves to God, whiles the taste of his goodness, and
fatherly love does make all things sweet unto us. The same nourishes and
susteineth hope in us, that it fail not.

How God is called the God of patience.
5 And the God of patience. God is so called of the effects, which before were
attributed to the scriptures, albeit in a very good manner, yet in a diverse.
For God only is the author of patience and consolation, because by his
spirit he infuseth them both into our hearts, howebeit, he uses his word
as an instrument thereunto. For first he teaches which is true consolation, and
which is true patience: then he inspireth and grafteth that doctrine in our
minds.

Furthermore, after he had admonished and exhorted ye Romans to their duty,
now he turns unto prayer. Because he knew very well, it was to no purpose
to entreat of the duty of any man, unless God did inwardly accomplish that by
his spirit, which he spoke by ye mouth of a man. The sum of his prayer is,
that he would bring their minds into a true consent, and would cause them
truly to agree amongst themselves. And withal he shows of what sort this
bond of unity is, while he would they should consent according to Christ. For
that is a miserable conspiracy which is out of God: and that is out of God,
which alienateth us from his truth. And to ye end he might ye rather make the
consent is in Christ commendable, he shows how necessary it is: seeing God
is not truly glorified of us, unless all our hearts and tongues consent to
his praise. It is to no purpose therefore that any should boast, that he
will glorify GOD after his manner: for God so esteems the unity of his
servants, that he will not have his glory sounded, amongst dissentions, and
contentions. This one consideration ought sufficiently to bridle the unruly
riot of contending and brawling, which at this day bears too great a swaye
in the minds of many.

7 Therefore receive one another, as Christ has received you to the glory of
God. 8 And I say that Jesus Christ was the minister of circumcision, for the
truth of God, to confirm the promises made unto the fathers. 9 And the
gentiles ought to praise God for his mercy: as it is written, for this cause I
will confess thee amongst the Gentiles, and will sing unto thy name. 10 And
again he says, rejoice you gentiles with his people.

11 And again, praise the Lord al ye gentiles, and magnify him together all
ye people. 12 And again Esaias says, there shall be a root of less, and he
which shall rise to rule the nations, in him shall the gentiles trust. 7
Therefore receive one another. He returns unto his exhortation, for
confirmation whereof, he always reteyneth the example of Christ. For he having
embraced, not one or two of us, but altogether, has so joined us together,
that we ought to cherishe one another, if that we will abide in his bosom. So
then we shall confirm our vocation or calling, if we separate not our selves
from those, to whom the Lord has bound us. This parcel: to the glory, may
be referred either unto us, or unto Christ only, or unto us and him
together. Which latter does like me best, to this sense, as Christ has
manifested the glory of his father, in receiving us all into favor, when we
stood in need of mercy: so we also to the setting forth of the glory of the
same God, ought to establish that coniunctio^, which we have in Christ.

9 And I say that Jesus Christ. Now he shows how Christ has received us
all: where he leaves no difference between the Jews and Gentiles, save that
he was first promised to the Jews, and in a manner peculierly appointed to
them, before he should be exhibited to the Gentiles. Howbeit he shows that
even in that, which was the cause of all contentions, there was no difference
between them: because he collected or gathered them both, from a miserable
dissipation or dispersion, and being gathered together has brought them into
the kingdom of the father, that they might be one flock in one fold, under
one sheepehearde.

Thereupon he infers, that they ought to agree amongst themselves, and not
contemn one another, seeing Christ did contemn neither of them. First
therefore he speaks of the Jews, and says, Christ was sent unto them, that
he might fulfill the truth of God, in perfourming the promises given to the
fathers. And this is a singular honor, that Christ being Lord of heaven and
earth, became flesh, that he might serve to their salvation. For the more he
humbled himself for their sake, the more he honored them. And that he takes
as undoubted for a thing confessed: whereby it is more wonderful, that there
should be so great impudency in certain frenzy heads, that they doubt not
to conclude in the flesh, and tie unto this present world, all the promises
of the old Testament. And least the Gentiles should arrogate to themselves
any dignity above the Jews, Paul plainelye denounces that salvation which
Christ brought, in respect of the covenant, to be proper unto the Jews:
because by his coming he fulfilled that which the Father in old time
promised to Abraham, and so was the minister of that people. Whereby it
follows, that the old covenant indeed was spiritual, notwithstanding it was
annexed unto earthly figures. For that accomplishment of the which Paul now
speaks, must needs he referred unto eternal salvation. Finally, least any
should cavil, that salvation was only promised to the nephews, seeing the
covenant was committed to the hands of Abraham, expressly he binds the
promises to the fathers. Therefore either the virtue of Christ shall be contained
in corporal benefits, or the covenant made with Abraham is extended further
then to the flesh.

The calling of the Gentiles.
9 And the Gentiles for his mercy. This is the other member, in confirming
whereof, because it was doubtful, he staieth longer. Psalm. 18.50. 2. Sam. 22.50.
The first testimony which he cites, is taken out of the 18. Psalm, which
Psalm is rehearsed in the second of Samuel: where without dout is uttered a
prophecy of the kingdom of Christ. Furthermore Paul proves the calling of
the Gentiles thereby, because there is promised the confession of the glory of
God amongst the Gentiles. For we can not preach God truly, but amongst such as
do truly hear his praises, whiles they are published of us. Wherefore, that
the name of God might be celebrated amongst the Gentiles, they must needs be
endued with knowledge, and come into the fellowship of the people of God. For
thou may see this every where in the Scripture, that the praise of God can
not be preached, but in the congregation of the faithful, whose ears are
capable to hear his praise.

10 Rejoice ye Gentiles with his people. Where as they commonly interpret this
verse, as thought it were taken out of the song of Moses, that I like not,
because in that place Moses goes about rather to terrify the adversaries of
Israel, with his greatness, then to inuit them unto a common rejoicing.
Therefore I take it rather to be borrowed out of the 67. psalm: Where it is
said, Let the Gentiles rejoice and be glad, Psalm. 67.5.
because thou iudgest the people in equity, and gouernest the nations in the
earth. And whereas Paul has added of his own, with the people of God, that he
has done by the way of explication. For there in deed the Prophet joins
the Gentiles with Israel, and inuiteth both of them to gather unto rejoicing,
which can not consist, but in the knowledge of God.

11 Praise him all ye nations. Neither is this place unaptly applied. For how
should they praise God, who know not his greatness? they can do that no
more, then call upon his name when they know it not.

It is therefore a very fit prophecy to prove the calling of the Gentiles.
And that may better appear by a reason which is added there: for he bids
them give thanks for his truth and mercy. Psalm. 117.1.


12 Again Esai, etc. This prophecy is most excellent of all. Esaias. 11.10.
For there the Prophet (things being almost brought to desperation) comfort
the small remnant of the faithful, namely in this, that there should arise a
graft out of the dry and dead stock of the house of David, and a branch
should flourish out of the despised root, that should restore the people of
God to their former glory.

It is manifest by the description there put down, that this plant or graft is
Christ the redeemer of the world. Secondly he adds, that he shall be erected
for a sign to the Gentiles, that he might be unto them for their salvation.
These words verily differ somewhat from the Hebrewe text. For whereas we read
here, he does rise, the Hebrewe text has, He shall stand for a sign, which
is all one: namely that he should appear manifestly like a sign. For the
word hope they have to seek: but according to the common use of scripture, to
seek God is nothing else, then to hope in him.

And the calling of the Gentiles is twice confirmed in this prophecy, first by
that is said, Christ must be erected for a sign unto them, which Christ
reigns among the faithful only: and secondly by that is said, they shall
hope in Christ: which comes not to pass without the preaching of the
word, and lightening of the spirit. Hereunto agrees the song of Simeon. But
hope in Christ is a testimony of his dietie.

13 And the God of hope fill you with all joy, and peace in believing, that ye
may abound in hope, through the power of the holy ghost. 14 And I my self
also, am persuaded of you my brethren, that you also are full of goodness, and
filled with all knowledge, and are able to admonish one another. 15
Nevertheless brethren I have somewhat more boldly after a sort wirtten unto
you, as it were putting you in remembrance, through the grace that is given
me of God. 16 That I should be the minister of Jesus Christ toward the
Gentiles, consecrating the Gospel of Christ, that the offering up of the
Gentiles might be acceptable, being sanctified by the holy spirit. 13 And the
God of hope. Now also as before he concludes with a prayer, wherein he
wishes that that might be given them of the Lord, what so ever he had
commanded.

whereby appears the Lord does not measure his precepts by our strength,
or power of free will: neither does he therefore command those things
concern our duty, that we trusting to our own strength might buckle our
selves to obedience: Wherefore the Lord commands such things as we are not
able to fulfill of our selves.
but he commands such things as stand in need of the help of his grace,
that he might provoke us to the study of prayer.

And when he calls God the God of hope, he has respect unto the next verse:
as though he said, that GOD therefore in whom we altogether hope, fill you
with joy, that is, with alacrity of conscience: secondly with unity and
concord, and that in believing: because to the end our peace may be approved
of God, we must be knit together by pure and sound faith.

If any man had rather take this saying, in believing, to be put for, unto or
into faith: The meaning shall be; that they ought to apply their peace unto
faith.

For the^ we are rightly prepared unto faith, when we being quiet and of one
mind willingly embrace that is taught. Yet is it better, to say, that faith is
joined to peace and joy, because it is the bond of holy and lawful concord,
and the supporte of godly joy. Although that peace also might be understood,
which every one has inwardly with God: yet the text leads us rather unto
the former exposition. Furthermore he adds, that ye might abound in hope.
Because by that means also hope is confirmed and increased in us. This
parcel, by the power of the holy ghost. Notes that all those are the gifts
of Gods bountifulnes: and the word power has his emphasis, to set forth this
wonderful power, whereby the spirit works in us, faith, hope, joy, and
peace.

14 And I am persuaded. This is a preoccupation or a kind of concession and
granting, to appease the Romans, if they thought themselves to be nipped or
dishonored, by so many and so serious admonitions, and so consequently to be
iniuried. He therefore excuses him self, that he durst take upon him
amongst them the person of a teacher and exhorter: and he says that he did
it, not because he distrusted their wisdom, goodness, and constancy, but
because he was compelled thereunto by his office. For so he puts away all
suspicion of rashness, which chiefly consists herein, if any man thruste
himself into another man's office, or handles those things which are not meet
for him. Wherein we may see the singular modesty of this holy man, to whom
nothing was more acceptable, then to be nothing reckoned of, so that the
doctrine he preached, might have authority. the Romans were very arrogant,
yea the name of their city made the poorest of them proud: to that they
could hardly abide a teacher that was a stranger, yea a barbarous fellow and
a Jew.

Paul will not in his own private name, fight with this haughtiness: but yet as
it were by stroking of it, he subdueth it, whiles he testifies that he
takes these parts upon him, by reason he was an Apostle. You are full of
goodness, being filled with all knowledge, etc. There are two things
specially required in him that gives counsel, Two things required in him that
gives counsel.
the first is humanity, which does both move his heart to help his brethren
with his counsel, and also temper his countenance and words with lenity:
secondly the dexterity of counsel, or prudencie, which may both get unto
him authority, and also profit his auditors unto whom he directs his
speech. For there is nothing more contrary unto brotherly admonitions then
malignitie and arrogancy, which causes that we proudly contemn those that
err, and had rather laugh them to scorn, then correct them. Roughness also
or bitterness if it appear either in words or countenance, it makes our
admonition fruitelesse.

Finally, howsoever you excel as well in the affection of humanity as of lenity
or gentleness, yet shall you not be meet to admonish, unless you excel in
prudencie, and experience of things. Therefore he attributes to the Romans,
both those faculties or abilities, giving testimony unto them, that they are
able enough to exhort one another without the help of others. For he
confesses they abounded both in courtesy, or gentleness, and also in
knowledge or experience: whereby it follows they were able to exhort.

15 But I have written more boldly unto you, etc. Now follows his excuse,
wherein to the end he might be the more modest, by the way of concession or
granting he says, that he did somewhat boldly, in taking upon him to meddle
in that thing, which they were able to perform by themselves: but he adds,
that he took upon him this boldness, for the necessity of his office, because
he was a minister of the Gospel to the Gentiles: and therefore he could not
pass them, who were among the Gentiles. Yet he so humbles him self, that he
holds up the dignity of his office. For obiecting the grace of God, whereby
he was advanced unto that degree of honor, he could not suffer any thing to
be contemned which he did in the right of his Apostleshippe.

Finally, he denies that he has taken upon him the office of a teacher, but
of an admonisher: whose duty is to bring into remembrance those things which
otherwise are not unknown.

16 Consecrating the Gospel. So I had rather translate it, then as Erasmus at
the beginning administering. For there is nothing more certain then that Paul
here alludeth unto the sacred mysteries, which were accomplished by the
priest. He therefore makes him self a Bishop or Priest in the ministry
of the Gospel, who offers in sacrifice the people which he wins unto God:
and in this manner he works or labors in the sacred mysteries of the
Gospel. And this assuredly is the priesthood of a Christian Pastor, by
bringing men into the obedience of the Gospel, to offer them as it were in
sacrifice unto God: and not as the Papists have hitherto proudly bragged, by
the offering up of Christ to reconcile men unto God. Neither yet does he here
simply call ecclesiastical pastors priests, as by a perpetual title: but Paul
going about to commend the dignity, and efficacy of the ministry, by
occasion has used this metaphore. Let this therefore be the end unto the
preachers of the Gospel in their function, namely to offer unto God the souls
of men being purified by faith.

That which Erasmus afterward put down by the way of correction, namely
sacrificing the Gospel, is not only improper, but also does darken the sense.
For the Gospel is rather like a swoorde, wherewith the minister sacrifices
men unto God for offerings. He adds that such oblations are acceptable unto
God: which makes not only to the comnendation of the ministry, but also to
the singular comfort of them, who yield them selves to be consecrated. Now as
the old sacrifices were dedicated to God by external sanctifications and
washings: so also these oblations are consecrated to the Lord by the spirit of
sanctification, by the virtue of whose power inwardly working, they are
separated from this world. For although the purity of the soul does arise
from the faith of the word, yet because the voice of man, by it self is
ineffectual and dead, the office of purifiyng is truly and properly given to
the spirit.

17 I have therefore wherein to glory by Christ Jesus, in those things which
apperteine unto God. 18 For I dare not speak any thing of those things, which
Christ has not wrought by me, into the obedience of the Gentiles in word and
deed. 19 In the power of signs and wonders, in the power of the spirit of
God, so that from Jerusalem, and all the coasts round about unto Illyricum,
I have caused the Gospel of Christ to abound.

20 Yea, so I enforced my self to preach the Gospel, not where Christ was
named, least I should build on another ma^s foundation: 21 But as it is
written, to whom he was not spoken of, they shall see: and they which hard
not, shall understand. 17 I have therefore. After he had in a general sort
commended his calling, that the Romans might know he was a true and
undoubted Apostle of Christ: now he adds testimonies, whereby he proves
that he did not only take upon him the office of an Apostle, being laid
upon him by the ordinance of God, but also did notably adorn the same. And
also he puts in mind of his fidelity, which he performed in discharging
that function. For it is too small purpose that we are ordained, unless we
answer our calling, and discharge our duty. Neither does he that with a
desire to get glory, but because nothing was to be omitted which might
procure grace and authority to his doctrine with the Romans.

Therefore he glories in God, not in him self: because he respects nothing
else, then that God might be truly praised. And whereas he speaks only
negatiuely, it is verily a sign of modesty, but it serves to win credit
unto those things which he goes about to maintain: as if he said, the
truth it self does minister unto me so much matter of glory, that I need
not to seek for false and foreign praises: I am content with true praises.

Perhaps also his meaning was to prevent sinister reports, which he knew to
be scattered abroad by evil persons: and therefore he foresheweth that he
will not speak, but of things well known.

^8 Into the obedience of the Gentiles. This parcel notes what his purpose
is, namely that he might make his ministry to be esteemed of with the
Romans, least his doctrine should be without profit. By the signs therefore
he shows, that God by the presence of his power, did give testimony to his
preaching, and in a manner did seal his Apostleshippe: so that now none ought
to doubt but he was ordained and sent of the Lord. The signs are, word,
work, and miracles: whereby appears that the name work, conteyneth more
then miracles. At length he concludes, in the power of the spirit: whereby
he signifies that these could not be done, but by the spyrit. To be brief,
he affirms that as well in teaching as doing, he had a power and virtue in
preaching Christ, wherein the wonderful power of God appeared: secondly, he
says miracles were added, which were as seals for the surer knowledge of
that thing. First he puts word and work, then he expressethe one kind:
namely the power of working miracles. So also it is taken with Luke, Luke.
24.19.
where he says, Christ was mighty in word and deed. Also with John, where
Christ himself sends the Jews unto his works, John. 5.36.
where they might have testimony of his Dietie. Neither does he simply name
miracles, but does adorn them with two tytles. And whereas he says, The power
of signs and wonders, Acts. 2.23
Peter in the Acts has virtues, and signs, and wonders. And surely they are
testimonies of Gods power to awake men, that being astonished at the power of
God, they might wonder at him, and also worship him: neither are they without
signification, but they stir us up to understand somewhat of GOD. The true
use of miracles.
This is a notable place of the use of miracles: nemely that they should get
unto God amongst men, reverence and obedince.

So thou read in Mark, Mar. 16.20. Act. 14.3.
that the Lord confirmed his doctrine by miracles that followed. So Luke says,
that the Lord gave testimony to the word of his grace by miracles. It is
manifest therefore that those miracles which seek the glory of creatures and
not of God, which bring credit unto lies, and not unto the word of God, are
of the devil. I refer the power of the spirit of God, which he has put in
the third place, unto them both.

19 That from Jerusalem, even unto Illyricum. He adds also a testimony
from the effect: because that success which did follow his preaching, did
pass all man's strength.

For who could gather so many Churches unto Christ, unless he were helped by
the power of God? From Jerusalem unto Illyricum (quoth he) I have spread
abroad the Gospel: neither have I done that by a direct course hasting unto
the end, but every where about, going through all those regions are between.
But the verb Pepleromenai which according to some we have translated, to
fill, does signfie to make perfect, and supplye that is wanting. Whereupon
Pleroma is called of the Grecians, as well perfection, as a supplement, or
fulfilling. I do willingly expound it thus, that he dispersed the preaching
of the Gospel, as it were by supplying it. For others had begun before, but
he did scatter it abroad further.

20 Yea I enforced my self to preach the Gospel. Because it stood Paul upon
not only to prove himself to be a servant of Christ and Pastor of the
Christian Church, but also to win unto himself the person and office of an
Apostle, that he might the rather be heard of the Romans: he puts here
a proper and peculier note of Apostleship. What it is to be an Apostle.
For the office of an Apostle is, to sow ye gospel where it was not preached
before: according to that commandment, Mar. 15.16
go, preach the Gospel to every creature. Which ought diligently to be
noted, least we draw that unto an universal example, which does peculiarly
agree unto the order of Apostles. Neither is it to be disliked that there is a
successor substituted in his place, who did build the church. So the^
Apostles are as it were ye founders of the church: pastors which succeed them,
ought to mayntaine, and increase that building which was raised up by them. He
calls that another man's foundation, 1. Cor. 3.11. and Ephe. 1.20.
which was laid by another man's hand. Otherwise Christ is ye only stone
whereon the Church is founded.

21 But according as it is written. He confirms that by the prophecy of
Esai which he said of the sign of his Apostleship. Esai. 52.10.
For he in the 52. chap. and 10. verse: When he speaks of the kingdom of the
Messiah, amongst other things foresheweth, yt the same must be dilated over all
the world. And yt the knowledge of the same Christ must be brought unto the
Gentiles, to whom his name was not hard of before. It was expedient this
should be done by the apostles, to who^ specially commandment was given:
Therefore the Apostleshippe of Paul was thereby manifest, that this prophecy
is fulfilled in him. Wickedly shall any man go about to draw this unto the
office of pastors, because we know in Churches rightly ordered, where the
verity of the Gospel was received long ago, the name of Christ must be
continually preached. To this end therefore was Paul a preacher of Christ yet
unknown, unto foreign nations, that after his departure in every place the
same doctrine might daily sound forth in the mouth of the pastors. For it is
sure that the Prophet entreats of the beginnings of the kingdom of Christ.

22 Therefore I have also been often let to come unto you. 23 But now having
no more place in these countries, and being desirous many years ago to come
unto you, 24 When I shall take my journey into Spain, I will come unto you. For
I trust to see you in my journey, and to be brought on my way thitherward by
you: after that I have bin somewhat filled with your company. 22 Therefore, etc.
Now also he draws that to another end which he said of his Apostleship:
namely to excuse himself that he never came unto them, seeing he was no less
ordained for them then for others.

By the way therefore he declares, ye sowing ye Gospel from Judea even unto
Illyricum, he did (as it were) accomplish a certain course enjoined him of
the Lord, which being finished he purposed not to neglect them. And least in
the mean while they should think they were neglected, he takes away that
suspicion, when he testifies there was no want of will long ago.

That he therefore did it no sooner, that came to pass by a just let: now he
puts them in hope, so soon as he may for his calling.

And out of this place a weak argument is drawn to prove Paul's going into
Spain. For it follows not straightwayes that he did it, because he was so
minded. For he speaks only of hope, whereof he as well as others of the
godly many time, might be made void.

24 For I trust. He touches the cause, why he wished of long time, and now
purposed to come unto them: namely that he might see them, and might enjoy
their sight and communication, and also might show himself unto them
according to his office. For under the coming of the Apostles is also
contained an increase of the Gospel, when he says, That I may also be brought
on in my way thither by you: thereby he declares how much he promises unto
himself of their courtesy or humanity: Which we have admonished before to
be a notable kind of getting favor. For look by how much every one
hears that greater trust is given to him, by so much the more he thinks
himself to be bound: because we count it filthy and uncivil, to deceive
the opinion conceived of us. And where as he adds, after that I have been
somewhat filled with your company, he testifies the mutual benevolence of
his mind toward them, whereof that they should be persuaded, it was greatly
necessary for the Gospel.

25 But now I go to Jerusalem to minister unto the Saints. 26 For it has
pleased them of Macedonia and Achaia to make a communication to the poor
saints which are at Jerusalem. 27 It has pleased them I say, and their
debtors they are. For if they have made the Gentiles partakers of their
spiritual things, their duty is also to minister unto them in carnal
things. 28 When I have therefore performed this, and have sealed them this
fruit, I will pass by you into Spain. 29 And I know that when I shall come
unto you, I shall come in the abundance of the blessing of the Gospel of
Christ. 25 But now. Least they should look for his coming strayghtwayes,
and think themselves mocked or deceived, if he came later then they looked
for, he foresheweth what business he had then presently, that he could not
forthwith take that journey: namely that he went to Jerusalem, to bear the
alms which was gathered in Achaia and Macedonia. Yet wtall hereby he takes
occasion to pass unto the commendation of that communication, to the end that
by a kind of insinuation he might provoke them unto the like. For although he
does not plainly ask it, yet whiles he says that Achaia and Macedonia ought
to do it, he infers what was the duty of the Romans, who were in the
same predicament. And that he had respect thereto he plainly confesses to ye
corinth. 2. Cor. 9.1.
I boast (quoth he) of your readiness, to al Churches, ye they might be provoked
by your example. And it was an argument of singular love, Distaunce of place or
diversity of nation ought not to let us from being bountiful to the faithful.
that when the Grecians heard, that the brethren which were at Jerusalem,
stood in need: they considered not by how great distaunce of places they
were severed from them: but counting them sufficientlye nigh, with whom they
were joined in the bond of faith, did relieve their poverty with their
abundance. And we are to note the word communication, which he uses: for it
expresses, very well, with what affection we ought to succor the want of our
brethren, namely because for the unity of the body, there is a common and
mutual consideration. I have not translated the pronoune tina, because it
often abounds with ye grecians, and it seems to diminishe the emphasey of
this place.

Whereas we have turned to minister, in Greek is the participle ministering,
but that seemed more fit to express the mind of Paul. For he excuses that
through just occasion he was stayed, that he could not straightwayes with
haste come unto Rome.

27 And their debtors they are. Every man does see, that that which is here
said of debt, is not said, so much for the cause of the Corinthians, as of the
Romans. For the Corinthians or Macedonians were no more indebted unto the
Jews then the Romans. And he adds the cause of this bond, namely that they
had received the Gospel from them: he takes an argument from the comparison
of the less with the greater, which he also uses in another place. Namely, 1.
Cor. 9.11.
that that recompense ought not to be though unjust, or grievous unto them, who
for spiritual things give carnal, which by many degrees are more base. And
this shows the dignity of the Gospel, that it does not only denounce them
bond to the ministers thereof, but also to all that nation from whom their
ministers came.

And note the verb Leitourgesai, for to minister: which signifies to do his
office in the common wealth, and to undertake the burden of his calling:
sometime also it is used in respect of sacred things. And I doubt not but
Paul signifies that it is a kind of sacrifice, when the faithful give of
their own to relieve the poverty of their brethren. For so they do that
duty of charity which they ought to do, and also they offer unto God a
sacrifice of a sweet savor: but properly in this place he did respect that
mutual right of compensation.

28 When I shall have sealed this fruit unto them. A dislike it not that some
do think, here is an allusion unto the manner of the old fathers, who were
wont to shut up with rings or signets those things they would have safe. In
this sort Paul commends his faith and integrity, as though he said, he
were a sincere keeper of the money committed to him, no otherwise then if it
were sealed unto him. By the name of fruit he seems to understand the
increase, which he said of late to come unto the Jews by the sowing of the
Gospel. Like as the field does nourish his dresser by bearing of fruit.

29 And I know that when I shall come. These words may be understood two
ways. 1. The first sense is, that he should find at Rome a plentiful fruit
of the Gospel: for this is the blessing of the Gospel, when it fructifieth by
good works. For whereas some restrain them unto alms, I do not like it.

2 Or to the end he might make his coming unto them more worthy to be
wished for, he says, that he hops it should not be unprofitable, because
it should bring great increase unto the Gospel, which he calls the fulness of
blessing, for a full blessing: whereby he signifies prosperous success and
increase.

And this blessing depended partly on his administration, and partly an their
faith: so then he promises that his coming unto them should not be in vain,
upon whom he should not loose the grace given to him, but should bestow it
well, through that alacrity of mind was in them to receive the Gospel. The
first exposition is more received and also does like me better, namely that he
hoped to find that he chiefly wished: that is, the Gospel to flourishe with
them, and to proceed by notable successes, because they would excel in
sanctity, and all kind of virtues. For he shows the cause of his desire,
namely that he hoped for some singular joy by the sight of them, whom he
should see to flourishe with spiritual riches of the Gospel.

30 And I beseech you brethren, by our Lord Jesus Christ, and by the love of
the spirit, that ye strive together with me in your prayers to God for me. 31
That I may be delivered from the unbelievers in Judea: and that my ministry
which I undertake toward Jerusalem, may be acceptable to the saints: 32
That with joy I may come unto you by the will of God, and together with you may
be comforted. And the God of peace be with you all. Amen. 30 And I beseech you
brethrrn. By many places it is sufficiently known, how greatly Paul was hated
in his own nation, for false slanders, as though he taught a falling away from
Moses. He knew how much reproaches could do to oppress the innocent: and
specially with those are carried with a rash zeal. Hereunto also came the
testification of the spirit, whereof he makes mention in the Acts. Act.
20.23.
Whereby he was oftentimes forewarned, that bonds and afflictions were at hand
for him at Jerusalem. Therefore the more danger he saw, the more he was
moved. Hence came it he was so careful to commend his health unto the
Churches: neither let us marvel that he was so careful over his life, wherein
he knew so great danger of the Church to be handled.

Therefore the vehemency is in this obtestation, bears witness how greatly
the godly mind was troubled, whiles unto the name of the Lord, he adds the
love of the spirit, whereby the Saints ought to embrace one another: but yet
in so great fear he cease not to go on, neither does he so fear danger,
but he was ready to die willingly.

Howebeit he armeth him self with the remedies given unto him of God. For he
calls for the help of the Church, that being helped by their prayers, he
might thereby feel some comfort, according to the promise of the Lord: Where
two or three shall be gathered together in my name, Mat. 18.20. Mat. 18.9.
there am I in the midst of them: and of whatsoever thing they shall consent
in earth, they shall obtain it in heaven. And least any should think this
were a remiss or light commendation, he beseeches them by Christ and the love
of the spirit. And that is called the love of the spirit, What is the love of
the spirit.

Prayers is the only haven of refuge for the servants of God in distress.


wherein Christ does join us together: because it is not of flesh, nor of the
world, but of the spirit, which is the bond of our unity. Seeing then it is
so great a benefit of God, to be helped by the prayers of the faithful, that
even Paul himself, an elect vessel of God, thought it was not to be
neglected of him: what intolerable bthernesse shall it be: if we wretches,
and men of no price do contemn it? Howebeit out of such places, to take
occasion to maynetayne intercessions unto dead Saints, is a token of too much
impudency. That ye might strive with me. Erasmus has translated it well, that
ye might help me laboring: but because the Greek phrase has more force, I
chose rather to translate it word for word. For both by the word strive, he
signifies with what perplexities he was pressed: and when he bids them
help him in this fight, he teaches what affection the prayers of the Godly
for their brethren ought to have: namely that they take upon them their person,
as though they were plunged in the same necessity: lastly also it shows what
effect they have. For he which commends his brother to the Lord, by taking
unto him part of his necessity, does ease him so much. And surely if our
strength consist in the invocation of the name of God, we can no way better
confirm our brethren, then by calling upon the name of God for them.

31 That my ministry toward Jerusalem. The slanderers by accusing him, had
so prevailed, that he also feared, least his office should be scarcely
acceptable at his hands, which otherwise in so great necessity was convenient
or seasonable. And hereby appears his wonderful gentleness, that he ceased
not to take pains for those, of whom he doubts whither he should be
thankefully accepted or no.

This mind we ought to follow, that we cease not to do good unto them, of
whose thankfulness we are not assured. And note that he vouchsafes them
with the name of Saints, to whom, he fears, least he should be suspected
and scarce welcome: he knew also that the Saints sometimes might be carried
by false reports, into sinister opinions: and although he knew they did him
injury, yet he cease not, to speak reverently of them. When he adds,
that I may come unto you, he signifies that this prayer is also profitable
for them, and it were good for them he were not killed in Judea. Hereunto
apperteineth the parcel, with joy. For this also should be profitable for the
Romans, that he might come unto them merry, and void of all sorrow, to the
end he might more courageously and stoutly bestow his labor upon them. And by
the word refreshe, or delight, he shows how assuredly he was persuaded of
their brotherly love. The parcel, by the will of God, admonishes how
necessary it is diligently to pray: because god only by his providence, does
direct all our ways. And the God of peace. By the note of universality I
gather, that he does not simply wish, that God might be present and favor
the Romans, but that he might govern every of them. For I take the Epithe of
peace, to be referred unto the present circumstance, that God the author of
peace might preserve them altogether.

CHAP. 16.
1 ANd I commend unto you Phaebe our sister, which is a faithful minister of
the Church at Cenchrea. 2 That ye receive her in the Lord, as it is meet
for the saints, and that ye assist her, in whatsoever business she shall
stand in need of your aid. For she has assisted many and me also. 3 Salute
Prisca and Aquila, my fellow helpers in Christ Jesus. 4 Who for my life have
laid down their own neck: to whom not I only give thanks, but also all
the churches of the Gentiles. 5 And the Church that is in their house. Salute
my beeloued Epenetus which is the first fruits of Achaia in Christ. 6 Greet
Marie which bestowed great labor on us. 7 Salute Andronicus and Iunia my
cosins and fellow prisoners, which are notable amongst the Apostles, and were
in Christ before me. 8 Salute Amplias my beloved in the Lord. 9 Salute
Vrbanus our helper in Christ, and Stachis my beloved. 10 Salute Apelles
approved in Christ. Salute the^ which are of Aristobulus friends. 11 Salute
Herodion my kinsman. Salute them which are of the friends of Narcissus, which
are in the Lord. 12 Salute Tryphena and Tryphosa, which women labor in the
Lord. Salute the beloved Persis, which woman has labored much in the Lord. 13
Salute Rufus chosen in the Lord, and his mother and mine. 14 Salute Asyncritus,
Phlegon, Hermas, Patrobas, Mercurius, and the brethren which are with them. 15
Salute Philologus, and Iulias, Nereus, and his sister, and Olimpas, and all the
Saints which are with them. 16 Salute one another with an holy kiss. The
Churches of Christ salute you.
AND I commend unto you, etc. A good part of this chapter is spent in
salutatio^s, which because they have no difficulty, it were to no purpose to
stand long upon them. I will only touch those things, which require some
light of exposition.

First of all, he commends Phaebe, to whom he gave this Epistle to be
brought. And first he commends her by her office, because she had an honest
and holy ministry in the Church: Secondly, he brings another cause why
they ought to receive her, and do unto her all duties: because she had always
bestowed her self upon all the godly.

Therefore because she is a minister of the Church at Cenchrea, even thereby
he commands she should be received in the Lord. And when he adds, as
it is meet for the saints, he infers that it were unmeet for the servants
of Christ, if they should show no honor nor bountifulness toward her. And
surely seeeing it becomes us to embrace all the members of Christ, then
ought we to embrace them which bear some public office in the Church, and to
reverence them, and to love and honor them in a special manner. Secondly, as
she was always officious toward all, so he commands that she should be
helped now again in her affairs. For it is a point of humanity, not to
forsake him, who by nature is ready to do good, if at any time he stand in
need of the help of others. But to the end he might the rather move their
minds, he reckons himself also among them, to whom she did good. Finally,
this ministry of the which he speaks, 1. Tim. 5.9.
of what sort it was he teaches in another place. For as the poor were
maintained out of the common treasury: so they were looked unto by a public
office. And unto this charge were widows chosen, who being loose from
domestical cares, and hindered with no children, did covet to consecrate
themselves wholly unto God by the duties of charity: therefore they were
received into this function, as though they were bound and tied: as he that
sets his labor, cease to be free and at his own pleasure. Whereupon the
Apostle charge them to have violated their faith, who afterward did renownce
the office they had once taken upon them. And because they were to live a
single life, 1. Tim. 5.11.
he forbids them to be chosen under threescore years: namely, because he
saw that the perpetual vow of single life was dangerous, yea pernicious, to
such as were under that age. That holy office and profitable for the church,
The coming up of Nuns
the estate of things waxing worse, did degenerate into the idle order of
Nuns: which order albeit it was corrupt even from his first original, and
contrary to the word of GOD, yet now it is so fallen from that beginning;
that there is no less difference then between some holy place of chastity
and a stews.

3 Salute Prisca and Aquila. Those testimonies which he gives here unto
many, do partly tend to this end, that whiles they are had in honor who are
honest and worthy, both honesty it self might be honored, and they might
have authority with such as could and would profit more then others: partly
that they might answer to their former life, neither might they faint in the
course of godliness, or their godly zeal quail.

It is a singular honor which he gives here to Prisca and Aquila, specially
in a woman. Whereby the modesty of the holy man, the rather appears, who
neither thinks scorn to have, nor yet is ashamed to acknowledge a woman for
his companion in the work of the Lord. And this was the wife of Aquila
himself, Act. 18.1
whom Luke calls Priscilla.

4 To whom no^ I only. Because prisca and Aquila did not spare their own life
for the defense of the life of Paul, he testifies that he himself
privately does give them thanks: yet he adds, that thanks also are given
unto them of all ye Churches, yt by this example he might also move the
Romans. And worthily was the life of one man so dear and precious to all the
Gentiles, for it was an incomparable treasure: wherefore it is no marvel
though all Churches of the Gentiles thought them selves bound to his
preseruers. That which he adds of the Church in their house is worth the
noting. For he could not more honorably adorn their family, then with the
title of the Church. For I do not like the word congregation, which Erasmus
has translated: for it is evident that Paul by the way of honor, has used
the sacred name of the Church.

5 Who is the first fruits. This is an allusion unto the ceremonies of the
law. For because men are sanctified unto God by faith, they which obtain the
first place in the oblation, are fitly called the first fruits. Furthermore as
every one was the formest, It is no small honor when God choseth any for first
fruits.
in respect of time, called unto the faith, so Paul does give unto him the
prerogative of honor: But this has place, whiles the end answers the
beginning. And surely it is a singular honor, when God vouchsafes to chose
any for first fruits. For by the continuance of time there comes a greater
and more ample proof or trial of faith, whiles they which first begun, are
not weary of running well. He testifies again his thankfulness, whiles he
makes mention of those things Marie did for him. And it is sure he ascribes
these praises, that he might make them more commendable to the Romans, whom he
praised.

7 Salute Andronicus. Although Paul is wont to make no great account of kindred,
and other things appertaining to the flesh, yet because that consanguinitie
which Iunia and Andronicus had with him, might greatly help that they might be
the more easily known, he does not neglect that praise also. There is more
force in the second speech of praise, whiles he names them his fellow
captives: because amongst the ornaments of Christian warfare, bonds are not
reckoned in the last place. Whiles in the third place he names Apostles, The
name Apostle largly taken
he takes not this word in his proper and usual signification: But he
extends it further: namely, unto all those which do not only instruct one
Church, but for the publishing of the Gospel every where, do bestow their
labor. They therefore who by cariyng the doctrine of salvation hither and
thither, did plant churches, are generally in this place called Apostles. For
other where he restrains it unto that principal order, which Christ at the
beginning ordained in his twelve Disciples. Otherwise it were absurd that so
great dignity should be ascribed unto them amongst few. Now because they had
by faith embraced the Gospel before Paul, he doubts not in that respect to
prefer them before himself.

11 Who are of the friends of Narcissus. It had been a thing too bad, that
Peter should be omitted in so long a catologue if he had been then at Rome. But
he must needs have bin there, if we believe the Romans. Howbeit if in
doubtful things there is nothing better, then to follow a probable
conjecture: no man of indifferent judgment, will believe that is true they
affirm. For he had never bin omitted of Paul. But it is worth the noting,
that none of those glorious and honorable titles are hard here, by the which
it might be gathered that noble men were christians: for who^soeuer Paul
reckons, they were obscure and unnoble at Rome. I take ye Narcissus who^ Paul
names here, to be the freeman of Claudius, a man famous for many mischievous
and naughty deeds. Whereby the goodness of God is more wonderful, which
pierced into that impure house, and abounding withal wickedness: not yt
Narcissus himself was converted unto christ: but this was a great matter, yt a
house as it were like unto hell, should be visited with the grace of Christ.
And seeing they did worship Christ sincerely, who lived under a huge Lion,
under a most cruel spoyler, and corrupt man, there is no cause why servants
should tarry for their masters, but every one should follow Christ for himself.
Yea, the exception added by Paul does declare that his family was divided, so
that there were but a few which believed.

16 Salute one another in an holy kiss. It is every where apparent by the
scriptures, that a kiss was an usual and common toke^ of good will amongst
the Jews. Perhaps less usual amongst the Romans: neither was it altogether
strange amongst the^, save that it was not lawefull to kiss women, other then
their kinswome^ only. Howebeit that grew into a custom with the^ in old time,
yt Christians before the communication of the Supper, did kiss one another, to
testify their good will by that sign: the^ afterward they gave alms, yt they
might co^firm yt in deed and effect, Whence the kissing of the pare proceeded.
which they represented by a kiss: as appears out of a certain homily of
Chrysostom. Hence came that ryte which is at this day among the Papists; of
kissing the Paxe, and making oblation. The one whereof is mere superstition
with out fruit: the other serves to no end, but to full up the coueteousnes
of the Priests, if yet it may be filled. Nevertheless paul seems not here
precisely to exact a ceremony, but only exhorts them to maintain brotherly
love, which he discerns from profane friendships of ye world, which for the
most part are either hypocritical, or are brought to pass by naughty deeds,
or are retained by evil means, and they never tend to a right end. And
wishing health as much as in him lay from ye churches, he studieth to bind all
the members of Christ among them selves with the mutual bond of love.

17 And I beseech you brethren, mark them diligently, which stir up division
and offenses, against the doctrine which you have already learned, that you
may avoid them. 18 For they that are such, serve not the Lord Jesus Christ,
but their own belly, and by fair speech and flattering do deceive the hearts
of the simple:

19 For your obedience is come abroad among al. I am glad therefore of you: but
yet I would have you wise, unto that which is good, and simple to that which
is evil. 20 And the God of peace shall tread Satan under your feet shortly,
the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you. Amen. 17 And I beseech you
etc. Now he puts an exhortation, whereby all Churches stand in need now
and then to be called on: because ye ministers of Satan are always at hand by
occasions to trouble the kingdom of Christ. And 2. ways they go about to
make this disturba^ce: for either they sow disse^tions, Two ways whereby the
wicked labor to hinder ye course of the Gospel.
whereby the mynds of men are distracted from the unity of ye truth, or they
stir up offenses, whereby they may be alienated from the love of the gospel.
That comes to pass, whiles the truth of God is scattered and drawn asunder
with new doctrines, and devised of me^: this, whiles by diverse deceipts it is
made odious and contemptible. Who so therefore do either of these, he
commands they should be marked, least they deceive and beguile the simple:
seco^darily, he bids they should be avoided, because they are hurtful.
Neither is it without cause yt he requires here atte^tion or circu^spectio^ of
the faithful: because oftentimes by our negligence and retchlesnes it comes
to pass, yt such lewd fellows do greatly hurt the church, before they be
met withal: also very often they creep in to hurt with woonderful subtilitie,
except they be wisely considered. And note yt he speaks unto such, as were
instructed in the pure doctrine of God: for it is a wicked and horrible
diuorceme^t, to divide those do consent in the verity of Christ. But it is an
impudent detractio^ or surmise under the pretense of peace and unity, to defend
conspiracy in lies and wicked doctrines. There is therefore no cause, why the
Papists should seek a color out of this place to procure hatred against us:
because we do not resist or pull asunder the Gospel of Christ, but the lies of
Satan, wherewith the Gospel has hitherto been darkened. Yea Paul shows
plainly, that he does not without exception, condemn every dissension, but
such as divides Catholic faith. For there is great weight in this saying.
Which you have learned: because before that the Romans were taught aright,
they must needs depart from their old manners, and institutions of their
fathers.

16 For they which are such. He adds a perpetual note, whereby false
Prophets may be known from the serauntes of Christ, A mark to know false
prophets.
namely that they seek not the glory of Christ, but serve their belly. Yet
because they creep in craftily, and by taking upon them the person of another,
do hide their malice, withal he notes what crafts they use, least any should
be deceived: namely that by fair speech they win favor unto them. The
Preachers of the Gospel also have their gentleness and sweetenes, but yet
joined with liberty or boldness, yt neither they flatter me^ with vain
praises, or cocker their vices: but those deciuers, both by their flattery
steal unto them the hearts of men, and also spare and cocker vices, that they
might hold them bound. He calls such simple, as are not sufficiently
circumspect to beware of deceyptes.

19 For your obedience. This is a Preoccupation or preventing, whereby he
shows that he does not therefore admonish them, as though he thought amiss
of them, but because it is easy to fall here: as if he said, surely your
obedience is commended every where, so that there is cause why I should be glad
of you. Yet seeing that oftentimes men fall here, through simplicity, I would
have you rude and simple to commit evil, but in that is good, that is, so
often as is expedient, for the conservation of integrity, What simplicity is
commended unto Christians.
I would have you very prudent. Here we see what simplicity is commended in
Christians: least they who at this day count sottishe ignorance of the word
of God for a high virtue should pretend this title. For although he praise the
Romans, that they were obedient and tractable, yet he would have prudencie
and choice, to be added, least their lightness of belief should be a pray to
every deceit. Therefore he so rejoices of them that they are without fraud,
that yet he would have them wise to beware. That which follows, namely, God
shall tread Satan, is rather a promise to strengthen them, then a prayer. For
he exhorts them that they fight courageously against Satan, promising they
should shortly have the victory. In deed he is once overcome of Christ, but
yet not so, but he may continually renew war: he promises therefore the
last putting of him to flight, which appears not in the midst of the
battle. Although he speak not only of the last day, wherein assuredly Satan
shall be trodden under feet: but seeing Satan at that time, as it were his reins
being loose or burst, did proudly disturb all things, he promises that
shortly it would come to pass, that the Lord would subdue him, and as it
were give him to be trodden vnderfeete. Straightwaies follows his prayer, that
the grace of Christ might be with them: that is, that they might inioye all
those blessings which are provided for us by Christ.

21 Tymothie my fellow lobourer, and Lucius, and Jason, and Sosipater, my
kinsmen Salute you. 22 I Tertius which wrote out this Epistle, salute you in
the Lord. 23 Gaius my host, and of the whole church saluteth you. Erastus the
chamberlain of the city, saluteth you, and Quartus a brother. 24 The grace of
our Lord Jesus Christ be with you all Amen. 25 To him now that is able to
confirm you according to my gospel: namely, the preaching of Jesus Christ,
according to the revelation of the mystery, which was kept secret since the
world began. 26 But now has been opened and published among al nations, by the
scriptures of the Prophets, at the commandment of the everlasting God, for the
obedience of faith. 27 To God I say, only wise, be praise through Jesus
Christ for ever, Amen. Written to the Romans from Corinth, and sent by Phaebe
servant of the Church Which is at Ceuchrea.

21 Tymothy my fellow labourer, etc. The salutations he ascribes serve partly
to maintain love, amongst those were far asunder: partly that the Romans
might know the subscription of their brethren in the Epistle. Not that Paul
stood in need of the testimony of others, but because the consent of the
godly avails much. And the Epistle (as we may see) is concluded with the
praise of God and thanksgiving, for he makes mention of that singular
benefit of God: namely, that he has vouchsafed the Gentiles with the light of
the gospel: wherein appears his infinite and unspeakable goodness. Although
this praise has also in it that, which may serve to set up and establishe the
confidence of the godly, that their minds being erected unto God, they may
assuredly look for all those things, which are here ascribed to him: and
also by his former benefits may confirm their hope touching that is to come.
But because by gathering many things into one sentence, he has made a long
Period or stop, which is wrapped with a disordered placing of words, every
member is to be divided of us. First, he gives to God only all glory:
secondly, to the end he might show how it is due unto him, by the way he
rehearses certain virtues of his, whereby appears, he only is worthy of
all praise. He says he is only wise: which praise whiles it is given to
him, it is taken from all the creatures. Although Paul seems, after he has
spoken of the secret counsel of God, purposely to have added this praise,
that he might draw all men into reverence and admiration of the wisdom of
God. For we know, when men in the works of God find not out the cause, how
ready they are to murmr. By adding that God is able to confirm the Romans,
he assures them of final perseverance.

And that they might more certainly depend on his power, he adds that the
same is testified unto us in the Gospel: where thou see, ye gospel does not
only bring unto us present grace; but also does bring unto us assurance of
grace still to continue. For there, God does not only promise to be our
father in present, but also that he will be unto the end. Yea, his adoption
is extended beyond death, because it brings us unto the eternal
inheritance. The residue are put to commend the virtue and dignity of the
Gospel. He calls the Gospel, the preaching of Christ, so that surely the
whole sum thereof is contained in ye knowledge of Christ: he calls his
doctrine the revelation of the mystery: which ought not only to make us more
attentive in hearing of it, but also impresse an high reverence thereof in our
hearts, and how high a secret that is, he signifies, when he adds that
from the beginning of the world by so many ages it was hidden. Verily it has
not a proud and hautie wisdom, such as the sons of this world covet, of
whom also it is therefore contemned: but it declares those unspeakable
treasures of celestial wisdom, above every capacity: which if the angels
also themselves do reverence with admiration, surely no man can sufficiently
wonder at it. Neither ought this wisdom to be therefore less esteemed, because
it lies hid under a base and simple style: because so it has pleased the
Lord, to subdue the arrogancy of the flesh. And because great dout might
arise, how this mystery which by so many ages was hidden, did so suddenly
appear forth: he teaches, that that came not to pass through the temeritie
of men, nor by chance, but by the eternal ordinance of God: where also he
shuts the gate against curious questions, which ye waywardnes of man's wit is
wont to move. For whatsoever comes suddenly and besides their expectation,
they think it is done at unawares: whereby they gather oftentimes wickedly,
that the works of God are absurd, or at the least they entangle themselves,
with many troublesome douts. Paul therefore admonishes, that that which
appeared now suddenly, was decreed of God before the world were made. But
least any should make a doubt therefore, that he might charge the Gospel
with newnes, and to defame it, he alleges the scriptures of the prophets,
where that was forespoken, which we see now fulfilled. For all the Prophets
have given so large testimony unto the Gospel, that it can not else where be
better confirmed. And by this means God did rightly prepare the minds of his,
least the noualtie of a thing wherewith they were not acquainted, should too
much astonishe them. Objection.
If any object that there is a contraryetie in the words of Paul, because he
says that that mystery of the which GOD has given testimony by his
Prophets was hidden in all ages, this knot is easily unfolded by Peter, namely
that the prophets, Answer. 1. Pet. 1.12.
whiles they diligently inquired of the salvation offered to us, did not
minister to themselves, but to us. Therefore, God by speaking then, held his
peace, because he held the revelation of those things, of the which he would
have his servants to prophecy, in suspense. Although it is not certainly
agreed upon among the learned, Ephe. 3.9. Collos. 1.27.
in what sense, both here and to the Ephesians. he calls the Gospel an hidden
mystery. The opinion of them, is more firm, which refer it to the calling
of the Gentiles, which Paul him self precisely touches to the Colos. Yet I,
albeit I confess that to be one cause, Collos. 1.27.
can not be brought to believe, that is the only cause. It seems more
probable unto me, that Paul had respect also unto the other differences of the
old and new Testament. For although the Prophets in old time, taught all
those things, which are expounded by Christ, and his apostles: yet they taught
them with such obscurity, in comparison of the clear light of the Gospel,
that it is no marvel, if they be said to have bin hidden, which now are made
manifest. Neither is it without cause that the prophet Malac. says, Mal. 4.2.
there should rise the son of righteousness: neither that the prophet Esai
has before hand so highly commended the embassage of the Messiah.

Finally, nor that the Gospel is called the kingdom of god: but we may better
gather by the thing it self, that then at length were the treasures of
celestial wisdom opened, when the shadows being done away, God appeared to
them in old time, by his only begotten son, as it were face to face. He
makes mention again of that end of the preaching of the Gospel, whereof he
made mention in the beginning of the first Chapter, namely, that God might
bring all nations into the obedience of faith.

Laus Deo, soli sapienti in secula. Amen. C. R.

A Table or Index, containing certain principal matters in the Commentaries
of M. Ioh. Calvin upon the Epistle to the Romans, the first number shows
the Chapter, the second the Verse.
A
ABba father. cha. 6. verse, 8 Abraham the father of the faithful. chap. 4.
ver. 1. 16. Abraham justified by faith only. chap. 4. 3. Abraham how he was
the heir of the world. chap. 4. 13. Abraham's laughter was without fault. chap.
4. 20. Abraham's body barren before the blessing of God. chap. 4. 19. Abraham's
faith. chap. 4. 3. Abuse of the kvowledge of the Gospel. chap. 2. 21. Adam a
figure of Christ. chap. 5. 14. Adams disobedience what harm it brought, chap.
5. 19. Adoption of the Jews. chap. 9. 4. To expect adoption what it is. chap.
8. 23. External adoration. chap. 11. 4. Adulation must be avoided. chap, 12.
28. cha. 16. 18. Aedification necessary for the godly. cha. 14. 19. Affection
twofold in the godly. chap. 8. 23. cha. 9. 2. cha. 11. 19. Afflictions are
furtherances of salvation to the godly. cha. 8. 28. Afflictions promote the
glory of the faithful. cha. 5. 3. 5. Afflictions must be borne patiently. cha.
8. 29. 30. Afflictions of the godly momentany. chap. 8. 1^. Afflictions the end
of the faithful. chap. 5. 3. Ambition is to be taken heed of. cha. 13. 13.
Anabaptists condemn al swearing. chap. 1. 9. Anathema what it is. chap. 9. 3.
Anguish what it is. cha. 8. 35. Anxiety what it is. cha. 8. 35. The Apostles
use great liberty in reciting the scripture. chap. 3. 4. To be ashamed for to
hasten. cha. 9. 33. Authority to be given unto God only. cha. 3. 10. The
Authority of the sword confirmed. chap, 13. 4.
B
Baptism has succeeded circumcision. chap. 4. 11. Baptism does not justify.
cha. 2. 25. The end of baptism, cha. 2. 25. Body put for that part of men is
unregenerate, cha. ^. 10. The body must be kept undefiled from al pollution of
superstition, cha. 11. 4. The body of death what it is, cha. 7. 24. The body of
sin what it is, cha. 6. 12. Budaeus his place, cha. 9. 3.
C
CAlling with (...), cha. 8. 30. Calling of election, cha. 1. 6. To call for to
raise, cha. 4. 17. Effectual and inner calling proper only to the elect, cha.
10. 16. The calling of the Gentiles witnessed by the Prophets, cha. 9. 25.
Calling of the Gentiles like unto a graffing, cha. 11. 18. Calumniations
against the grace of God, cha. 6. 7. Catharites confuted, cha. 7. 25. The cause
of the Jews excetation, cha. 10. 19. The causes of the salvation of the
faithful, cha. 8. 28. The certainty of Gods word whence it depends, cha. 3.
4. The certainty of salvation depends upon the goodness of God, cha. 8. 32
Charity the bond of perfection, cha. 1^. 19. Degrees of charity, cha. 16. 1.
Children of righteousness who they are, cha. 6. 20. Christ eternal God, cha. 1.
3. 4. Christ the advocate and intercessour of the godly, cha. 8. 34. Christ why
called Lord, cha. 10. 9. Christ the only pattern of the faithful, cha. 8. 29.
Christ the son of God, cha. 1. 4. Christ the first begotten son of God,
cha. 8. 29. Christ the end of the law, cha. 10. 4. Christ the brother of all the
godly, cha. 8. 29. Christ a man, cha. 1. 3. Christ the judge of the whole
world, cha. 2. 16. Christ how he is a stone of offense, cha. 9. 32. Christ the
minister of circumcision, cha. 15. 8. Christ only our peace, cha. 5. 1. Christ
how he has purchased salvation for all, cha. 4. 25. Christ how he beseeches
the father for us, cha. 8. 34. Christ how he dwells in us, cha. 8. 10. Christ
sent unto us filled with all heavenly treasures, cha. 8. 32. Christ wherefore he
was sent, cha. 15. 8. Christ how he died to sin, cha. 6. 10. Christ by his
own strength rose again, cha. 1. 4. Christ his manifestation twofold, cha. 3.
21. Christ his death ye beginning of our reconciliation with God, cha. 5. 10
Christ his death kills sin in the faithful, cha. 6. 4. Christ by death has
done away our sins, cha. 4. 25. The efficacy of Christ his death, cha. 6. 5.
The communication of Christ his death twofold. cha. 6. 7. Two natures in
Christ, cha. 9. 5. Christ his obedience, cha. 5. 19. Christ his office, cha. 1.
16. Christ his resurrection, cha 1. 4. Christ his resurrection the work of the
power of God, cha. 6. 4. Christ his resurrection has gotten the victory for
us, cha. 10. 9 Christ his resurrection has gotten righteousness for us, cha. 4.
25. The end of Christ his resurrection, cha. 10. 9. Christ his triumph, cha. 7.
4. Christ his zeal, cha. 15. 3. To put on Christ what it is, cha. 13. 14. Who
are true Christians, cha. 8. 9. Christian life stands in doing, cha. 12. 11.
Christian priesthood what it is, chap. 15. 16. The Church is nourished by the
secret providence of God, cha. 11. 2 Circumcision twofold, chap. 2. 28. Which
is true circumcision, cha. 2. 25. Circumcision did not justify, cha. 2. 25.
28. The use of circumcision, chap. 4. 11. Collections for the poor, cha. 15.
25. Common for profane, cha. 14. 14. Compassion may lawfully be in the godly
eue^ for the reprobate. cha. 9. 2. Compassion necessary in the godly, cha. 12.
15. Communication of the faithful, cha. 12. 4. 15. Diverse complaints of the
godly full of desperation, chap. 5. 3. A common wealth how it may be well
governed, cha. 13. 3. Compassion necessary in the godly, cha. 12. 15.
Concupiscence is sin. cha. 7. 7. Condemnation of mankind printed in all
creatures. chap. 8. 21. Whither confession be the cause of our salvation. chap.
10. 10. Confession why it is put before faith. chap. 10. 9. Conjecture which
they call moral is a school imagination. chap. 4. 16. and 8. 16. 34. Coals of
fire upon the head of our enemy. cha, 1^. 20. Conscience subject to the
commandment of God only. cha. 6. 17. The conscience in steed of a thousand
witnesses. cha, 2. 15. An evil conscience the heauiest torment. cha. 2. 15.
With doubting conscience nothing ought to be done, cha. 14. 23. True consent
what it is. cha. 15. 5. Conspiracy or consent out of God is miserable. cha. 15.
5. Contention for rebellion and stubbornnes. cha. 2. 8. Contention is
condemned. cha, 1. 28. and 13. ver. 13. and 14. 1. Who are contumelious. cha.
1. 28. The counsels of the godly are sometime turned of the Lord. cha. 1. 13.
The consolation of the faithful. cha. 2. 5. and 4. 13. and 6. 14. and 8. 1. and
9. 33. and 10. 8. Continual prayer. cha. 12. 12. The contrariety of the letter
and the spirit. chap. 7. 6. The consolation of Pastors. cha. 1. 9. Contentious
and unprofitable questions must be avoided. cha. 14. ^ Covetousness condemned.
chap. 1. 28. Covenants why they differ from the promise. cha. 9. 4. A twofold
cutting off. cha. 11. 22. Curiosity is to be avoided. cha, 9. 14. and 11. 23.
D
David the image of Christ. cha. 11. 9. Day put for the brightness of celestial
life. cha. 13. 12. The day of judgment horrible. chap. 2. 5. The day of
judgment must be looked for. cha. 2. 16. Days superstitiously observed. cha.
14. 6. Death almost always present to the servants of God, cha, 8. 36. Death to
what end it is to be wished for of the godly. cha. 7. 24. Death of sin the
life of man. chap. 7. 9. Death the reward of the reprobate, chap. 6. 23. The
difference of right and wrong how it is graffed in the hearts of men, chap. 2.
15. The difference of the old and new testament, chap. 2. 28. Difference of
meats, cha. 14. 5. The difference of the elect and reprobate, cha. 1. 13. and
7. 15. and 8. 9. 18. Difference of the Jews and Gentiles, cha. 3. 1. Diversity
of the gifts of God, cha. 12. 6. Domitian how he is described of Pliny, cha.
3. 10. The doctrine of the Gospel not new, cha. 1. 2. Doubting called
incredulity of Paul, cha. 4. 16.
E
Election founded only upon the good pleasure of God, cha. 9. 7. Election
respects not works to come, cha. 9. 11. Election of God free, cha. 2. 11. 9,
11. and 11. 5. Election not tied to external causes, cha. 9. 15. Election of
the godly wholly to be referred unto the counsel of God, cha. 9. 16. The cause
of election must be sought in the purpose of God, cha. 9. 14. The certainty of
election, whence it is, cha. 8. 33. Secret election c^leth over the external
calling, cha. 9. 7. The elect vessels of mercy, cha. 9. 23. The elect only are
inwardly called, cha. 10. 1^. The number of the elect known to God only, cha.
11. 3. Al are not elect though the doctrine be universal, cha. 10. 16. Our
enemy must be loved, cha. 12. 20. Who is our enemy, cha. 12. 20. The special
end of the scripture, cha. 5. 4. Esau why put behind his brother, cha. 9. 13.
Evil must not be requited with evil. cha. 12. 17. Evil must be overcome with
good, cha. 12. 21. No excuse left for men, cha. 1. 20. 24. Example in dumb
creatures, cha. 8. 19. What it is to expect adoption, cha. 8. 23. The
excellency of the Jews, cha. 9. 5. The use of examples cha. 4. 25.
Exhortations ought to follow doctrine, cha. 6. 12. Excecation how it is of God,
cha: 11. 30.
F
FAith begottten by the word of God, cha. 10. 13. 17. The seat of faith is
the heart, cha. 10. 10. Faith the gift of God, cha. 1. 8. cha. 10. 16. Faith
for the principles of religion, cha. 12. 6. Faith for a constant persuasion of
the mind, cha. 14 23. Faith only justifies, cha. 1. 17. 21. 28. and 4. 6.
Faith how it justifies, cha. 3. 21. Faith the mother of invocation, cha. 10.
14. Faith approved by the invocation of God, cha. 8. 16. Faith is not by and by
found where the word is, cha. 10. 16. Faith and invocation joined together,
cha. 10. 14. Faith and the merit of works, things utterly contrary, cha. 9.
32. True faith what it is, cha. 10. 10. Whose faith is but an imagination,
ibidem. The word faith has diverse significations, cha. 3. 28. The faithful are
sure of eternal life, cha. 8. 30. Who may truly be counted faithful, cha. 5. 2.
The faithful how they are conformed to the image of Christ, cha. 8. 23 The
faithful imperfect, cha. 6. 14. and 7. 14. 15. The faithful how they are
graffed into Christ, cha. 6. 5. The faithful predestinate to salvation, cha. 9.
11. The faithful why they are called the first fruits, cha. 8. 23. The
faithful how they are justified, cha. 4. 5. The faithful how they die unto
sin, cha. 6. 10. The faithful how they are approved before men, cha. 14. 18.
Fame how far it is to be regarded of us, cha, 12. 17. The fathers saved by
Christ, cha. 5. 6. The fewnes of the faithful, cha. 10. 16. Flesh taken for
men, cha. 3. 20. Flesh for corrupt men, cha. 7. 14. and 8. 3. Flesh for the
whole man not regenerate, cha. 7. 18. What it is to walk according to the
flesh, cha. 8. 1. To be in the flesh what it is, cha. 8. 5. Form taken for
that is commonly called appearance, cha. 2. 19. Foreknowledge of works is
wickedly mixed with election, cha. 11, 6. Free will overthrown, cha. 8. 6. 7.
The fulness of the Gentiles, cha. 11. 25.
G
GEntiles not excused by pretense of ignorance, cha. 2. 14. The glorying of the
wicked, cha. 1. 28. The glorying of the faithful true, cha. 5. 2. 3. 11. and 8.
23. The glory of the faithful is furthered by calamities, cha. 5. 3. God the
judge of life and death, cha. 9. 21. God a woonderful workman, cha. 3. 8. God
only worthy all praise, cha. 16. 21. God only the judge of al men, cha. 2. 3.
and 3. 6. God how he is called just, cha. 3. 26. God the lawgiuer of the Jews,
cha. 9. 4. God at liberty to elect and reject, cha. 9. 11. God why he is called
the God of patience, cha. 15. 5. God the beginning and end of all things, cha.
11. 36. God how he is called true, cha. 3. 4. God is to be worshipped in
spirit, cha. 1. 9. God is debtor to no man, cha. 9. 15. and 11. 32. 34. 35.
God is no way to be figured, cha. 1. 23. God beholds the heart, cha. 14. 23.
God how he justifies us, cha. 4. 5. God preuenteth men, but not on the
contrary, cha. 11. 3. 5. God how he is to be sought, cha. 15. 12. God how he
delivers man over unto sin, cha. 1. 24. Gods worship put for ceremonies and
rites, cha. 9. 4. Gods gifts why they are distributed to diverse, cha. 1. 11.
Gods favor takes away al sorrow, cha. 8. 31. Gods glory how greatly it ought
to be esteemed, cha. 8. 8. Gods glory is manifested in the destruction of the
Reprobate, cha* 9. 23. Gods grace what it is, cha. 1. 6. Gods grace the cause
and fountain of al good things, cha. 1. 6. Gods grace more effectual then
the fall of Adam, cha. 5. 15. Gods grace how it is common unto al, cha. 5. 18.
Gods grace is not bestowed alike upon all, cha. 9. 11. Gods care toward the
godly, cha. 8. 15. Gods just judgment to be seen in the reprobate, cha, 9.
15. Gods righteousness what it is, cha. 1. 17. 21. Gods righteousness contrary
to the righteousness of men, cha. 10. 3. Gods mercy what it is, cha. 1. 21.
Gods mercy is to be seen in the elect, cha. 9. 14. Gods mercy upon whom it is
showed, cha. 11. 32. Gods mercy peculiarly appointed unto certain, cha. 9. 15.
Gods mercy only pacifieth consciences, cha. 3. 21. Gods mysteries are al of
them absurd unto the flesh, cha. 3. 5. Gods name how it is defamed, cha. 2. 24.
Gods power what it is, cha. 1. 21. Gods power how it is to be considered, cha.
4. 21. and 9. 21. and 11. 13. Gods foreknowledge what it is, cha. 8. 29. Gods
Preachers are stirred up by the special providence of God cha. 10. 15. Gods
Predestination is not to be considered according to our sense, cha. 11. 34.
Gods providence how it is to be considered, cha. 3. 8. and 8. 7. Gods kingdom
wherein it consists, cha. 14, 17. Gods wisdom what it is, cha. 1. 21. Gods
fear the beginning of wisdom, cha. 3. 10. Gods word is preached no where but
by the special providence of god, cha. 10. 13. Gods truth what it is, cha. 1.
21. Gods truth for true knowledge of God, cha. 1. 18. Gods truth cannot be
overthrown by man's vanity, cha. 3. 4. Gods will is to be respected in all
things, cha. 1. 10. Gods will is the mark of the life of the faithful, cha.
14. 7. Good works how they are crowned of God, cha. 2. 6. Good men mixed with
evil, cha. 16. 11. Good things how they are to be provided before men, cha.
12. 17. The Gospel what it is, cha. 1. 2. The Gospel contemptible in the eyes
of the world, cha. 1. 16. The whole Gospel contained in Christ, cha. 1. 3. The
Gospel for whom it is ordained, cha. 1. 14. The Gospel the doctrine of
salvation, cha. 1. 16. The Gospel was exhibited when Christ was incarnate, cha.
1. 2. Why the Gospel is called the Gospel of the son of God, cha. 1. 9. The
Gospel is the ministry of reconciliation. cha. 5. 2. The Gospel is no new
thing, cha. 16. 21. The Gospel subject to false slanders chap. 3. 8. The
Gospel why it is called the Gospel of Paul, cha. 2. 16. The Gospel came not by
chance, cha, 10. 15. The end of the Gospel, cha. 15. 16. The Gospel and the law
compared, cha. 8. 15. To be under grace what it is, cha. 6. 14. Graffing
threefold, cha. 11. 22.
H
HEart put for serious and sincere affection, cha. 10. 10. Heart put for
understanding, cha. 2. 15. Hardening how it is taken in the scripture. cha. 9.
18. Haters of God who they be, cha. 1. 28. The heavens preach the power of God,
cha. 10. 18. Health of the faithful, by what degrees it is promoted, cha. 8.
30. Hypocrites flatter themselves with a vain trust, cha. 7. 9. Hypocrites
wax proud with prosperity, cha. 2. 4. Hypocrites doubt not to set their
feigned worshippings against the truth, cha. 2. 8. Hypocrites must be drawn to
the judgment seat of GOD, chap. 2. 29. Hypocrites in vain call upon God, cha.
10. 14. Hypocrites secure, cha. 2. 1. Hypocrites have a color of zeal, cha.
10. 3. Hystory the mistres of life, cha. 4. 23. Honor put for all kind of
duty, cha. 12. 10. Hope always brings with it patience, cha. 8. 25. Hope is
necessary for all the godly, cha. 12. 12. Hope how it is attributed to dead
creatures, cha. 8. 19. Hospitality commended, cha. 12 13. Humility to be
embraced, cha. 12. 16.
I
Jacob why preferred before Esau, cha. 9. 3. Whence a true Jew is to be
esteemed, cha. 2. 28. Jews how they are the sons of promise, cha. 9. 6.
Jews are borne the heirs of grace, cha. 3. 30. Jews the first borne in the
house of God, cha. 9. 4. and cha. 11. 26. Jews why they were rejected, cha. 9.
30. Jews how they are holy, cha. 11. 16. The cause of the Jews their
excecation, cha. 10. 19. The excellency of the Jews, cha. 9. 5. Jews their
vain glorying, cha. 2. 17. Jews their prerogatives, cha. 9. 4. 5. Jews their
reiection whence it was, cha. 9. 30. Jews and gentiles compared, cha. 3. 32.
Jews and gentiles made equal, cha. 11. 32. Impatiency must be brideled, cha.
7. 25. Impudency, cha. 1. 28. Inner man what it is, cha. 7. 22. Incredulity the
greatest fault of the Jews, cha. 11. 28. Ingratitude of men inexcusable, cha.
1. 24. Ingratitude condemned, cha. 1. 18. Inheritance of the faithful, cha. 8.
17. Inhumanity for the most part follows the ignorance of God, cha. 3. 10.
Who are insociable, cha. 1. 18. Good intentions whither they carry men, cha.
10. 2. Infirmity of the law what it is, cha. 8. 3. Joy of the faithful what it
is, cha. 12. 12. At what time the Israelites began to be called Jews and of
whom, cha. 2. 17. Judas Machabeus the Author of the name Jew as it is supposed,
cha. 2. 17. The just judgment of God, cha. 9. 2. Judgment for every
reuengement of God, cha. 13. 3. Lightness in judgment condemned, cha. ^1. 4.
and cha. 14. 14. To justify what it means with Paul, cha 13. 33.
Justification for Absolution, cha. 5. 18. Of justification three causes, cha.
3. 21. 24.
K
KIssing of the Paxe whence it came, cha. 16. 16. The use of kissing in old
time, cha. 16. 16. Knowledge of God graffed in the minds of al men, cha. 11.
21. Gods truth for the true knowledge of God, cha. 1. 18.
L
LIberty gotten by Christ gives not license to sin, cha. 6. 19. Liberty of
the faithful what it is, cha. 6. 18. and cha. 7. 14. Lycurgus why he is called
Sacrilegus of Ovid, cha. 2. 22. Life of the faithful what it ought to be, cha.
12. 11. Lightness in judgment condemned, cha. 11. 4. and cha. 14. 14. To live
unto God what it is, cha. 6. 16. Life must be sought in the gospel, cha. 1. 17.
Love how it is the fulfilling of the law, cha. 13. 8. 10. Lactantius plane,
cha. 10. 2. Law taken two ways, cha. 10. 5. Law taken for the revelation of
Gods truth, cha. 13. 11. Law taken for the whole old Testament, cha. 3. 19. Law
to what end it was given, cha. 3. 31. Law with all his parts respected Christ,
cha. 10. 4. Law is the rule of a right life, cha. 6. 15. Law in what sense it
is called spiritual, cha. 7. 10. 14. Law how it is abolished, cha. 6. 15. and
cha. 7. 1. 2. Law how it is established by faith in Christ, cha. 3. 31. Law how
it is fulfilled by love, cha. 13. 8. Law how it gives a deadly wound, cha. 7.
10. Law how it is deadly, cha. 7. 11. Law of faith what it is, cha. 3. 27. Law
of righteousness for the righteousness of the law, cha. 9. 3. Law of works what
it is, cha. 3. 27. Law of sin and death what it is, cha. 8. 2. Infirmity of
the law what it is, cha. 8. 3. The name of the Law diversely taken, cha. 7. 2.
Law and marriage compared, cha. 7. 2. Law and Gospel compared, cha. 8. 15.
Letter for external observation without inward devotion, cha. 2. 28.
Contrariety of the letter and the spirit, cha. 7. 6. Lust preposterous how
execrable, cha. 1. 26. Love of God is not to be sought out of Christ, cha. 8.
35. Love of God toward us brings victory, cha. 8. 37.
M
MAn why made of God, cha. 1. 19. Man twofold, cha. 7. 22. Man how he is called
a liar, cha. 3. 4. Inner man what it is, cha, 7. 22. Old man what it is, cha.
6. 6. Man's will every way contrary to the will of God, cha. 8. 7. cha. 12. 2.
That is sometime given unto man which is Gods only, cha. 11. 14. Magistrate to
what end ordained of the Lord, cha. 13. 3. An evil Magistrate is the scourge of
God, ibid. Magistrate a natural office, cha. 13. 3. Magistrates calling what it
is, cha. 13. 4. Magistrates are debtors to their subjects. ibid. The principal
Maxim of all Christian Philosophy, cha. 3. 4. Good men mixed with evil, cha.
16. 11. All men formed to the image of God, cha. 3. 29. Men know not how to
pray unto God, cha. 8. 26. Men as they are the sons of Ada^, so the captives
of sin, cha. 6. 6. Merit how it is maintained of Papists, cha. 10. 5.
Merit cannot be proved by reward, cha. 2. 6. Merit and faith are utterly
contrary, cha. 9. 32. Man's merit overthrown, cha. 2. 6. and 3. 27. and 4. 2.
and 5. 5. and 8. 18. and 9. 31. Mercy a Christian virtue, chap. 1. 28. Renewing
of the mind necessary, cha. 12. 2. Minister of the word how he is said to
save, cha. 11. 14. Ministry of the word commended, 1. 16. and 10. 15. and 11.
14. The use of miracles, cha. 15. 18. Mortification necessary in the godly,
cha. 6. 8. Moses preached the Gospel, cha. 10. 5. Moses how he wished to be put
out of the book of life, cha. 9. 4. Moses his proper and peculier office, cha.
10. 5. Moses and Paul consent notably, cha. 10. 8. Mouth for face and
countenance, cha. 10. 9.
N.
THe name of the law diversely taken, cha. 7. 2. The nature of faith, cha. 1. 5.
17. Nuns whence they came, cha. 16. 1.
O
THe obedience of the Romans, cha. 16. 19. Objections of the wicked, cha. 3.
7. and 9. 19. Offenses must be avoided, cha 3. 8. cha. 6. 1. and 9. 1. 14. and
10. 2. The office of an Apostle, cha. 1. 1. The office of Pastors, cha. 3. 10.
and 15. 16. The old man what it is, cha. 6. 6. The old and new Testament
compared, cha. 3. 26. Whither the old Testament apperteine unto Christians,
cha. 15. 4. Opportunity must be taken, cha. 2. 4. and 12. 11. An oath what it
is, cha. 1. 9. An oath not altogether unlawful, ibidem. Ouids place. chap. 7.
16.
P
Papal Bishops not the successors of the Apostles. chap. 1. 1. Papists brag
themselves for Christians without the spirit of Christ. chap. 8. 9. Papists
contend there is no sin in the regenerate. chap. 7. 7. Papists whence they
prove their merits. cha. 10. 5. The patience of the faithful what it should
be. chap. 15. 4. What patience is to be praised. cha. 15. 4. Patience an
inseparable companion of faith. chap. 8. 25. Patience how it woorketh trial.
chap. 5. 4. Patience necessarily follows hope. cha. 8. 25. Patience
necessary for the faithful cha. 2. 7. and 8, 18. and 12. 19. Paul a true
Apostle of Christ. chap. 1. 1. Paul prayed continually. cha. 1. 9. Paul a
true worshipper of God. cha. 1, 9. Paul a true Israelite. cha. 11. 1. Paul
subject to diverse reproaches. cha. 15. 30. The perfection of the faithful what
it is. chap. 7. 25, and 8. 5. Popish satisfactions overthrown. chap. 4. 6.
Prayer continual. chap. 12. 12. Prayer necessary for the Godly. cha, 15. 31.
What prayers be acceptable to God. cha. 8. 27. True prayer what it is. cha. 8.
27. and 10. 14. Prayer unto dead Saints whence it is established. cha. 15. 30.
Preaching of the Gospel ought to be greatly esteemed, cha. 10. 15. Preaching of
the Gospel an acceptable service to God. cha. 1. 9. Preposterous lust how
execrable it is. cha. 1. 26. Pretertence for the presentence. chap. 8. 30.
Pretertence for the future. cha. 10, 20. The prerogative of the faithful. cha.
1. 8. Pride must be avoided, chap. 12. 16. The profitinges of the faithful.
cha. 1. 17. Who are proud, cha. 1. 28.
R
REading of Scripture necessary for the Godly. cha. 15. 4. Reasonable service.
chap. 12. 1. Relation between faith and the promise, cha. 4. ^. Renewing of
the mind, cha. 12. 2. Regeneration is perfected by degrees in the faithful,
chap. 6. 7. and 7. 15. and 8. 10. Religion that it may be true must coupled
with the word, cha. 10. 2. The cause of reprobation is hidden in the secret
counsel of god, cha. 11, 7. The cause of reprobation is to be sought for in the
purpose of God, cha. 9. 14. What is the next cause of reprobation, cha. 9. 11.
Reprobates vessels of wrath prepared to destruction, cha. 9. 22. 23. Reprobates
bequeathed to destruction, cha. 9, 18. A reprobate sense, cha. 11. 8. Revenging
forbidden, cha. 12. 19. Righteousness of faith what it is, cha. 10. 9.
Righteousness put for the rule of a right life. cha. 6. 19. Righteousness for the
remission of sins, cha. 4. 6.
S
Sacraments, cha. 4. 11. The sacrifice of the faithful, cha. 12. 1. Sacrilege
what it is, cha. 2. 22. Salvation depends upon the mere goodness of God, cha.
9. 14. and 1. 6. Salvation proper to the Jews by the covenant, cha. 15. 8.
Salvation of the godly not perfected without patience, cha. 8. 25. The first
cause of salvation, cha. 8. 28. Why part of our salvation is attributed unto
confession, cha. 10. 10. Certainty of salvation whence it depends, cha. 8.
32. Certainty of salvation consists upon 2. points, cha. 10. 6.
Sanctification a fruit of righteousness, cha. 6. 22. Sanctity put for
dignity, cha. 11. 16. The Saints are specially to be helped, cha. 12. 13.
Saraes laughter faulty, cha. 4. 20. Satan the Prince of this world. Satan
the minister of Gods wrath, cha. 1. 24. and 9. 18. Satan is overcome of the
faithful, cha. 16. 19. The seat of faith is the heart, cha. 10. 10. To seek
God is to hope in him, cha. 1. 5. 12. Seruetus blasphemies and errors refuted,
cha. 1. ^. To be under sin what it is, cha. 3. 9. What simplicity is to be
praised, cha. 16. 19. Schoolmen when the fault is forgiven retain the
punishment, cha. 4. ^. Shame sometime profitable, cha. 6. 21. The true scope of
the faithful, cha. 2. 7. Slouthfulnes must be avoided, chap. 8. 22. and 9. 16.
Sobriety necessary in the godly, chap. 13. 14. Sons of the flesh who they
are, cha 9. 8. Sons of God who they are, cha. 9. 25. Sons of the promise
who they are, cha. ^. 8. Soul taken for the whole man, cha. 13. 1. Spirit for
the spiritual end of ceremonies, chap. 2. 28. Spirit for that part of man is
regenerate, ca. 7. 18. The spirit how it makes intercession for us, cha. 8.
26. The spirit of compunction what it is, cha. 11, 8. The spirit of
sanctification what it is, cha. 1. 4. The spirit of bondage what it is, cha. 8.
15. Spirit and letter opposite. cha. 7. 6. The operation of the spirit
manifold, cha. 8. 14. The help of the spirit how necessary, cha. 8. 26.
Spiritual riches, cha. 8. 32. Spiritual walking what it is, cha. 8. 1. Strife
must be avoided, cha. 13. 3. Sufferings of ignominy, cha. 1. 26 To swear by
the name of God what it is, cha. 9. 1.
T
Thanksgiving, cha. 14. 6. and 16. 21. Tribulation what it is, cha. 8. 35.
Tribulation how it works patience, cha. 5. 3. Tributes why they are paid
unto Princes, cha. 13. 6. Truth for the rule of Gods will, cha. 2. 8. The truth
of Gods judgment wherein it consists, cha. 2. 1. To serve the time what it
is, cha. 12. 11.
V W
The victory of the faithful, cha. 8. 37. and 12. 21. and 16. 19. Until how it
is taken, cha. 11. 25. The warfare of the faithful, cha. 6. 13. and 12. 12.
Weakness of faith twofold, cha. 4. 19. Weak taken for wicked and unworthy,
cha. 5. 6. The weak in faith must be considered, chap. 14. 1. Way put for the
reason or manner of doing. cha. 11. 33. Weapons of light what they be. chap.
13, 11. Whisperers what they be. chap. 1. 28. Whoredom condemned. chap. 1. 28.
The wicked are made worse by the bountifulnes of God. cha, 2. 5. The wicked
always flee the yoke of God. cha. 2. 8. The wicked appointed for destruction.
cha, 9. 2. Wickedness what it is. cha. 1. 28. To be wise unto sobriety what it
is. cha. 12. 13. The word of faith for the Gospel. 1. 8. and 10. 8. Works of
darkness. cha. 13. 11. Works justify not. cha. 2. 13. World how it is taken.
chap. 12. 2. True worship of God what it is. cha. 1. ver. 9. The worship of God
put for ceremonies and rites. cha. 9. 4.
Imprinted at London by Thomas Dawson for John Harrison, and George Bishop.
1583.


