A COMMENTARY ON THE WHOLE EPISTLE TO THE HEBREWS.

By M. JOHN CALVIN. TRANSLATED OVT OF FRENCH.

The law was given by Moses, but grace and truth came by Jesus Christ. John
1.17. Imprinted at London by FELIX KINGSTON, for Arthur Johnson, and are to be
sold at his shop near the great North door of Paul's, at the sign of the
white Horse. 1605.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE ROBERT EARL OF SALISBVRIE, VICOVNT Cranbourne, Baron
of Essendon, Principal Secretary to the Kings most excellent Majesty, Master
of the Court of Wards and Liueries, and one of his Highness most Honorable
Privy Counsel.
Grace and peace be multiplied.
RIght Honorable, such has been the singular care and fatherly providence of
God over his church in these last times: that according to his own most
gracious promise (through the means of preaching and writing) knowledge has
ouerflowed in all places, Esai, 11.9.
as the waters that cover the sea. Hence it is come to pass, that even this
nation also, albeit utterly unworthy to receive so much as (...)

TO THE READER.
Dear Christian Reader, among the many helps wherewith God has furnished
thee for the furtherance of thy godly Meditations and spiritual growth in
Christ, I pray thee accept of this amongst the rest; of which (if I may so
speak) thou have been too long unfurnished. Diverse good and godly men have
labored, some by their own writings, and some again by translating the works
of others, to store thee with Sermons and Expositions in English, upon all the
books of the New Testament, this Epistle to the Hebrews only excepted: which
lack, rather than it should be vnsupplied, has caused me (the unfittest I
confess of many thousands) to undertake the translation of the Commentary
ensuing: which being finished, I have been bold (for thy benefit Christian
Reader) now to publish. Hoping therefore of thy friendly allowance and
acceptance of these my poor endeavors: I beseech thee, if thou reapest that
benefit thereby, which I heartily wish thou may, to give God the praise, and
to help me with thy prayers. Thus commending thee and thy studies to the grace
of God, I bid thee farewell.

Thine ever in Christ, C. C.

THE ARGUMENT ON THE EPISTLE TO THE HEBREWS.
THere have been diverse opinions in times past, not only touching the Authors
name of this Epistle: but also even the Epistle it self has bin received with
much ado; and that very lately amongst them of the Latin churches. They had
it in suspicion, as if it favored the error of Nouatus, touching the denial
of pardon unto those which fell back again into sin: but when we shall come
to those places where this matter is spoken of, we will show that this their
suspicion was causeless. Now for mine own part, I do receive it without any
difficulty at all amongst the Apostolical Epistles; and do make no doubt but
that it came to pass by the craft and subtlety of the Devil, that there have
been some heretofore which have indeauoured to out off this Epistle from the
number of the Canonical Books. For there is no book in all the holy
Scripture, which more clearly, or lively speaks of the Priesthood of Christ:
neither yet any which does more highly extol the dignity, and virtue of his
only Sacrifice, the which he has offered up by his death: neither is there
any book which handles more fully, both the use and the abrogating of
Ceremonies: In a word, none which instructs us better, that Christ is the
end of the Law. Let us not then by any means suffer that the Church of God
and we with it, should be deprived of so great a benefit: but on the contrary,
let us hold it fast, and carefully keep it. Now we need not much busy our
selves in standing to discuss who was the Author of it, some have thought that
S. Paul was the Author of it; some others S. Luke; others Barnabas, and others
Clement; as S. Hierome declares. Although Eusebius in the sixth book of the
Ecclesiastical history, makes mention but of S. Luke and Clement. I know
very well that since Chrysostoms time, it has been wholly received of the
Greeks amongst the Epistles of S. Paul: but the Latins were of another
opinion, even amongst those which were nearest to the times of the Apostles. To
speak what I think, I cannot beeleue that S. Paul was the Author of it. For
there is no great likelihood, to say as some do, that he suppressed his name
of set purpose, because it was odious and hateful among the Jews. And if this
had been so, why then should he make mention of Timothy? for by this only
word he had discovered himself, and had laid himself open sufficiently to
their knowledge.

Contrariwise, the manner of teaching, as also his style, does give apparent
testimony that it was not of S. Paul's writing, but of some other man's doing:
for he which wrote it, confesses in the second Chapter, that he was one of the
Disciples of the Apostles: now this is very far off from Saint Paul's manner
of speech. Moreover the use and custom of the Catechism, which he touches in
the sixth Chapter, cannot properly agree to Saint Paul's time. There are also
other reasons, which we will touch when we shall come to the places that give
occasion thereof. I know the excuse very well which some are wont to bring
touching the style; to wit, that the difference thereof, does give no
sufficient ground to stay our judgments upon, because that S. Luk, or some
other did translate this Epistle out of the Hebrew tongue into the Greek. But
it is easy to refute this their conjecture. I willingly let pass other places
which are alleged out of the Scripture: only I say, that if this Epistle had
been written in Hebrew, there could not have been an allusion in this word
Testament, whereupon the author of this Epistle does stay himself. I say then,
that which he handles touching the nature of the Testament in the ninth
Chapter, cannot be drawn out of any other fountain then from the Greek word.
For the Greek word signifies two things, to wit, Testament, and Covenant: but
Berith after the Hebrews, signifies Covenant only. This reason will satisfy
those that are of sound judgment to prove that which I have said: to wit,
that this Epistle was written in the Greek tongue. As touching that which is
brought to the contrary, that it is more probable that the Apostle would not
write to the Jews but in their own tongue, this has no more ground then the
rest. How few were then to be found which understood the language of their
ancestors? Again, according to the region where every one dwelt, so had he
also learned the language of the same. Now the Greek tongue was spread
furthest abroad, and was more in use then any other. I therefore come now to
the Argument it self.

First we have to observe that the point whereat the Apostle aims, is not to
persuade the Jews, that Jesus the son of Marie, was the Christ, and the
Redeemer which had been promised them. For in as much as he wrote unto them
which had already made profession of Christianity, he takes this article as
wholly granted. But his only drift is to prove unto them, what Christ his
office is, to the end they might thereby acknowledge that the observation of
the ceremonies, were abolished by his coming. We must of necessity note this
distinction. For albeit it had been a superfluous labor in the Apostle, in
speaking to those which were then sufficiently persuaded that Jesus which was
already manifested was that Christ; to busy himself in proouing the same
point still unto them: yet it was necessary, that he should declare unto them
what this Christ was: because they did not as yet understand the end; the
virtue, nor the fruit of his coming. But whilst they beguiled themselves with
a false exposition of the law; in stead of taking the solid body and
substance, they rested themselves in the shadow; and contented themselves
therewith. The like difference have we at this day with the Papists: for they
confess indeed with us that Christ is the son of God, which was promised to
be the Redeemer of the world: but when we come to join issue, as they say,
they dispoyle him of more then the one half of his power.

But to the matter; he does purposely begin his speech with the dignity, and
greatness of Christ, because the Jews were of opinion that there was no reason
why the law should be in less estimation than the Gospel. First of all then,
he confirms the Article whereupon the disputation was: to wit, that the
doctrine brought by Christ ought to have the sovereign place, because it is
the shutting up and conclusion of all Prophesies. But least the reverence which
they bare to Moses, might be some hindrance unto them in this behalf, he
shows that Christ is much more excellent than all others.

And having touched in brief, wherein he is more excellent, he does purposely
subject the Angels underneath him, to the end that all others with them, might
be brought under, and abased in regard of Christ. Now this manner of proceeding
which he uses, is very fit; and not without great reason. For if he had
begun the comparison with Moses; it would have been very odious: but after
he has showed by the scriptures, that even the heavenly principalities are
beneath Christ; there is neither Moses, nor any man else whatsoever, which ought
to refuse to be ra^ged with them, that so the Son of God may have the
chieftie above all, both Angels and men. And therefore after the Apostle has
brought in the Angels under the rule and power of Christ; forthwith, as taking
more courage unto him, he comes to pronounce, and to express how much more
Moses is inferior: to wit, the difference is as much as is between the master
and the servant. Thus then, when we shall perceive that he always places
Christ in the sovereign degree of principality, in the first three Chapters,
let us know that he aims at nothing but this, that when Christ speaks, all
others should hold their peace, and that nothing should hinder us to give our
whole attention to his doctrine. Although when he sets him before us, as our
brother in our flesh, chap. 2. he calls and allures us also by this means, to
the end we should frame our selves under his obedience, and give our selves
wholly unto him. Now he intermingles Exhortations, and threatenings for their
sakes that are dull and slothful to obey, or; who do obstinately resist. This
matter is continued almost to the end of the fourth Chapter. From thence he
begins to expound the Priesthood of Christ: the true and pure knowledge
whereof abolisheth all the ceremonies of the law. But having only in brief
showed how amiable the law ought to be unto us, and with what contentment of
mind we may be bold to rest our selves in the same, he digresseth a little from
his purpose to blame the Jews, who like little children, did yet always busy
themselves in the first rudiments. Where he also strikes them with terror, by
thundering out a most sharp and fearful threatening against them: For he
shows that they stand in great danger to be rejected of the Lord, if they did
continue to be so slothful in profiting. But by and by after, he asswageth
this sharpness, saying, that he has good hope, that they would become better.
And this is to the end he might rather encourage them to go on forward, than
to beat them down altogether. Then he returns again to speak of the
Priesthood of Christ. Aaron, and all others of the tribe of Leui in dignity
and honor. Of all which things he shows that there was an Image and shadow in
the person of Melchisedecke. Now to the end he might the more certainly
prove that the ceremonies of the law were abolished, he shows how they, as
also the Tabernacle, were instituted to another end, to wit, to serve to the
heavenly pattern, to which all was referred. Whence it follows, that they were
not to be rested in, unless we would stand at a stay in the midde way, making
no reckoning to come to the mark. For confirmation of this matter, he
alleges the place of Jeremiah, wherein there is promise made of a new
Testament, which is nothing else but the correction of the old. Whence it
follows, that the old was earthly and weak. So consequently coming to show
the similitude, and agreement, which is between the shadows and the substance
which was manifested in Christ, he concludes that all the ceremonies ordained
by Moses, were abolished by his sacrifice; because the efficacy and virtue
thereof is perpetual, and that in it is not only contained the perfect and
full confirmation of the new Testament, but also the true and spiritual
accomplishment of that external priesthood, which was in force and had place
under the law. Unto the doctrine he adds yet another exhortation, which he
uses as a spur to prick them forward, to the end, that renouncing all
impediments, they might receive Christ with such reverence as was meet. As
touching so many examples of the fathers, which he recites in the eleventh
chapter, I think he alleges them of purpose to give the Jews to
understand, that if so be they were to pass from Moses unto Christ, it would
be so far off, that they should decline from the holy Fathers, that by this
means rather they should be the more nearly conjoined with them. For if faith
were the principal virtue which was in the fathers, yea the very root of all
virtues; it follows then, that it is this faith also, by which they should
especially be acknowledged for the children of Abraham, and of the Prophets.
And contrariwise, that all those which followed not the faith of those fathers,
were bastards and no children. And surely it is a point which greatly
redoundeth to the praise of the Gospel; yea, it should cause us also to have
it in so much the more estimation, in regard that therein we are found to be
such, as have a sweet accord, and society with the universal Church, which
has bin since the beginning of the world. The two last Chapters do contain
diverse directions for the rule of a good life: to wit, of hope, of bearing of
the cross, of patience, and perseverance, of the acknowledgement of Gods
benefits, of obedience, mercy, and other worke^ of love; of chastity, and all
such like things. Lastly, he shuts up his Epistle with a prayer, and forthwith
puts them in hope of his coming to see them shortly.

A COMMENTARY OF M. JOHN CALVIN ON THE WHOLE EPISTLE to the Hebrews.
CHAP. I.
1 At sundry times, and in diverse manners God spoke in the old time to our
fathers by the Prophets: In these last days he has spoken unto us by his
son,

2 Whom he has made heir of all things, by whom also he made the worlds.

THe beginning of this Epistle tends to the praise and commendation of the
doctrine of Christ: for he not only shows that we ought to receive it with
reverence; but that we are wholly to stay our selves in it alone. Now to the end
we may understand this the better, let us note the opposition of every member:
the sum of this proposition, we will use this figure, ensuing: God spoke
In old time by the Prophets: -- Now by his Son.
Then to the Fathers: -- But now to us.
Then many times: -- Now in the last times.


This foundation being laid, you see the consent and agreement between the
law and the gospel established: because God, who is always like unto himself,
and his word, which is the sure and unchangeable truth, did speak both to
them, and to us. But it shall not be amiss to note the difference between the
fathers and us: for in old time God framed his speech and style unto them in
another manner, and order, than he does now unto us.

For first of all, Moses is reckoned among those Prophets; but, as in the
number of them, which are far inferior to the Son. At sundry times and in
diverse manners God spoke, etc. for God would always have held and continued
one manner of proceeding unto the end, if so be the same had been full, and
perfect in all points. It follows by consequence therefore, that these
diversities were signs of imperfection. Moreover I take these words, At
sundry times, and in diverse manners, so, as the first is to be referred to the
diverse succession of times; for the Greek word, to translate it word for word,
signifies in many pieces: as it falls out when they determine to speak more
fully of a matter in time to come. By the second (in mine opinion) he signifies
diversity, both in the form and manner of speech.

When he says, that he has spoken to us in these last times, his meaning is,
that we have no more occasion to hang in suspense, as though we had need to
wait for some new revelation. For the word which Christ has brought unto us,
is not a treatise of some particular parts of doctrine, but it is the last
closing up, and perfect conclusion of all that which is needful for us to know
unto salvation. And in this sense, the Apostles do take the last days, and
the last times; which thing Paul also testifies, where he says that the ends
of the world are come upon us, 1. Cor. 10.11. If so be then that God has now
spoken once for all, in these last times; we for our parts ought to hearken
unto it, and not only so, but in giving ear unto it, we are also to settle
and stay our selves in it, and never enquire further: which two points are not
a little auayleable for us to understand. For first the Jews are greatly
hindered, because they consider not that God has deferred the revelation of the
perfect doctrine unto these last times: and therefore contenting themselves
with their law, they set not themselves forward to come home to the mark: on
the other side although Christ be come, and is so received, yet an evil no
less pernicious than the former has begun to reign in the world: for men now
desire to seek further than Christ; for I pray you what other thing is there
in the whole Papacy, but a straying beyond the limits which the Apostle here
has set us? Wherefore even as the spirit of God in this place sommoneth all
men to come to Christ: so also it forbids them to pass beyond the bounds of
these last words here mentioned. In a word, the highest perfection of our
wisdom is to be bounded within the limits of the Gospel.

Whom he has made heir of all things:] he is the universal heir of the
world. Oh how miserable and wretched are we then, if Christ enrich us not with
his benefits! In the second place he adds, that this honor does of right
belong to the son of God, to have authority over all things, because all
things were created by him. Though I deny not but these two titles are
attributed unto Christ in diverse respects. For the world was created by him,
because he is the eternal wisdom of God, which from the beginning of the
world has been the disposer of all his works. And from hence we may note the
eternity of Christ. For it is necessary indeed that he should be before he
could create the world. But if we seek the length of time, we shall find no
beginning thereof: now it does nothing at all diminish his power, in that it is
said the world was made by him; which sounds as though he made it not himself.
For it is a manner of speech commonly used in the Scriptures, that the Father
is called the Creator: and whereas in some places it is added, by his wisdom,
Prou. 8.27. By his word, John 1.3. By the Son, Col. 1.16. It is all one as if
wisdom it self were called the Creator of the world. Yet notwithstanding the
distinction of the persons is to be noted not only in regard of us, but even
as it is in God, between the Father and the Son. Thus then by reason of the
unity of the essence it falls out that whatsoever is essential in God,
appertains both to the Father, and to the Son: as likewise, that whatsoever
simply appertains unto God, is common both to the one and to the other. And
yet this hinders nothing at all, but that every person should have his
propriety.

Now the name heir is given to Christ manifested in the flesh, for in that he
was made man, he thereby clothed himself with our very nature: this right of
being heir of the world was conferred unto him, to this end that he thereby
might recover that again for us which we had lost in Adam. For in the
beginning God appointed man as heir of all his benefits, as if he had been his
son: but the first man falling away from God by sin, deprived both
himself, and all his offspring, not only of Gods blessing, but of all good
things themselves, therefore do we then begin by good right to enjoy these
blessings from God, when Jesus Christ who is the only and universal heir,
receives us to have communion with him. For for this cause is he become heir,
to the end he might enrich us with his benefits. Yea the Apostle himself does
adorn him with this very title, to the end we might learn to know that
without him, we are naked and empty of all good things. Whereas we have
translated of all things: the Greek word might be as well of all: and then it
gives us to understand, that we ought to be subject unto Christ, because the
Father has given us unto him. But I rather interpret it of all things, and so
it signifies that we are thrust out of the lawful possession of heaven and
earth, and of all creatures, till we come to be made one with Christ.

Verse. 3. Who being the brightness of the glory, and the ingraued form of his
person, and bearing up al things by his mighty word, has by himself purged
our sins, and sits at the right hand of the majesty in the highest places.

THese things are spoken partly of the divine essence of Christ, and partly of
his humane nature. For in that he is called the brightness of the glory, and
the ingraued form of his substance: it is proper to his divinity: the words
following likewise appertain to his humanity. Yet the whole verse contains
notwithstanding an high commendation of the dignity and excellency of Christ.
Moreover, look by what reason he is called the brightness of the glory; by the
same reason he is called the engraven form of his person. Both which manners
of speech are borrowed from the creatures. For nothing can be said of things so
high and excellent, unless we borrow some similitudes from them. It is
needless therefore for us to stand to dispute over subtly how the Son, who
is of one essence with the Father, is called the brightness of his glory. We
must confess that that which is transferred from the creatures to the majesty
of God, is something improper: yet is it no absurdity that these things
visible to our senses should be applied unto God, to the end we might be
taught thereby what we are to seek in Christ, and what profit he brings unto
us. For we must know, that this place leads us not to the seeking out of
vain speculations; but to learn therein a true and sure doctrine of faith.
Therefore we are to apply these titles of Christ to our profit: for it is for
our sakes that they are thus attributed unto him. Do we hear then that the
Son is called the brightness of the glory of his Father? Let us thus think
then in our selves: the glory of the Father is to us invisible, till such time
as it shine forth unto us in Christ. Is he called the lively image of his
Fathers substance? It is to the end we might learn, that the majesty of the
Father is hidden from us, till such time as he manifests the same unto us in
this ingraued form of his image. They which think not of this relation, and
that these things are attributed unto Christ as in respect of us, do dispute
over subtly, and to no purpose: because they understand not the meaning of
the holy Apostle. For he does not here take upon him to show what likeness of
the Father the Son has within himself: but as I have said, his meaning is
to edify our faith with fruit and profit: to the end we might learn that God
is no otherwise manifested unto us, but in Christ. For so infinite is that
brightness which is in the essence of God, that our eyes are dazeled therewith,
till such time as he shines unto us in Christ: whereof it follows, that
unless God show us his brightness in Christ, we shall be utterly blinded with
the beholding of that light. And this indeed is a very profitable philosophy,
namely to learn the excellency of Christ by a lively feeling and certain
experience of faith. As much is to be said as touching the other word, the
ingraued form, as I have said. Thus then the Greek word which is translated
brightness, signifies in this place no other thing than a visible or shining
light which our eyes are not able to bear: And the Greek word which is
translated image, signifies a lively form of that substance which is hid and
invisible. By the first word then we learn, substance (therein following
others) in mine opinion signifies not the being or essence of the Father, but
the person. For it is unapt to say, that the essence of God is engraven in
Christ: seeing both the one and the other is but one simple essence. But it is
proper and truly said, that all that which the Father has of his own, is
naturally engraven in the Son: so that whosoever has the Son, he has
also all that which is in the Father. Thus the ancient Fathers who taught
faithfully, do use this word Hypostasis, which is to say substance, or
subsistence, in such sense as it should be triple in God: and that this word
ousia, which signifies essence, is but one and simple in God. S. Hillarie does
every where take this word substance for person. Now although it be not the
Apostles purpose in this place to show what Christ is in himself, but such a
one as he declares himself unto us by effect: yet notwithstanding he does
sufficiently refute the Arrians and Sabellians when he attributes that unto
Christ which only appertains to God, and forthwith notes out two distinct
substances in the Father and in the Son. For from hence we gather that he is
one and the same God only with the Father, and yet that there is a distinction
notwithstanding as touching the propriety: so as both of them has his
subsistence.

And bearing up all things] Properly it is, bearing al things. But the word to
bear is taken to maintain, or bear up, and to cause all creatures to
continue in their estate. For his meaning is that all things would presently
fall to ruin, if they were not vpheld by his power. Notwithstanding when he
says by his word, this may be expounded as well of the Father as of the Son:
but because the second exposition is the more received, and agrees very well
to the scope of the text, I am content to satisfy my self therein. Word for
word it is by the word of his power: but according to the manner of the
Hebrews, it is as much as if he had said by his mighty word. For whereas some
do thus turn the text, that Christ maintains all things by his Fathers word,
that is, by himself who is the word; it has no color at all. Besides, what
need is there of so constrained an exposition? For when the Scripture calls
Christ the word of the Father, it is not wont to use the word which is put
here, that is, Rhema, but another, to wit, Logos. Wherefore the word does here
simply signify to will: and the sense is, that Christ who conserues the world
by his only will, and as it were with his only beck; notwithstanding refused
not to take upon him the office by which he made the purgation of our sins. And
this is the second member of the doctrine which is handled in this Epistle. For
the maine groundworke of all the disputation consists in these two points: by
himself: we must supply an Antithesis: to wit, that the shadows of Moses law
were of no force to assist him in the doing of it. And hereby he shows the
difference between him and the Leuiticall Priests: for it was also said of
them that they purged sins: but they borrowed this virtue from another: to
wit, from Christ. To be short, his meaning is to exclude all other means, or
helps: in laying the power and price of the purgation of our sins only upon
Christ.

And is set at the right hand.] As if he should say, after he had obtained
salvation for mankind, he was received into the heavenly glory, to the end he
might govern all things. Now this is added, to show that the salvation which
he has obtained is not temporary. For otherwise it is our wont to measure his
power by beholding of present things. He admonishes us then that we ought not
the less to esteem Christ, because he appears not now before our eyes, but
rather to think that the fulness of his glory consists in his being received,
and exalted to this high and sovereign degree of honor and rule: for the
right hand is transferred unto God by way of metaphor and similitude: otherwise
he is not shut up in any place; neither has he either right hand or left. When
it is said therefore that Christ is set, it only signifies that kingdom which
is given him by his father, and that power whereof S. Paul makes mention, to
wit, that at his name every knee shall bow, Phil. 2.10. Wherefore to be set at
the right hand of the Father, is nothing else but to govern and rule in the
stead of the Father; as the Lieutenants of Princes are wont to do, to whom
free and absolute power is given over all things. And therefore it is added, of
the majesty, in the highest places: to signify that Jesus Christ is placed in
the highest throne, wherein the majesty of God shines. Wherefore as he ought
to be loved for our redemption, so ought he to be adored in regard of this his
Majesty.

Verse. 4. And is made so much more excellent than the Angels, in as much as he
has obtained a more excellent name than they.

5. For unto which of the Angels said he at any time, Psalm. 2.7. 2. Sam. 7.14.
Thou art my son, this day begat I thee? And again, I will be his father,
and he shall be my son.

Having in the former verses preferred Christ before Moses and all others; now
also by comparing him with the Angels, he further amplifies his glory. It was
a thing familiarly known to the Jews, that the Law was given by Angels. They
heard that which was written of them as touching their honor throughout the
whole Scriptures: And as the world is wonderfully inclined to superstition, so
also is it wont many times to darken the glory of God, by too much exalting of
Angels. Good reason it is then that they should be set in their proper place,
least they might any way hinder the brightness of Christ. And first of all the
Apostle takes his argument from Christ's name: to wit, that he is much more
excellent than the Angels, because he is the Son of God. Now he proves by
two testimonies of Scripture, that Christ is adorned with this title: which two
places we will first examine, and afterward will gather the sum of the
matter.

Thou art my Son, this day etc.] It cannot be denied but that this is spoken
of David: why? because he represented the person of Christ. Therefore that
which is written in this second Psalm, was figurative in David: but all was
lively accomplished in Christ. For in regard that David by subduing many
enemies, did thereby cause the limits of his kingdom to spread round about
from one side to another, he therein was a figure of this promise; I will give
thee the heathen for thine inheritance. But what was this in respect of that
large spreading of Christ's kingdom, the bounds whereof stretch from the East
to the West? By the same reason David was in like manner called the son of
God: that is to say, specially chosen of God to perform excellent things. But
this alas was scarce one sparkle of that glory which shined in Christ, in whom
the Father has engraven his own image. So that the name of Son, does
appertain only to Christ by a special privilege: neither can it be
transferred unto any other whatsoever, but it shall be profaned. For the
Father has set his seal on him, and upon none else, Ioh. 6.27. Ioh. 10.36.
name of Son? Psalm. 82.6.
and ye all are the children of the most high. Or as if the Prophet spoke not
more honorably of Israel when he calls him the first borne of God, Ierem.
31.9. for this title of son is every where attributed unto him. Moreover,
David in other places calls the Angels the sons of God. Who is like the Lord
among the sons of the Gods? Psalm. 89.6. But the answer is easy: to wit,
David in the person of Christ calls himself the son of God simply without
any addition, he therein notes out something more peculiar and excellent than
all the honor not only of all Israel, but of Princes and Angels also.
Otherwise it were but an improper kind of speech and altogether unfitting, if
he should be called the son of God by way of excellency, and yet should have
nothing in him more worthy than others: for by this title he is exempt out of
the order and number of all degrees both of men and Angels.

Seeing these words then, Thou art my son, are exclusiuely spoken of Christ,
it also follows, that such honor is unbeseeming any of the Angels. If any do
yet reply, David is exalted above the Angels: I answer, they are adorned with
those titles which the Angels cannot attribute unto themselves without
sacrilege.

Hereby then it sufficiently appears, that the argument taken from this title
of Son, is good. As touching the generation or begetting of the Son, this
we are to note in a word, that it is taken here by way of relation. For the
subtlety of S. Augustine is frivolous, who imagines that Christ is eternal to
day, and so continues. True it is that Christ is the eternal son of God: for
he is his wisdom, begotten of him before all worlds: but this makes nothing
to this present place, which speaks not of the eternal generation of the
Son, but is rather spoken in regard of us, who do now acknowledge him to be
the Son of God, since the Father has manifested him in the flesh. And
therefore that same declaration whereof also S. Paul makes mention, Romans 1.4.
was as a kind of eternal generation, as you would say: for this secret and
hidden generation which went before, was unknown unto men: and should not have
come to light if the Father had not approved the same by a manifest and
visible revelation thereof.

Again, I will be his father, etc.] In this second testimony, that which we
have noted ought also to have place: that is, howsoever Solomon is here chiefly
meant (who otherwise was less than the Angels) yet notwithstanding he is now
separated from the common order of all men, in that God promises him that he
will be his Father: for God was not reckoned his father, as being one of the
sons of Abraham, or as to some of the Princes, but to him which was more
excellent than any other. So that look by what privilege he is established
Gods son, by the same privilege all others are shut out from having equal
degree of honor with him. Now it appears by the whole text, that this is no
otherwise said of Solomon, but as he was a figure of Christ: for the rule and
government of the whole world is destinate to this Son, of whom he there
speaks: and a perpetuity of government is promised unto him. On the
contrary, we may see that Salomons kingdom was bounded within straight
limits: and so far was it off from enduring long, that by and by after his
death it was divided; and a little after that fell to ruin. Yet in the Psalm,
the Sun and the Moon are called forth for witnesses; and the Lord himself
swears that this kingdom shall remain safe and immovable, as long as they
shall shine in the firmament. Contrariwise the kingdom of David fell to decay
not long after, and in the end was clean abolished. Moreover, it may be
gathered from many places of the Prophets, that this promise was never
otherwise meant than of Christ. So as none can cavil, that we have coined a
new exposition: for this kind of speech where they call Christ the son of
David, was usually received among the Jews.

Verse. 6. And again, when he brings in his first begotten son into the
world, he says, Psalm. 97.7.
And let all the Angels of God worship him.

NOw he exalts Christ above the Angels, for another reason: to wit, because the
Angels are commanded to worship him: for thereupon it follows that he is
their head and Prince. Notwithstanding, it should seem that the Apostle does
ill in applying this to Christ, which is spoken of God. If we answer that
Christ is the eternal God, and that for this cause whatsoever appertains to
God, does also by right appertain unto him; yet in so answering we should not
satisfy all that might be objected. For it were to small purpose to prove a
doubtful thing, if we should ground our argument in this matter upon the
common titles of God. For the question is of Christ manifested in the flesh.
But to answer to the point, we must understand, that the Apostle expressly
says that the holy Ghost spoke thus, when the Son was brought into the
world: which were not truly spoken, if so be the Psalm did not speak properly
of the manifestation of Christ: yet questionless that is the very true
meaning. For the beginning of the Psalm is an exhortation to rejoice: neither
does David speak there to the Jews only, but addresseth his speech to all
the earth, even to the Isles: that is to say, to the Regions beyond the Seas.
The reason of this rejoicing is in these words: for the Lord reigns. And if
afterward you read the whole Psalm, you shall see nothing spoken in it that
does not belong to the kingdom of Christ, which began when the Gospel was
published. Yea the whole argument of the Psalm is nothing else but a letter
authentical wherewith Christ is sent (as you would say) to be put into the
possession of his kingdom. Now what cause of joy would this kingdom bring, if
so be it were not a kingdom of salvation to all the world, that is to the
Gentiles as well as to the Jews? Wherefore the Apostle speaks here very
properly and to the purpose, when he says that Christ is brought into the
world, to wit, because his coming unto men is there described. Moreover, the
Hebrew word Elohim, for which he has here put Angels, does also signify
Gods: but we are not to doubt but the Prophet speaks of Angels. For this is
the sense, there is no power so high which ought not to stoop to the rule of
this King, seeing his coming shall bring an universal joy to all the world.

Verse. 7. Psalm. 104.4.
And of the Angels he says he makes the spirits his messengers, and his
ministers a flame of fire.

IT seems that in alleging this place, he draws it to a contrary sense.
For albeit David does in this Psalm describe the order which God keeps in
governing of the world, so as out of all question in this fourth verse he
speaks of the winds, which he says are made his messengers, in regard they
run as posts at his beck, and commandment: so that whenever he causes
the earth to ring with his thunders, they show what ready and diligent
servants they are to execute their charge enjoined them. But what does all this
appertain to the Angels? For answer, some take it to be spoken allegorically,
as if the Apostle should expound the literal and plain sense of Angels by an
Allegory, as they call it. But for my part, I had rather say that this place
was alleged to be applied to the Angels by way of similitude, in this manner:
David compares the winds to the Angels, so as they exercise the like office
here in this world, which the Angels do in heaven, the winds being visible
spirits as it were. For even as Moses in the creation of the world recites
only the things which are to be perceived by our senses, and yet
notwithstanding would that higher things should be comprehended therewithal:
so David in this description of the world, and of nature, paints out unto us as
in a table that which we ought also to understand as touching the heavenly
order. And therefore I think this is an argument which we call a similie, that
is to say, of a thing like, when the Apostle transferreth that to the Angels,
which is properly spoken of the winds.

8 But unto the Son he says, O God thy throne is for ever, and ever: the
scepter of thy kingdom is a scepter of righteousness.

9 Thou have loved righteousness, and hated iniquity. Psalm. 45.7.
Wherefore God, even thy God has anointed thee with the oil of gladness above
thy fellows.

WE cannot deny but that this Psalm was composed for Solomon in form of a
marriage song: because his marriage with the King of Aegypts daughter is
celebrated therein: yet notwithstanding we must also confess that that which
is here said is so excellent, that it cannot wholly be found in Solomon. Now
least the Jews should be constrained to confess that Christ is God, they do
here frame a cavil: to wit, that this throne is of God; or that we must
supply the verb, has established, and say, God has established thy throne.
Thus after the first exposition this word Elohim should be translated in the
Genitive, of God: the other exposition supposes that this sentence should be
imperfect: but one may very well see that they seek nothing else but starting
holes. Whosoever then shall read this sentence with ripenes of judgment, and
without a mind bent to contention, he shall not deny, but the Messiah is here
called God. And let no man reply, that here is a word used which is common
both to Angels and Judges: for we shall not find it in any place wheresoever,
attributed to any one in particular but to God. Further, to the end that I
strive not about the word; where shall that throne be found which may be said to
be stable and firm for ever, and ever, unless it be the throne of God? The
perpetuity therefore of the kingdom is a certain testimony of the
Divinity. Now in the next place, the scepter of Christ's kingdom is called a
scepter of righteousness: whereof there was some figure in Solomon, but very
obscure: that is to wit, so far forth as he showed himself a just King and a
lover of Equity. But the righteousness, and equity of Christ his kingdom does
far exceed: the reason is, because that by the Gospel which is a spiritual
scepter he reformeth us according to the righteousness of God. As much is to be
said touching his love of righteousness. For because he loves it, therefore he
causes it to reign in those that are his.

Therefore God, even thy God:] It is certain that this is truly spoken of
Solomon, who was anointed King, because God preferred him before all his
brethren, who excepting this, were equal, and children of a King also as well
as he. But it more fitly agrees to Christ, who has adopted us to himself to
be companione together with him: howbeit, not by any right of our own. Now, he
is anointed above his felllowes, because he was anointed without measure: but
we, every one according to our measure, as it is distributed; to some more, to
some less. Moreover, he was anointed for our sakes, to the end all of us
might draw out of his fulness, Ioh. 1.16. And therefore he is the Christ, that is
to say the anointed: and we Christians, in, and through him, as the rivers do
stream from the fountain: now for as much as Christ has received this
annoynting in his flesh, it is therefore said that he was anointed of his
God. For it should be absurd to say he was inferior to God, unless in regard
of his humane nature.

10 And thou Lord, in the beginning have established the earth, and the heavens
are the works of thine hands.

11 They shall perish, but thou do remain: Psalm. 102.26.
and they all shall wax old as does a garment.

12 As a vesture shall thou fold them up, and they shall be changed: but thou
art the same, and thy years shall not fail.

IT may seem at the first blush that this testimony is unfitly alleged of
Christ, and specially in a matter so doubtful, as this is whereof he
entreats. For the question is not as touching the glory of God, but of that
which properly belongs and agrees unto Christ. Now there is no mention of
Christ in this place, but the majesty of God is rather set forth simply unto
us therein. But although it be granted that no mention at all is made in this
Psalm of Christ: yet we may evidently perceive that he is so pointed out in
it, that no man need to doubt but that his kingdom is recommended as directly
therein unto us, as if it were uttered in plain and express words. Therefore
whatsoever is contained in it ought to be applied to the person of Christ. For
whereas it is said in the former verses, Thou will arise and have compassion on
Sion, that the Gentiles may fear thy name, and all the Kings of the earth thy
glory. And again, when the people shall be gathered together, and the
kingdoms to serve the Lord. All this you know was not fulfilled but in Christ.
Truly we shall but lose our labor to seek this God by whom all the world was
united into one faith, and into one spiritual worship, unless we seek him
in Christ. So then all the whole contents of this Psalm, agrees properly to
the person of Christ. First, in that he is called the eternal God, Creator of
heaven and earth. Secondly, that such a perpetuity is attributed unto him as
is without change; by reason whereof his Majesty is exalted into the highest
degree, and himself exempt out of the rank of all creatures.

Now whereas David says, that the heavens shall perish, some do resolve the
meaning thus: if it please God it should so come to pass, to wit, that the
heavens should perish: which sense if it stand for good, then nothing should be
affirmed. But what need have we of such a constrained exposition, when as we
know that all creatures are subject to vanity: for to what purpose should this
renument of the heavens serve, (the which they attend and wait for with no
less desire then women in travail to be delivered) if there should be no
change of them? And therefore the perpetuity of Christ, which is here
magnified, brings singular consolation to the faithful, whereof this Psalm in
the end concludes that they shall be partakers. For Christ, you know,
communicates himself, and all his benefits to his body the Church.

13 Unto which of the Angels also said he at any time, sit at my right hand
till I make thine enemies thy footestoole? Psalm. 110.1. 1. Cor. 15.25.


14 Are they not all ministering spirits, sent forth to minister, for their
sakes, which shall be heirs of salvation?

HE yet again extols the excellency of Christ by another testimony, to the
end we might thereby know how far he surpasses the Angels. The testimony
is drawn out of the hundredth and tenth Psalm; which cannot be expounded of any
other than of Christ. For seeing it was unlawful for Kings to meddle with the
Priesthood, as the leprosy of king Vzzias witnesses; and seeing it is
manifest likewise that neither David nor any of his successors in the kingdom
were ordained Priests; it thereupon follows that here is a new kingdom, and a
new priesthood, seeing one only is appointed for both these offices. Besides
that; the eternity of the Priesthood agrees to none but to Christ. Now in the
very beginning of the Psalm he is placed at the right hand of God. Which
manner of speech, is as much as if he had said, that the second place was given
him after the father. For it is a similitude, or metaphor by which he
signifies, that he is the fathers Lieutenant and his chief Ambassador to
exercise his power, so as the Father reigns, and gouerns; yet by his hand. Now
there is never a one among the angels, which has so excellent and high an
office: and therefore it follows that Christ is far more excellent than they
all.

Till I make thine enemies thy footestoole. Because Christ is never without
enemies which fight against his kingdom, it seems not altogether out of
danger: especially if we look upon those who endeavor with might and maine to
overthrow it, for as they have great power and force, so they want no
subtlety, nor politic devises, but have skill enough to put in exequution
all their designs, with no less then a furious madness. And if on the other
side, we shall with the eyes of flesn only, look upon the little flock of
Christ, we shall think ever and anon that his kingdom is ready to fall to
the ground. But this promise dispossesseth us of all fear, to wit, when we
hear that Christ shall never be plucked from his seat, but shall reign
rather, till he put all his enemies under his feet. It is profitable therefore
for us to note these two things. First, Though Christ's kingdom be daily
assaulted, yet it shall never be vanquished.
yet they shall never attain the end which they aim at: because Christ who is
set at the right hand of his father, is not set there for a time, but shall sit
there till the end of the world. Therefore let all those look to be
overthrown and trodden under his feet, that will not submit themselves as
subjects under his Imperial government.

Now if it be demanded, whether the kingdom of Christ shall end after he has
subdued, and destroyed all his enemies: I answer, it is certain that it shall
be perpetual; but in such a manner as Saint Paul sets it out unto us in the
15. to the Corinth. For we must understand that God, 1. Cor. 15, 27.28.
who now will be only known in Christ, shall then appear unto us in
himself. Christ indeed shall still continue the head both of men and Angels,
but yet so, that his honor shall be no way diminished thereby. Now they that
would be further resolved as touching this question, let them have recourse to
that which I have written upon the foresaid place to the Corinthians.

Are they not all, etc.] Now he speaks of the condition of Angels, showing
what it is, to the end the comparison between them and Christ might be the
better understood. True it is, that in calling them spirits, you may therein
see a title of great excellency. For in this respect they are advanced far
above bodily creatures. But the word of administration which he immediately
adds is to abase them, and to hold them within the compass of their degree:
for Administration is set against Rule, and Imperial dominion. And this does
he yet further declare when he says, To minister: For the first Epethite,
signifies as much, as if he had called them officers: but the name of minister
is yet more base and abject. I grant indeed, it is an honorable service which
God enioynes the Angels: yet notwithstanding in as much as they serve; it
thereby appears that they are too inferior to be compared with Christ, Paul
witnesses, procure their safety and salvation. For is it not a wonderful
pledge of Gods love toward us, to know that they are incessantly employed for
our protection? from this also proceeds a singular confirmation of our faith:
to wit, that our salvation being fortified with such helps, is out of danger.

God therefore does provide exceeding careful for our weakness, when he gives
us such helpers which are ready with us to resist Satan, and do every way
employ their power and diligence to maintain and defend us. But this benefit
is proper only to the elect of God: and therefore if we would that Gods Angels
should be ours, let us look that we be the members of Christ. They that will
have the protection of Angels, must look that themselves be the members of
Christ.
Some examples and testimonies might be brought indeed to show how the Angels
have been sent sometime to attend upon the reprobates. For in Daniel the 10.
chap. and 20. verse, mention is made of the Angels of the Persians, and
Greeks. But I answer, they were so aided by the Angels, that by means
thereof, the Lord advanced the salvation of his people. For the happy issues
in their affairs, and the victories which they obtained, fell out always to
the benefit of the Church, as to their chief mark and end. Howsoever it be,
this remains sure, that all of us being banished by our sins, out of the
kingdom of God, we have now no fellowship at all with the blessed Angels, but
by the reconciliation made by Christ: and this is manifest by the ladder which
the Patriarch Jacob saw in a vision erected before him. Genesis 28.18.

CHAP. II.
1 Wherefore we ought diligently to give heed to the things which we have
heard, least at any time we run out.

2 For if the word spoken by Angels was steadfast, and every transgression and
disobedience received a just recompense of Reward,

3 How shall we escape, if we neglect so great salvation, which at the first
began to be preached by the Lord, and afterward was confirmed unto us by them
that heard him,

4 God bearing witness thereto, both with signs and wonders, and with diverse
miracles, and gifts of the holy Ghost, according to his own will.

FOr this cause we ought etc.] Now he shows what his drift has been all this
while in comparing of Christ with the Angels: even that he might thereby
maintain the sovereign authority of his doctrine. For if the law which was
given by Angels, ought not to be lightly regarded and received: and if the
transgression thereof was also grievously punished: what will become (says he)
of the contemners of the Gospel, which has the Son of God both for the
author and defender of it, and has also been confirmed by so many miracles?
The sum of these four verses is this, that because the dignity of Christ is
far greater than that of the Angels, so much the more reverence is due rather
to the Gospel than to the Law. So then he commends and extols the doctrine, by
the excellency of the authors person.

Yet here arises also another question: so, it seems the Apostles argument is
absurd. I answer,

Least at any time we run out, or fall away. Although the diverse readings be
of no great consequence, because we may collect the true sense by the
Antithesis: for to take heed, and to run out, are opposite. The first
signifies to conserve and keep: the second to shed, or suffer all that to be
lost which was put within: as we see in a sieue, or such like vessel. For I
allow not of their opinion which interpret it, to die: as it is said in 2. Sam.
14.4. We all die and are as water spilt upon the ground. We must rather (as I
have said) consider the Antithesis, which is between the words to hold, and to
spill. For the attentive mind is like a vessel close stopped, and the
careless and wandering mind like a vessel full of holes.

For if the word spoken by Angels was steadfast:] steadfast: because it did
hereby well appear that it was not a vain or needless doctrine, seeing God
showed his mighty hand in punishing the transgressors of it.

If we neglect:] Not only the reiection, therein. And therefore he says, so
great salvation. For God would have us to esteem his gifts according to their
excellency. By how much the more precious they be then, so much the more is
our vile ingratitude, if we prize them not according to their value. Now for
as much as Christ is great; great and rigorous will Gods vengeance be upon all
the contemners of the Gospel. And it is to be noted, that the name of
salvation is transferred in this place by the figure Metonymia, to the
doctrine: because as it is Gods will and pleasure yt men shall be no other way
saved than by the Gospel; He that reiects the Gospel, reiects the salvation of
God.
so, in rejecting of it, we reject the salvation of God. For it is the power of
God to all them that believe. He then which seeks salvation by any other
means, he will have it without the power and virtue of God; and what a
senselesnes is that? But this title tends not only to the magnifying of the
Gospel, but it is also a singular stay and prop of our faith: because it
testifies that the word is not in vain, but contains in it most certain and
assured salvation.

Which first began to be preached by the Lord.] Here he opposes the Son of
God, who was the first preacher of the Gospel against the Angels. Now withal
he uses a prevention, to take away a doubt which might enter into many men's
fantasies. For they had not been taught by the mouth of Christ immediately,
because the most part of them had never seen him. Had they only respected men
then, by whose ministry they were brought to the faith, it is likely they
would not have regarded that which they had learned of them. And therefore the
Apostle admonishes them that the doctrine which was delivered unto them by the
ministry of others, did not therefore cease to proceed from Christ. For he
says, that they were the disciples of Christ, who faithfully reported that
which they had heard and received of him. And therefore he uses this word
confirmed: as if he should say, it was not a matter of report scattered abroad
hand over head, as if they knew not whence it came, or as if they had it by
suspected witnesses: but that it has authors both grave, and also men of good
credit. Furthermore, we may know by this place that this Epistle was not
penned by S. Paul: for he uses not so to diminish his authority, as to make
himself one of the disciples of the Apostles, not that he meant thereby to
purchase any glory to his own person: but because false teachers under this
color endeavored so much the more to lessen the credit of his doctrine. It
appears then that it is not S. Paul's, seeing the author writes that he had
the Gospel by the report of others, and not by revelation.

God bearing witness thereto.] Powers, Signs, Miracles, witnessing, is noted
the right use of miracles: to wit, they serve to establish and confirm the
Gospel: for we find that almost all miracles whenever they were wrought,
served as seals to the word of God. And therefore so much the more ought the
superstition of the Papists to be condemned, which allege the miracles of
their own devising; for they make them serve (not to confirm) but to corrupt
the truth of God.

This word, thereto, has this sense, that we are confirmed in the faith of
the Gospel by an agreement and harmony which is between God and men, because
the miracles wrought by God do agree with the voice of men, and serve as a
testimony thereto. Afterward he adds, Gifts of the holy Ghost: by which the
doctrine of the Gospel was also adorned, as being dependances of it. For to
what purpose has God distributed the gifts of his Spirit, but to the end they
might be means and helps in part to publish this doctrine; and in part to
beget an admiration in men, that their hearts might be moved thereby to obey
the doctrine? For otherwise S. Paul says in the first to the Cor. 14.22. that
the diversities of tongues are given for signs, not to them that believe, but
to them that believe not. This clause, according to his will, admonishes us
that those powers and wonders, whereof he made mention before, cannot be
attributed to any other than to God, and that they were not done by chance, but
by his determinate counsel, to the end they might seal up the truth of the
Gospel.

5 For he has not put in subjection unto the Angels the world to come,
whereof we speak.

6 But one in a certain place witnessed, Psalm. 8.5.
saying, What is man that thou should be mindful of him? or the son of
man, that thou would consider him?

7 Thou made him a little inferior to the Angels: thou crownest him with
glory and honor, and have set him above the works of thine hands.

8 Thou have put all things in subjection under his feet. Matthew. 28.18. 1.
Cor. 15.27.
And in that he has put all things in subjection under him, he left nothing
that should not ^e subject unto him. But we see not all things yet subdued
unto him.

9 But we see Jesus crowned with glory and honor, Philip. 2.8.
which was made little inferior to the Angels, through the suffering of death,
that by Gods grace he might taste death for all men.

FOr he has not] He proves again by another argument that we ought to obey
Christ: the sovereignty over all creatures. But it is needful in the first
place that we examine the Psalm which he alleges: because it seems he
draws the words thereof unfitly unto Christ. For may some say, David does
there recite the benefits which God shows to mankind. And after he had
considered of the power of God in the heavens, and in the stars, he comes in
the next place to speak of men: concerning whom the wonderful bountifulnes of
Gods goodness does especially appear. And therefore it should seem he speaks
not of one man alone, but of all men in general. To which I answer, Adam
turned away from God by his sin, he was worthily deprived of all the benefits
he had received. Not that he lost the use, but because he could no longer lay
claim unto them; himself having forsaken God the giver of them. And even
concerning the use also, God would there should remain signs therein of this
privation. As for example, how comes it to pass that the beasts do rise up in
fiercenes against us: and whereas they should fear our countenances, we fear
them: so that some of them can never be brought into subjection, and those that
be, it is with great difficulty for the most part? What is the reason that
many of them are hurtful unto us so many ways? that the earth does not of it
self bring forth increase according to the tilling and sowing bestowed upon
it, that the heavens, the air, the sea, and other creatures are become so
noisome and hurtful unto us? Is it not because we have rebelled against our
heavenly Creator?

not (...) this benefit of God does in no sort any way belong unto us, (...)
selves appertain unto God.
till that right which we have lost in Adam, be restored to us again in
Christ. For which cause S. Paul teaches that meats and drinks are sanctified
unto us by the word and prayer, 1. Tim. 4.5. And in another place he says,
that to the unbelieving nothing is pure, because without faith their minds and
consciences are impure and defiled, Tit. 1.15. And that is it which we had in
the beginning of this Epistle, where it is said that Christ is ordained of his
Father heir of all things. Truly in that he attributes the inheritance to one
only, he thereby excludes all others as strangers. And that very justly: for
we are all of us banished out of Gods kingdom. What have we to do then to
scrape unto our selves those creatures which he has ordained for the
nourishment of his household children and servants? But Christ, by whom we are
called again into the family and household of God, receives us with him into
the society of his right and title, to the end that by him (with all the
elect) we might enjoy the whole world with the blessing of God. For man having
received rule and lordship over all creatures, and by his sin losing all
right and interest in them, both for himself, and all his posterity: God the
Father instituted in his place a second Adam, his only begotten son Jesus
Christ God and Man, to whom he has given power and lordship over all
creatures, and has also given him authority to communicate the comfortable
right, and lawful use of them to whom he will, that is to say, unto the
faithful, but not to the reprobates and unbelievers.

And therefore S. Paul shows that Abraham was made heir of the world by
faith: that is to say, because he was incorporated into the body of Christ,
Romans 4.13. which being (...) men to seek timely, and earnestly. Now this
restoration and renument is begun in Christ as by the head. We need not doubt
then to behold our title and recovery of our first estate in him, All our
right to the creatures co^sists in Christ.
as often as there shall be any question moved touching the power and
authority of man over all creatures. And hereunto appertains that which he
expressly mentions touching the world to come. For he takes it for the
renewed world to come. And to the end we may the better understand this, let us
conceive in our minds two worlds: first, Adam: and the second, that which is
repaired by Christ. Two worlds.
This Psalm then shall have no place till such time as a restoration be made
by Christ. We now see well that he calls not only the estate of those things
which we wait for after the resurrection the world to come: but that also
which took his beginning from the first reign of Christ, and shall have his
accomplishment in the last redemption. I cannot conceive the reason why he
suppressed David's name: and yet I assure my self that he does not call him a
certain one, by way of contempt, but does so name him by way of honor, as
being one of the Prophets, or of the most excellent and authentic authors.

Thou have made him a little inferior.] David's meaning: for it seems that he
referres this word a little, to the time: and thereby understands the abasing
of Christ in regard he was made none account of: restraining the glory to the
day of the resurrection: whereas David stretches it generally to the whole
life of man. I answer, that it was not the Apostles meaning to recite the
native exposition of the words. For no inconvenience follows, if we say that
he alludes to the words of David, thereby to adorn the point which he
handles: as S. Paul in the tenth to the Romans alleges the place of Moses,
Who shall ascend into heaven? He adds by and by after, not the
interpretation, but rather an amplification to adorn his speech, transferring
that to the heavenly heritage, and to hell, which Moses had said of the
Heavens, and of the Sea. And such is the intention of David, Lord (says he)
thou have advanced man to such great dignity, that he wants not much of
approaching near to the honor of God, or of the Angels. For thou have made him
ruler over the whole world. The Apostle meant not to overthrow this sense,
neither yet to turn it to a contrary: but his meaning is only that we should
behold in Christ that abaseme^t which he did undergo for a little time: and
afterward that glory wherewithal he was crowned for ever: which he does,
rather by way of allusion to the words, than to express that which David meant
by them. He takes to be mindful and to visit, for one thing; saving that to
visit has a more full signification. For he notes the presence of God by the
effects.

Now in that he has put all things.] David speaks. But all things are not
made subject to mankind: therefore he speaks not of every particular man.
But this argument would not hold: because the second proposition, which we
call the minor, does also agree unto Christ. For even to him all things are not
yet subject: as S. Paul shows 1. Cor. 15.18. Therefore the words following
have another sense. For after he has made Christ to be the ruler over all
creatures without exception, he adds by way of a contrary objection, But we
see not yet all things subject unto him: and to satisfy us herein, he teaches
that one may see that accomplished in Christ notwithstanding even now, which
follows by and by after touching his crowning with glory and honor. As if
he had said, although this general subjection does not yet appear unto us,
let us notwithstanding content our selves with this, that after his death he
was raised to a more high degree of honor. For that which is yet wanting,
shall at the last be accomplished in his time.

But in the first place, some are offended that the Apostle does over nicely
gather that all things should not as yet be subject unto Christ, because David
meant to comprehend al things generally. For the kinds of creatures which he
afterward reckons up, shows nothing of all this: to wit, the beasts of the
field, the fishes of the sea, and the birds of the air. I answer, that one
general sentence is not to be restrained to these kinds, because David's
meaning was only to show some examples of this lordship in those things which
do most ordinarily present themselves before our eyes: or rather to the least
things, that we might know nothing is ours but by the bounty of God, and by
the participation of Christ. Wherefore we may thus resolve this sentence, Thou
have put all things under him, not only the things which serve to eternal
blessedness, but also even those lesser things which serve for the use and
benefit of the body. Howsoever, it is certain,that this inferior lordship
over the creatures depends upon a superior. Hereupon some make this question;
Paul before alleged: and we have also somewhat touched the same in the
beginning of this Epistle. Christ has yet continual war with diverse
enemies, and therefore he is not yet in very deed in the peaceable possession
of his kingdom. Now he is not constrained to hold this war by any
necessity, but voluntarily: for in that his enemies are not subdued until the
last day, it is to the end we in the mean while might be daily tried by such
exercises.

Jesus, which was made a little inferior to the Angels.] Because the
signification of the Greek word which we translate, a little, is ambiguous
(for it may either be referred to the time, or to the manner of this
abasement) he has more regard to the thing in it self such as it was in the
person of Christ, than to the true and natural exposition of the words, as I
have already said: wherein he gives us occasion to consider of that glory in
the resurrection, which David extends to all the gifts wherewith man is adorned
by Gods liberality toward him. Yet it is not inconvenient that the Apostle
does thus apply the words of the Prophet, because he leaves the literal sense
still whole and sound. That which he says, by the suffering of death, is as
much as if it had bin said, that Christ in enduring of death, was exalted into
this glory which he obtained, as S. Paul in like manner shows in the second
to the Philippians, verse. 8. not that Christ gat unto himself some particular
thing, as the Sophisters forge, who say that he first of all merited eternal
life for himself, and afterward for us. For this manner of speech is only to
show by what means he obtained his glory. But why was Christ crowned with
glory? To the end every knee should bow before him, Philip. 2.10. Wherefore it
may be concluded from the final cause, that all things were given into his
hands.

That by the grace of God he might taste of death for all men.] He recites the
cause and fruit of Christ's death, that we should not think it any way
diminished his dignity. For when we hear that so great a benefit is obtained
for us by his death, there is no place left for contempt, because the
admiration of the divine goodness does wholly ravish us. Where he says, for
all, he not only means, that it should serve as an example to all, as
Chrysostom brings in the similitude of the Physician, who first tastes
himself of the bitter potion, to the end the patient should make no
difficulty at all to drink it up: but the Apostles meaning is that Christ
died for us, because he setting himself in our place, has delivered us from
the curse of death. And therefore he adds that it is done by the grace of God,
because the cause of our redemption was the infinite love of God, which caused
him not to spare his only begotten son, Romans 8.32. Whereas Chrysostom
expounds to feel death, in stead of to taste thereof (as you would say with
the tip of the lips) because Christ obtained victory over death: I do neither
reject nor disallow it: notwithstanding I will not affirm that the Apostle
meant to speak so subtly.

10 For it became him, for whom are all these things, and by whom are all these
things, seeing that he brought many children unto glory, that he should
consecrate the Prince of their salvation through afflictions.

11 For he that sanctifies and they which are sanctified are all of one:
wherefore he is not ashamed to call them brethren. Psalm. 22.23.


12 Saying, I will declare thy name unto my brethren: Psalm. 18.3.
in the midst of the Church will I sing praises unto thee.

13 And again, I will put my trust in him. And again, Isai. 8.18.
Behold here am I, and the children which God has given me.

THe point whereunto the Apostle aims, is to make the abiection of Christ
glorious in the eyes of the faithful. For when he says that he clothed
himself with our flesh, it seems he meant to set Christ among the common
order of men. And then the cross being added, it abaseth him below all sorts
of men. Christ must not be the less esteemed, because he willingly abased
himself for our sakes.
Wherefore good heed must be taken that Christ be not the less esteemed,
because that of his own good will he made himself of none account for our
sakes. And this is the point which is now handled in this text. For the Apostle
shows that even for this cause the Son of God ought to be honorably
esteemed; in regard he was thus consecrated to be the Prince of our salvation.
First of all he takes it for granted, that Gods ordaining of it ought to be
rested in, because that as all things are sustained by his power, so ought they
also to serve to his glory. Wherefore we ought to seek no better cause than
this; It so pleased God. Hereunto appertains that circumlocution of words
which he uses: By whom, and for whom are all things: he might in one word
have named God; but his meaning was to show that we must hold and esteem that
to be chiefly good, which God has ordained and appointed, whose will and glory
is the very right end of all things. Yet notwithstanding it seems that which
he would say is not yet fully proved, to wit, that it was convenient that
Christ should be consecrated after this manner. But this depends upon the
ordinary course which God is wont to hold in his dealing with those that are
his. For his will is they should be exercised with diverse miseries, and that
their whole life should be a continual cross. It was necessary then that
Christ, as he was the first borne, should be consecrated by the cross,
thereby entering into his principality; because it is the rule and common
condition of all. This is the conformity of the head with the members, whereof
S. Paul entreats, Romans 8.29.

Now it is a singular consolation to assuage and sweeten the bitterness of the
cross, when the faithful do hear that they are sanctified unto glory
together with Christ by miseries and tribulations: and that in very deed they
do perceive there is good cause why they should embrace the cross amiably,
rather than fearfully. Which cannot be brought to pass, unless this shame
of the cross be by and by swallowed up, and the glory that thereby comes
unto them does also shine forth. For who will despise that which is sacred; yea
that which even God himself has sanctified? Who will esteem that to be
reproachful wherewith we are prepared unto glory? Now both the one and the
other is here affirmed of the death of Christ. By whom are all things. When it
is spoken of the creation, this is attributed to the Son as a thing which is
proper unto him, to wit, that all things were created by him: but the Apostle
signifies nothing else in this place, but that all creatures are steadie and
vpholden in their estate by the power of God. Whereas we have turned the word,
to consecrate, others have put, to make. But for as much as the Greek word
which the Apostle uses has diverse significations, I think it is very clear,
that mine exposition agrees best to the scope of the text. For he notes here a
solemn and lawful consecration, by which the children of God are brought in
to obtain their degree, yea even to be separated from the rest of the world:
and mention also is by and by after made, of sanctification.

For he which sanctifies, and they which are sanctified, etc.] are all of one;
that is to say, of one nature, as I for mine own part do interpret it. It is
commonly understood of Adam. Some do refer it to God; but altogether without
reason. For I think it rather to be meant of one nature: as if he should say,
made and framed of one lump. Now this serves greatly to augment our confidence
and assurance; to wit, that we are joined to the Son of God by so straight a
bond, that we may find the very same holiness in our nature, whereof we stand
in need. For he does not only sanctify us as he is God, but the propriety
to sanctify is also in his humane nature: not that the humanity has this
virtue of it self, but because God has shed into it a perfect fulness of
holiness, to the end we should all draw our holiness from thence. To which, this
sentence has respect, For their sakes I sanctify my self, Ioh. 17.19. Do
we at any time see our selves unclean? we need not seek far for the
remedy, for it is in our own flesh.
Thus then if we be profane and unclean, we need not seek that remedy
far off, which is offered us in our own flesh. If any had rather take it of
the unity in the Spirit (which is far otherwise between the faithful and
the Son of God than it is commonly between men) I do not gainsay it.
Notwithstanding I willingly follow that which is the most received; seeing it
is not contrary to reason.

For which cause he is not ashamed to call them brethren.] This place here
alleged is taken out of the two and twenty Psalm. Now that Christ is there
brought in speaking, or David in the person of Christ, we have first of all
the Evangelists for witnesses, who do allege many verses of this Psalm: as
namely these, They parted my garments among them: They gave me gall for my
drink: Also, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? Afterward even the
thing it self shows it. For in the history of the passion, we may see a
lively image of all things there mentioned. And the conclusion of the Psalm,
which is the vocation of the Gentiles, cannot be referred to any other than to
Christ. All the ends of the earth shall turn unto God, and all the families of
the Gentiles shall bow before him: The kingdom is the Lords, and he shall rule
over the Gentiles. The truth of all these things is only in Christ, who did not
enlarge Gods kingdom in little or narrow places, as David did, but has spread
it through the world, whereas it was before shut up within certain bounds and
limits. Wherefore this place here alleged is also questionless spoken of him,
which he does very fitly; and uses a most significant word when he says, he
is not ashamed. For how great is the difference which is between him and us?
Surely he humbled himself very low, when he vouchsafed to call us his
brethren: who otherwise had bin utterly unworthy to be esteemed so much as his
vassals. The circumstance also does greatly amplify this wonderful favor of
his toward us. For Christ speaks in that place, It is no small honor that
Christ does us, in calling us his brethren.
not as a mortal man in the shape of a servant, but as being clothed with
immortal glory after his resurrection. Wherefore this title is no less
excellent, than if he had carried us up into heaven with him. As often therefore
as we hear that Christ calls us brethren, let us remember he does after a
sort clothe us with this quality, that with the name of brethren we might also
apprehend the blessed life, with all the heavenly benefits contained therein.

Moreover, it is to be noted what office Christ takes upon him, to declare the
name of God: which began at the publishing of the Gospel, and is daily
continued by the office of the Pastors. Whence we gather, that when the Gospel
is preached, it is to bring us to the knowledge of God, to the end his goodness
might be magnified and extolled amongst us. Also we may note, Christ the author
of the Gospel.
that Christ is the author of the Gospel, howsoever it is offered unto us
only by men. And that is it which S. Paul says, 2. Cor. 5.20. that he, and
the rest of the Ministers are Ambassadors for Christ: when they do beseech us
in the stead of Christ to be reconciled to God. Which ought to affect us with
great reverence toward the Gospel. For truly we are not to think that they
are men which speak, but Christ rather by their mouth. For even then when he
promised to preach the name of God unto men, he ceased to converse with them
in the world, and yet questionless he attributes not this office unto himself
for nothing. He has therefore fully accomplished it by his Apostles and
Ministers.

In the midst of the congregation.] It yet appears more manifestly by this,
that the publishing of the praises of God, is always contained in the Gospel.
For as soon as it is given us of God to know him; infinite are his praises
which do sound in our hearts and ears. Let us also note herewithall that
Christ by his example does exhort us to sing these praises publicly, in such
wise as they may be heard of many. For it is not sufficient that every one of
us apart should give thanks for the benefits we have received of God, unless
by testifying the same our thankfulness openly, we do thereby mutually stir up
one another to do the like. And verily this doctrine is as a sharp goad in
our sides to prick us forward to praise God with a more ardent affection of
heart, seeing we hear that Christ sings first, and does as it were give us
the tune to make us sing after him.

And again, I will trust in him.] Paul alleges, Romans 15.9. applying it to
the kingdom of Christ, touching the vocation of the Gentiles, Psalm. 18.50.
the order of the argument thereof sufficiently shows that David there speaks
under the person of another. For we shall scarsely see the least shadow of
that great and excellent majesty in David, which is there set forth with most
magnificent terms. He boasts himself to have been placed the head over the
nations: and that even strangers, and such as knew him not should of themselves
submit their necks under him at the only hearing of his renown. Now David
indeed with force of arms conquered some people which were neighbors and very
well known, and made them tributaries unto him: but what is this in regard of
the conquests of many other Kings besides? Moreover, where is that voluntary
subjection? where are the people so far off, that he should not know them?
In a word, where is that solemn publishing of the grace of God among the
Gentiles, whereof the conclusion of the Psalm makes mention? It is Christ then
undoubtedly who is ordained to be the head over diverse nations, to whom
strangers should submit themselves even from the ends of the earth, and that
only by being moved with the report of him, that is to say, being touched with
the hearing of the word. For they are not constrained to receive his yoke by
force of arms, but being subjected by force of the doctrine, they willingly
offer themselves to obey him. We do also see in the Church that same fained and
dissembling profession, whereof the Psalm speaks. For many in all times do
profess themselves to be of Christ; but it is not from the heart. Let us hold
this then as a thing certain, that the text of this Psalm which the Apostle
alleges is fitly and properly expounded of Christ. But what is all this to
the present purpose? and want. Howbeit in one point we differ from Christ: that
is to say, he did voluntarily submit himself to those infirmities; which are
imposed upon us by necessity. Yet this ought greatly to imbolden us to trust
in God, because we have Christ for our Captain and Master. For who shall fear
to go astray following his steps? We need not fear, I say, that our faith
which we have in common with Christ should be in vain, seeing we know it
cannot be deceived.

Behold here am I and the children etc.] It is very certain that Isaiah in
this eight chapter speaks of himself. For howsoever it be true that he gives
the people hope of their deliverance, and that the promise which he published
was not received as a thing of any certainty: yet to the end the infidelity
and obstinacy of the people should be no discouragement unto him, the Lord
commands him to seal up that doctrine which he had taught, among a very few
of the faithful. And it is as much as if he had said, the doctrine which thou
have delivered is rejected of the greater part, yet there are some
notwithstanding (although a little handful indeed) which will receive it.
Isaiah staying himself upon this answer, takes courage again unto him, and
protests that he and the disciples which God has given him, are always
ready to follow God. Now it remains to show how the Apostle applies this
sentence to Christ. First of all, there is no man of sound judgment which will
deny, but that which is there spoken as touching the Lord, who should be a
stone of offense to the kingdom of Judah and Israel, was fulfilled in Christ.
And in very truth, like as the return and deliverance out of the captivity
of Babylon, was as a beginning and figure of that principal deliverance which
was achieved unto us and to the fathers by the outstretched arm of Christ: so
also there were then so few even among the Jews which enjoyed this benefit of
God; that only a small remnant were saved. Now that was a foretelling as it
were and a sign of their blinding which was to ensue: by which it is now come
to pass that in rejecting of Christ, they have therewithal rejected God also,
and have worthily perished. For we must note that the promises as touching the
restoration of the Church, whereof the Prophets make mention; began when the
Jews were brought out of captivity, and does also reach even to the kingdom
of Christ. As also the Lord himself in bringing back the people from thence,
had this end, that the Church should continue even to the coming of his son,
by whom at the last it was truly and firmly established. Seeing it is so,
God speaks not only to Isai, when he commands him to seal up the law and the
testimony: but in his person he commands the same to all the Ministers of his
word, who should fight against the incredulity of the people: and therefore it
especially belongs to Christ, who should be assailed of the Jews with a more
obstinate and furious rebellion, than all the Prophets were which were before
him. Nay do we not see that those who have succeeded Israel, and call
themselves by the name of Christians, have not only rejected his Gospel, but
do also furiously set themselves against him? But howsoever the doctrine of
the gospel be esteemed a stone of offense to those that are in the bosom of
the Church, yet God will not have it fall to ruin for all that; but will
rather command it to be sealed up among his Disciples. And Christ in the name
of all the Doctors, as their head, or rather as the only Doctor who guides us
by their ministry, pronounces that although we see such a desperate
unthankfulness in the world, yet there shall always be some which shall yield
themselves obedient unto God. Thus you see how this place of Isaiah is fitly
applied unto Christ. And thereupon the Apostle gathers that we are one with
him, because he associates us with himself, when he offers himself, and us
together with him, to his father. For they who obey God under one and the same
rule of faith, make also one self same body. Could any thing be said more
properly for the praise of faith, than when we are made companions with the
son of God, who exhorts us by his example, and shows us the way? Wherefore
if we follow the word of God, we know assuredly that we have Christ for our
guide: contrariwise those who turn from the obedience of the word, do nothing
at all belong to Christ. Is there any thing, I pray you, more desirable than
this: to wit, that we consent with the Son of God? Now this consent and
agreement consists in faith: it follows therefore, that by infidelity we
dissent from Christ, which is the most detestable thing that can be. This word
children, which in many places of the scriptures signifies as much as servants,
is taken here for Disciples.

Which God has given me:] In these words is noted out unto us the first cause
of obedience, to wit, that God has adopted us to himself. Christ brings none
to the father but those whom he has given him. Now we know that this donation
depends upon the Eternal Election: because those whom the father has ordained
unto life, those he commits to the tuition of his son, to the end he may
conserve and keep them. And that is it which he says, Ioh. 6.37. All that the
father has given me, shall come unto me. Therefore when we feel that we can
submit our selves unto God in obedience of faith, let us learn to attribute it
wholly unto his mercy, because we would never otherwise have submitted our
selves to be brought to him by the hand of Christ. Moreover this doctrine does
furnish us with singular matter of Confidence; for who would tremble under the
protection and safeguard of Christ? who is he that having such a keeper would
not boldly despise all danger? And truly when Christ says, Behold me, and my
children, he fulfils that indeed, which he elsewhere promises, That he will
not suffer any of those whom he has received of his father to perish. Ioh.
10.28. Lastly, let us note from hence, that although the world do furiously
reject the Gospel, yet notwithstanding the sheep of Christ will always
acknowledge the voice of their shepherd. Wherefore let us not be dismayed,
though almost all people and nations of the world do reject it; seeing Christ
will gather those that are given into his custody. If the Reprobate plunge
themselves into death by their impiety, the plants which God has not planted
are thereby plucked up, Matthew. 15.13. In the mean while let us not doubt but
that he knows his own, and that the salvation of them all is sealed up in him,
to the end none should escape him. The foundation of God remains sure, and
has his seal, The Lord knows who are his. 2. Tim. 2.19. Let us then content
our selves with this seal.

14 For as much as the children are partakers of flesh and blood, he also
himself likewise took part with them that he might destroy through death, him
that had the power of death, that is, the Devil.

15 And that he might deliver all them, which for fear of death were all their
life time subject unto bondage.

FOr as much then as the children:] The son of God, says he, was made man;
to the end he might participate the same nature and condition with us. Could
he say any thing more to the purpose for the confirmation of our faith? for by
this it appears that he loves us with an unspeakable love. The fullness of
which love consists in this, that he took upon him our nature; that he might
thereby subject himself to the condition of death, for as he was God he could
not die. Now howsoever he touches the fruit of his death but in few words,
yet notwithstanding in these few he does express the matter, with wonderful
life and efficacy: how? he has so kept us from the tyranny of the devil,
that we are out of his danger: and has so redeemed us from death, that we need
not now fear it any more. But because there is no word which has not his
weight, let us yet a little more diligently examine them. First this destruction
of the devil, whereof he speaks, shows, that he has now no more power over
us. For howsoever the devil has force and power still, The Devils power
weakened and limited.
and deuiseth daily to work our destruction, yet notwithstanding the power
which he has to hurt us is weakened, or at the least limited. And doubtless
it is a great consolation, to be assured that we have to do with such an
enemy as has no power over us. Now that this is said in regard of us; we may
gather by the member following, which had the power of death, for the Apostle
would hereby give us to understand, that the devil is destroyed, in as much as
he reigned to our destruction. For this power is so called because of the
effect; for it is deadly to us, and brings forth destruction. He shows then
that not only the tyrranie of Satan is destroyed by the death of Christ, but
also that Satan himself has received such a wound, that we need now no more
to fear him, then if he were not at all. He speaks of the Devil in the
singular number, according to the custom of the Scriptures: not that we should
imagine there is no more but one, but because all of them together make one
body, which cannot be as we know, without an head.

All those which for fear of death] This place does very notably describe how
miserable their state and condition is who stand in fear of death: Death must
needs be terrible to as many as look upon it without Christ.
doubtless it must be very horrible and terrible to as many as look upon it
without Christ; because without him nothing is to be perceived therein but
cursednes. For from whence comes death but from the wrath of God inkindled
against sin? thence comes this bondage all our life long: that is to say,
that anguish and continual disquietnes wherein poor souls are imprisoned.
For the judgment of God does always present it self before our eyes by the
knowledge and guilt of sin: now Christ by bearing our curse upon him has
freed us from this fear, when he took away whatsoever was fearful in death.
For howsoever necessity be laid upon us to pass through death, yet
notwithstanding both in life and in death we are at peace, We have peace both
in life and in death, because Christ is our guide. He has profited but little
that has not learned to contemn death.
and secure; because we have Christ for our guide. And if any cannot quiet his
mind by the contempt of death, let him know that he has profited very little
as yet in the faith of Christ. For as too servile a fear proceeds from the
not knowing the grace of Christ; so is it a certain and sure note of
infidelity in whomsoever it is. Death in this place does not only signify
the separation of the soul from the body, but also the punishment which is
sent us of God in his anger: so as this word comprehends even eternal
damnation it self. For where the fault and transgressions stand in Gods sight
untaken away, there does hell also forthwith present it self.

16 For he in no sort took on him the Angels nature, but he took on him the
seed of Abraham.

17 Wherefore in all things, it behooued him to be made like unto his brethren,
that he might be merciful, and a faithful high Priest in things concerning
God, that he might make reconciliation for the sins of the people.

18 For in that he suffered and was tempted, he is able to succor them that
are tempted.

FOr in no sort] By this comparison he further enlarges the honor and
benefit which Christ has done us in taking of our flesh, for he never did so
much for the Angels. In as much then as there was greater need of special
remedy to repair that exceeding fearful ruin of mankind, it was the good
pleasure of the Son of God herein to manifest the excellent and incomparable
pledge of the love he bare us, which might not be communicated; no not to the
Angels themselves. Now in that he has preferred us before the Angels, was it
for any excellency that was in us above them? No in no wise, but only in
regard of our misery. Wherefore there is no cause why we should glory as if
we were more excellent than the Angels, unless it be because the heavenly
Father has showed more mercy to us than he has done to them: the which we
have good cause to confess, to the end the Angels with admiration may behold
from above so great bounty powered forth upon the earth. Whereas he says in
the present tence, he takes not, or took not, I refer it to the testimony
of the Scriptures, as if it did represent that before our eyes which had been
before witnessed by the Prophets. Moreover, this only place suffices to
overthrow Marcion, the Maniches, and all such railers, who deny Christ to be
true man, begotten of man's seed. For if he only bare the figure of a man; he
often appeared so in old time under the form of an Angel, and then where was
the difference? But because it cannot be affirmed that even Christ was indeed
a very Angel clothed with their nature: therefore it is rather said that he
took the nature of man, than of the Angels. The Apostle therefore speaks of
this nature, and shows that Christ having taken flesh, was true man, so as now
in two natures there is the unity of the person. For this place does nothing
at all favor Nestorius, who forged two Christ's, as if the Son of God had not
been true man, but had only dwelt in the flesh of man. We see that the Apostle
had a far other meaning. For he meant to show that we have a brother in the
person of God, because of the participatio^ of one self same nature with us.
Wherefore not contenting himself to call him man, he says he was begotten of
the seed of man. He expressly names the seed of Abraham, to get the more credit
to that which he says, because it is taken out of the Scripture.

Wherefore in all things it became him] We must consider two things in Christ
his humane nature: that is to wit, to the end he might be a merciful and a
faithful high Priest. The which words I expound thus, to the end he might be
merciful, Merciful.
and so by consequence faithful. For in an high Priest, whose office is to
appease the wrath of God, to succor the miserable, to raise up them that are
fallen, and to comfort the weary; mercy is exceeding necessary, which the
feeling of the same things begets in us. For it will never be that those who
are always at their ease, should be touched with the anguish of another. For
doubtless that which Virgil the Latin Poet says, is taken from the ordinary
custom of men. Knowing what grief is in mine heart,
I learn to pity another smart.
Not that the Son of God had any need to be instructed, or framed to a
merciful affection by having experience of our troubles and afflictions: but
because we could not be persuaded of his gentle and inclinable affection to
help us, unless he had been exercised with our miseries. For this, as all the
rest was done in regard of us. As often then as we are pressed with any kind
of calamity whatsoever, let us remember that nothing befalles us whereof the
Son of God has not experience in himself, that he might have compassion
upon us: and let us not doubt but that he will assist us even as if he
himself suffered with us. This word faithful, Faithful.
signifies truth and vprightnes. For it is the contrary to a dissembler, or
one that discharges not the duty of his office. The experience that Christ
has had of our miseries does so bow him to compassion, that he is careful to
entreat the help of God for us. But what more? Intending to make the
purgation and satisfaction for our sins, he took our nature upon him, to
the end that we might have in our flesh the price of our reconciliation: and
last of all, that he might bring us together with himself into the Sanctuary
of God, by the right of nature which we have together in common with him. By
the things which should be done concerning God, he means whatsoever tends
and appertains to our reconciliation with God. Now because the first entrance
in unto God is by the liberty of faith, we have need of a Mediator which may
remove all doubtings away from us.

For in that he suffered, etc.] temptation signifies in this place nothing but
experience or trial: and to be able, is taken to be fit, inclined, or disposed.

CHAP. III.
1 Therefore holy brethren, partakers of the heavenly vocation, consider the
Apostle and high Priest of our profession Christ Jesus:

2 Who was faithful to him that has appointed him, even as Moses was in all
his house.

3 For this man is counted worthy of more glory than Moses, in as much as he
which has builded the house, has more honor than the house.

4 For every house is builded of some man, and he that has built all things is
God.

5 Now Moses verily was faithful in all his house as a servant, for a witness
of the things which should be spoken after.

6 But Christ is as the Son over his own house; whose house we are, if we
hold fast that confidence and that rejoicing of that hope unto the end.

WHerefore holy brethren,] He closes up and concludes the former doctrine
with a very profitable exhortation: to wit, ye the Jews should be attentive,
and bethink themselves well in acknowledging both what Christ is, and how
great he is. For when he called him heretofore the Doctor, and sovereign high
Priest; in those few words he made comparison between him, Moses, and Aaron:
now he comprehends both the members. Two offices of Christ.
For he adornes him with two titles, because he also has two offices, and
preheminences in the Church of God. Moses performed the office of a Prophet and
Teacher; Aaron the office of the high Priest: but both estates were given to
Christ. Wherefore if we will receive him as we ought, we must consider what he
is: we must I say, cloth him with his virtue and power, least in stead of him
we take some vain shadow and imagination of Christ. First of all, this word
Consider, has his weight: for it signifies that diligent attention is to be
given to this matter, because it cannot be contemned without a fearful
punishment ensuing: and then that the true knowledge of Christ suffices to
chase away, yea to cause all darkness and errors to vanish Now to the end he
might quicken them up to a more earnest affection and study; he admonishes
the^ of their own vocation; as if he should say, God has not done you a small
favor in calling you to his kingdom. It remains then that you fix your eyes
upon Christ, The only way to secure the calling of the faithful, is to shroud
themselves under the wings of Christ.
as upon your leader and guide in the way. For the calling of the faithful can
no other way be secured, unless they wholly gather themselves under Christ.
And therefore let us not imagine that this is said only to the Jews, but that
it is a general doctrine propounded to all those who desire to come to the
kingdom of God. Let such look diligently to Jesus, because he is the only
master of our faith, and has confirmed it by his sacrifice. For Confession is
here taken for faith. And it is as much as if he had said, that the faith which
we seem to hold is vain and unprofitable, unless it be applied to Christ.

Who was faithful.] A lawful calling.
For God only ought to be heard, as the whole scriptures does testify. For
this cause Christ protests, that the doctrine which he brings is not his, but
his fathers: Ioh. 7.16. And in another place he says, he that receives me,
receives him that sent me. Luke 9.48. For we speak of Christ, who as he is
clothed with our flesh, is the minister and servant of God, to declare those
things unto us which are given him in charge. Now as the calling of Christ is
of God, Faithfulness in performing the work of this calling.
so besides that, he does also carry himself faithfully and sincerely in the
same; which is a thing requisite in all true ministers, to the end they may
have audience and authority in the Church. Now if both are to be found in
Christ, then assuredly we cannot despise them, but God in all of them must of
necessity be despised. As Moses was. Leaving a little his speech of the
Priesthood, he comes now to deal with the Apostleshippe. For although the
coueuant of God contains two parts: to wit, the setting forth of the doctrine,
and the real confirmation thereof, if we may so speak: the exact perfection
of the Covenant should not otherwise be fulfilled of Christ, unless both of
them do appertain unto him. The Author of this Epistle then having made
mention of the one, and the other, he has also at the last by a brief
exhortation quickened up the faithful to attention. But he enters now into a
more large treatise, and fuller handling of these things, and begins at the
charge and office of the Doctor: therefore also he compares him with Moses
only. Whereas he says in all his house, it may be referred to Moses: but I
had rather refer it to Christ, to the end he may be said to be faithful to
his father in the whole government of his house. From whence it follows that
none are to be accounted of the Church of God, but those who acknowledge Christ.

For this man is counted worthy, etc.] Least he might be thought to make Moses
equal with Christ, he shows how he is much more excellent then Moses, which
he proves by two arguments, for Moses was so appointed over the Church, that
himself was always a part and member thereof: But Christ being the master
builder, Moses in governing of others, was also governed himself, because he
was but a servant: Tim. 3.15. Now because it is composed and built of the
faithful, therefore every of them is called a living stone. 1. Pet. 2.5. and
sometimes also vessels and instruments by which the house is decked and
garnished. 2. Tim. 2.20. There is not any one which is so absolute over others,
that himself in the mean while should not be a member and comprehended under
the body. God only is he which builds, and ought to be preferred far
above his building and work. Now God dwells in Christ, so as whatsoever is
said of God, appertains unto him. Moses was no less a master builder than S.
Paul, who gives himself this title, the common order of others; for, he was so
the true temple of God, that therewithal himself was the God which dwelt in
it.

And he that has built all things, etc.] S. Paul says of Christ, that he is
the head by whom all the body linked and coupled together by every joint for
the furnishing thereof, takes increase according to the operation, in the
measure of every part. Ephesians. 4.15. For this cause he says often, that the fruit
of his ministry is a work of God. To be short, if we judge as the truth is,
although God do use men as the means to build his Church, yet it is he only
notwithstanding which does perfect al things: for the instrument diminishes
nothing from the praise of the workman.

Now Moses verily was faithful, etc.] Moses, but so, as he himself still was
subject thereunto as well as others. But howsoever Christ took upon him the
form of a servant, yet he is Lord and Master notwithstanding, under whom every
knee is to bow: Philip. 2.10. He was appointed heir over all things, as we
heard in the first chapter of this Epistle. For a witness of the things, etc. I
expound these words plainly thus, Moses as an Herald and a publisher of this
doctrine, which should be manifested to the ancient people according as the
time would bear; did also therewithal give witness to the Gospel, for the
preaching whereof the fit time was not yet come. For truly it is very apparent
that this perfection of wisdom which is contained in the Gospel, is the end
and accomplishment of the law: and it seems that the Greek word which is in
the future tence, which we translate should be spoken; or which were to be
spoken, requires this exposition. Now the sumine is, that Moses did faithfully
teach the people those things which God had given him in charge; yet so, as a
certain measure was limited, beyond which it was not lawful for him to pass.
God has heretofore spoken unto us diverse ways, and at sundry times by the
Prophets, yet he deferred the clear revelation of the Gospel to the fullness
of time.

Whose house we are.] Paul in the 1. to the Romans, after he had told them in
his Preface, that he was appointed the Apostle of the Gentiles, adds in the
6. verse, that the Romans to whom he wrote were of the number of them, and all
to the end he might obtain authority with them. Even so now does the author
of this Epistle, exhort the faithful Jews, who had made profession of Christ,
to persevere in the faith; to the end they might have place in the household of
God. He had said before that the house of God was under the rule of Christ: and
now he adds this admonition to very good purpose, telling them that they shall
have a place in this house of God, if so be they obey Christ. But in regard
they had before begun to receive the Gospel, he ioynes this condition, if
they holdfast that confidence, and that rejoicing, Hope, the constancy of faith
etc. for I take this word hope for faith. And truly hope is nothing else but
the constancy of faith. He puts assurance and rejoicing, the better to
express the virtue of it. Staggerers, no true believers.
And from hence we gather that those who faintly and staggeringly do consent
unto the Gospel, are nothing less then true believers. For faith cannot be
without a quiet and peaceable mind, Two effects of faith.
which brings forth a constant boldness of rejoicing. For faith indeed has
alwais these two effects joined with it, to wit boldness, and rejoicing: as we
have said in the fifth to the Romans, and in the third to the Ephesians. To
which, as all the doctrine of the Papists is contrary, so if they had none
other false doctrine but this alone; it would rather destroy the Church of God,
then build it up. For they not only darken the truth, by their inventions, but
openly condemn this confidence, whereof the Apostle speaks, of presumption.
As if it were not lawful for a man to hold that he is consecrated to be the
temple of God. And besides, what assurednes of confidence and boldness could we
have thereof, when men know not what to believe? Now this infolden faith, which
they have forged of their own heads, is nothing else but a license to wander
and stray out of the right way. We are therefore admonished out of this place
always to profit and to go forward even till death, because our whole life is
but a race.

7 Wherefore (as the holy Ghost says, Psalm. 95.8. chap. 4.7.
to day if ye shall hear his voice,

8 Harden not your hearts, as in the provocation, Numb. 14.22. Exodus 17.2.7.
according to the day of temptation in the wilderness,

9 Where your fathers tempted me, proved me, and saw my works forty years
long.

10 Wherefore I was grieved with that generation and said, They err ever in
their heart, neither have they known my ways.

11 Therefore I swear in my wrath, if they shall enter into my rest.)

12 Take heed, brethren, least at any time there be in any of you an evil
heart, and unfaithful to depart away from the living God:

13 But exhort one another daily, while it is called to day, least any of you
be hardened through the deceitfulnes of sin.

HE still exhorts them to obey Christ in his word. And to the end his
exhortation might have the more weight, he confirms it by the testimony of
David. For when he was to touch them to the quick, it was needful he should
press them in the person of another, least he might offend them. If he had
plainly reproched the infidelity of their fathers, they would not so willingly
have heard him: but in that he sets David as it were to tell them of it, the
matter is so much the less odious. Now his drift in few words is this, that as
God from the beginning would that his voice should be obeyed, and could not
bear stubbornnes, and obstinacy, but did sharply punish it; so also at this
day if we prove not good scholars under him, he will punish our obstinacy no
less severely than he did theirs. Moreover, the words depend one upon another
till you come to the 12. verse. To the end therefore the scope of the text may
the better be understood, the words which begin at the seventh verse to the
twelfth, the first of them being excepted, must be enclosed with a parenthesis.
But let us now come to the handling of every point in order.

As says the holy Ghost.] David's name. And it is good and profitable also to
accustom our selves to such manner of speaking, to the end we may be put in
mind that the words which are cited out of the books of the Prophets, are not
of men, but of God. Now because this sentence, To day if ye will hear his
voice, is a part of the verse that went before: some have not translated it
amiss; Would to God you would this day hear his voice. It is certain that
David having called the Jews the people of God and the sheep of his pasture,
does from thence forthwith infer, that it is good reason they should hear
the voice of God. For speaking there to them whom he had called to sing the
praises of God, and to celebrate his goodness, he by and by admonishes them
that obedience is the principal service that he requires, and that he
preferres it far before all sacrifices. The first point is then that they
should obey the word of God.

Harden not your hearts.] None can soften the hardness of our hearts but God only.
to wit, when we shut the gate against his grace. True it is that we have
already hearts of stone, and every one of us has brought this hardness with us
from our mothers womb, neither is there any but God only who can soften and
correct them. Notwithstanding whereas we repel the voice of God, we do it
with a witting and willing obstinacy, and not by any other instigation: and
whether this be a truth or no, let every man's conscience testify. Wherefore
the holy Ghost does justly reprove al unbelievers, for opposing themselves
against God and for that they themselves are masters and authors of their own
obstinacy: least they should lay the fault upon some body else.
Notwithstanding it cannot be gathered from hence, that on the contrary the
liberty to frame our hearts to the obedience of God is in our power. For it
will always necessarily come to pass unto men to harden their own hearts,
till such time as another heart be given them from heaven. For as we are by
nature inclined to malice, so we will never cease to resist God, till such time
as we be tamed and brought under by his hand.

As in the provocation,] It was needful for two causes that the disobedience
of their fathers should be remembered unto them. David; to the end they also to
whom he addresseth his speech might not be given too much to the following of
their fathers steps. From hence we may gather a general doctrine, to wit, how
far we ought to follow our fathers: that is to say, even so far forth as
their authority does not turn us from the only one God. For if ever any
fathers were worthy of honor, the Jews doubtless obtained the first place
among others. How far the example of our forefathers is to be followed,
And yet notwithstanding David gives express charge to their children, to
take heed how they grew like them. And for mine own part I make no doubt but
he has regard here to that which is written in the 17. of Exodus. For David
does here use two words, which Moses shows were given to the place, because of
that which happened: to wit, Meriba, which signifies contention or strife: and
Massah, which signifies tentation: for they tempred God, saying, that he was
not in the midst of them, because they lacked water, Exodus 17.7. and also
strife, because they contended with Moses. Now although they had showed many
examples of their incredulity, David notwithstanding chooses this principally,
because it was the most memorable among many others: as also because that
according to the order of time it followed all the rest of the temptations, at
leastwise for the greater part, as we may see by the fourth book of Moses
called Numbers, where there is a continual succession of many temptations from
the 11. chapter to the 20. Now this is written in the twentieth; which
circumstances make the offense much more heinous. For what ingratitude is it
that having had experience of the power of God, they should yet continue to
contend and strive so malapertly with him, and should give no credit to him at
all? He has then put one kind for all. This word to tempt, is taken in the
ill part, as we use to say, to distrust with despite. For although God had many
times succored them, notwithstanding forgetting all he had done for them, they
asked in scorn where his virtue and power was become?

And proved me, and saw my works.] This member must be thus resolved;
notwithstanding that they had proved me, and seen my works. For he
aggrauates the crime of their wickedness, because they had profited no better,
though they had been taught by so many experiences. For it was a marucilous
beastlines that they made none account of Gods power which was so sure and
approved. That which follows of forty years, is joined in the Psalm with
that which is said by consequence. For we know that the Apostles in alleging
the Scriptures had regard rather to the substance, than to be curious about
words. And God himself also when he complains that this people vexed him by
the space of forty years, it was because so many benefits as he had
bestowed upon them, had not been auailable to bring them under. For although
God showed himself good every day even to those which were unworthy of it,
yet they would not cease to rise up in rebellion against him: From thence
proceeded the continual wrath of God, as if he should say, they have not
provoked me once, or twice; but have continued their naughtiness forty
years long. Generation, signifies an age, or the men of an age.

And said, they err always, etc.] they err always, because he saw no hope
at all of amendment.

Therefore I swear in my wrath.] his rest, in the which they should have
rested. For they had been strangers and pilgrims in the land of Egypt, they
wandered through the desert: but the land of Canaan, should have been their
perpetual inheritance, according to the promise. And God calls it his rest,
in respect of the promise: because we never find a firm and stable rest, till
we come where we are gathered by the hand of God. Now the right of the sure
possession was grounded upon this that God had said to Abraham, I will give
this land to thy seed, Genesis 12.7. In that God swears; the heinousness of
their sin is so much the more aggrauated with the greater vehemency. For it
is a sign that the wrath of God is the more inflamed. They shall never enter,
this is a kind of oath, in which somewhat must be supplied, as an Imprecation,
or some such like thing when men speak: but when God himself speaks, it is
as much as if he should say, let me not be taken to be true of my word, or let
me not hence forth be believed if it be not so. Notwithstanding these manners
of speaking, wherein somewhat is wanting, admonishes us to fear, and tremble;
least we presume lightly to swear, as commonly men are wont upon every
trifling occasion, even with horrible execrations.

But as touching the present text, we are not to think that they were then
first of all cast out from entering into the land, when they tempted him in
Riphidim. They were excluded long before: that is, from the time that the spies
brought them ill tidings, whereby they withdrew their affections from passing
over into that land. God therefore does not say here, that this tentation was
the first cause for the which they were put by, from enjoying of Canaan; but it
signifies that they could scarcely be humbled by any correction, but still
added sin upon sin. And by this means he shows that they had well deserved
to be so rigorously dealt withal by him, because they ceased not to augment
his wrath more and more by their transgressions: as if he should say, this is
the generation to whom I have denied the inioying of the land which I had
promised them; who for forty full years together have showed themselves still
to be foolishly obstinate by innumerable offenses.

Brethren take heed least there be in any of you, etc.] I had rather retain
that which the Apostle has put word for word; an evil heart of infidelity:
then to seek a periphrasis. By this he signifies that infidelity shall be
joined with perverse malice, if so be after they have tasted of Christ, they
shall turn away from his faith. For he speaks to them who had already
learned the rudiments of Christianity. And therefore he by and by adds, to
depart away. For a man cannot revolt but he must needs break his faith. He also
immediately shows the remedy to prevent this falling away: to wit, if they
exhort one another. Faith must often be repaired, beat, and a vakened: or else
it will fall, wa^e cold, and become arousy.
For as we are all naturally inclined to that which is evil, so we have all
need of diverse helps to keep us in the fear of God. If our faith be not
often repaired it will fall: if it be not heat, it will wax cold; if it be not
awakened it will fall a sleep. He would then that they should whet up one
another by mutual admonitions, least Satan by his subtle means should get
within their hearts, and by his secret deceipts should turn them away from
God. Which manner of speech is to be well considered. For we fall not into this
mischeife, to resist God at the first choppe: but Satan makes his entry upon
us by little and little, till he get us snared in his nets; and then being
blinded, we enter into an open rebellion.

This evil therefore is to be remedied betimes: for there is not one of us but
is subject to this danger; because none are so easily deceived. Now from this
falling away, proceeds the hardening of the heart. We may see by this how
necessary it is to be continually provoked and stirred up by exhortations. For
the Apostle not only commands all in general to take heed, but he would
they should be careful in such wise of the salvation of every member, that by
their negligee^e they should not suffer any one of the^ to perish, who were
once called. And herein he performs the office of a good shepherd and pastor,
who ought so to watch for the salvation of the whole flock, that in the mean
time, there do not any one of his sheep perish for want of his care.

Whilst it is called to day.] David to his purpose. For he shows that this
same to day, whereof mention is made in the Psalm, ought not to be only
restrained to David's time, but also comprehends all that time wherein it
pleases God to speak unto us. Wherefore even as often, and as many times as
it pleases him to open his sacred mouth to teach us, let us remember this well,
To day if ye will hear his voice. According to which, S. Paul teaches, that
the acceptable time in which God hears us, is whilst the gospel is preached;
then is the day of salvation wherein he will be ready to succor, 2. Cor. 6.2.
Now we ought to take this opportunity: It is dangerous to neglect opportunity.
for if by our negligence we suffer the same to ouerslippe us, it will be in
vain to bewail the loss of it, when it shall be taken away from us. And
therefore Christ says, walk whilst ye have the light, the night will
quickly approach: Ioh. 12.35. Thus then this word whilst, does covertly show
that our opportunity will not last always, if we be slack to follow God
when he calls. God now knockes at our door: if we open not unto him, it will
come to pass that he also will shut the gate of his kingdom against us. To
be short, the sighs of those who despise that grace which is now offered unto
them, will be all too late. Therefore, seeing it is unknown whether God will
continue his call till to morrow, let us not delay. He calls to day, let us
by and by answer him. For there is no faith, but where there is this readiness
to hearken and obey.

14 For we are made partakers of Christ, if we keep sure unto the end, that
beginning, wherewith we are vpholden.

15 So long as it is said, Psalm. 95.8. Numb. 14.37.
to day if ye hear his voice, harden not your hearts, as in the provocation.

16 For some when they heard provoked him to anger, howbeit not all of them
that came out of Egypt by Moses.

17 But with whom was he displeased forty years? was he not displeased with
them that sinned, whose carkesses fell in the wilderness?

18 And to whom swear he that they should not enter into his rest, but unto
them that obeyed not?

19 So we see they could not enter, because of unbelief.

For we are made etc.] It is not enough to make good beginnings, unless we go
on therein to the end.
yet as though they were come to the last degree of perfection, think they
have no need to go any further forward in profiting. And so it comes to pass
that they do not only faint in the midst of their course, yea almost at their
very first entrance, but they also turn head to run the contrary way. It is
true this objection has a fair show, what would ye more, are we not come to
Christ? But if it be so that by faith we possess him, we must persevere still
in it, to the end our possession may be for ever. Thus then Christ has given
us the enjoying of himself under this condition, that we hold fast so great a
benefit till death, even by the same faith by which we were admitted into the
participation of him.

Therefore he says, the beginning, signifying thereby that faith is only
begun. Seeing the Greek word Hypostasis sometimes signifies assurance, it may
be taken in this signification. Nevertheless, I think it not from the purpose
to use the word substance, as some others have translated: although I do
interpret it a little otherwise. For others think that faith is called by that
name, because the whole being of man without it, is nothing else but vanity:
but I say it is because we rest in it: there being none other stay whereupon
we can stand. And this epithet sure, agrees thereunto very well. For we
shall be sure and out of danger of falling, if so be we be built upon faith.
The sum then is, that it behooves that the faith whereof we have but the
beginning, do still go on forward, firmly and constantly unto the end.

So long as it is said, etc.] so long as it is said, do import as much as if
he should have said; Seeing it is so that God cease not to speak, it shall
not be enough once to have received the Gospel with a cheerful readiness, if
we yield not our selves obedient, perseuering in the same teachablenes day by
day even unto the end.

For some when they heard, etc.] David speaks so of the Fathers, as if all
those which were of that time had been unbelievers. Yet no doubt but there were
some mingled among the wicked, that had the fear of God. The Apostle does
recount the same; but yet it is with a little asswaging of that which was
spoken somewhat sharply by David, to the end we might know that the word is
propounded generally to all, that all might obey with one consent: and that
incredulity is justly to be condemned in all people, when the body is rent
and shiuered by the revolt of the greater part. Moreover whereas he says,
that some provoked him to wrath, although the number of them were far greater
than of the others; he does it not only least the word should be too
gaulling, but also to the end he might encourage the Jews to follow those who
believed. As if he should say, As God on the one side forbids you to follow the
incredulity of your fathers: so yet on the other side he proposes the example
of them that were godly, that their faith might be for you to follow. Thus he
mitigates his speech, which otherwise might have seemed somewhat too hard, if
he should have commanded them wholly to turn from the way of their fathers.
To come out of Egypt by Moses, signifies by the hand, and under the conduct of
Moses: because he was the minister of their deliverance. Now this is a close
comparison between the benefit of God conferred unto them by Moses, and of the
participation of Christ, whereof he spoke before.

But with whom was he displeased forty years? Paul shows in the tenth
chapter of the first Epistle to the Corint. God is never angry without just
cause.
5.6. So then look how many chastisements we read of to be come from God
upon the ancient people, so many heinous transgressions shall we find whereby
they provoked the vengeance of God to come upon them. Always bearing this in
mind, that infidelity was the chief and capital sin of all others. For
howsoever he puts it in the last place, now in coveting, now in murmuring, now
in whoring, now in profaning and polluting themselves with superstitions, even
till their frowardness was fully made manifest.

This unbelief then which they showed from the beginning, hindered them to
receive and enjoy the benefit of God, because the contempt of the word did
always provoke the^ to sin. And as by their incredulity they first deserved
that God should deprive them of that rest which he had promised them: so also
all the sins they committed afterward, proceeded from the same root. Moses
and Aaron, and such as they were, are comprehended within this number. Moses;
his faith was only shaken once, and that but for a moment. Likewise there is in
the words of the Apostle, the figure called Synecdoche; which is, when a part
is taken for the whole, or the whole for a part: which figure the scripture
often uses, as often as there is question of a multitude, or of the body of a
people.

CHAP. IV.
1 Let us fear "therefore, "or, then.
least at any time by forsaking the promise of entering into his rest, any of
you should seem to be deprived.

2 For unto us was the Gospel preached, as also unto them, but the word that
they heard, profited not them, because it was not mixed with faith in those
that heard it.

LEt us fear then.] The care of a good pastor.
least they be deprived of the blessing which is offered them. And again he
says, least any of you, signifying that his affection is to bring them all to
God, not one of them accepted: for such is the care of a good Pastor; that
whilst he studieth for the good of the whole flock, he is likewise watchful
over every particular sheep, that not any one of them through his default do
perish. Yea every one of us ought to have the same care over one another, and
to fear for other men's sakes, as well as for our own. Now this fear which is
here recommended unto us, Fear ought not to take away the assurance of faith.
is not to take away from us the assurance of faith; but it is to quicken us to
such great care, that by our negligence we should not become drousie. We must
fear then, not to bring us to wavering, or distrust; as if we were uncertain
of a good event; but least the grace of God which is offered us, become
unprofitable unto us. Now when he says, that by forsaking the promise, we
should seem to be deprived, he signifies, that none are deprived of it, but
they who putting grace away from them, have first renounced the same. For it is
so far off that God should repent him of his well doing, that on the
contrary he never cease to enlarge his gifts continually, if so be there be
not a contempt of his calling. This word then, signifies, that the falls of
others ought to instruct us to humility and vigilancie: as also S. Paul says,
These are fallen by unbelief; be not thou high minded but fear. Romans 11.20.

For unto us was the Gospel preached.] repeates hearing twice; Hearing prosits
no^, unless faith be joined with it.
to the end we might know that hearing will not profit us, though we have the
Gospel preached, unless faith be joined therewithal. Moreover here we are to
note the mutual relation which is between the word and faith: which is such,
as the one cannot be separated from the other; for if faith be separate from
the word, or the word from faith, neither of both will profit: not that the
efficacy of the word depends on us. For let the whole world be a liar, yet God
notwithstanding which cannot lie, Faith gives the word entrance in respect of
us.
will not cease therefore to be true. Tit. 1.2. But the word brings forth his
fruit no other way in respect of us, but when faith gives it entrance.

It is the power of God indeed to salvation; yet to none but the believers.
The righteousness of God is revealed therein, but it is from faith to faith.
Romans 1.16. The word preached is the power of God to salvation: yet none feel
the fruit but such as believe.
Thus it appears that we must always conclude, that the word, if it be
considered in it self, and of it own nature has his efficacy and is of
power to save men: but they only which believe do feel the fruit. But as
touching the first member, where I said, that there is no faith, where the word
wants, and that he who goes about to make such a divorce, wholly que^cheth
faith, and brings it to nothing: it is a thing worthy to be noted. For hereby
it appears, No faith without a promise.
that faith can be in none but in the children of God, to whom only the promise
of adoption is offered. For what faith have the devils, to whom there is no
promise made of salvation? what faith also have all wicked men, who know not
what the word of God is? wherefore hearing must always go before faith: and
that in such wise, that we well consider that it is God and not man that
speaks.

3 For we which have believed, do enter into rest, as he said to the other, As
I have sworn in my wrath, if they shall enter into my rest: although the
works were finished from the foundation of the world.

4 For he spoke in a certain place of the seventh day on this wise, And God
did rest the seventh day from all his works. Deuteronomy. 5.14. Genesis 2.2.


5 And in this place again, if they shall enter into my rest.

6 Seeing therefore it remains, that some must enter thereinto, and they to
whom it was first preached, entered not therein for their vnbeleefs sake:

7 Again he appointed in David a certain day, by Today, after so long a time
saying as it is said, This day if ye will hear his voice, harden not your
hearts.

8 For if Jesus had given them rest, then would he not after this have spoken
of another day.

9 There remains therefore a rest to the people of God.

10 For he that is entered into his rest, has also ceased from his own works,
as God did from his.

HE begins now to polish and to amplify the place of David, which he had
alleged; hitherunto he has handled it according to the letter, as they say;
that is, in the own natural sense: but now he amplifies it by way of decking
or polishing of it. Therefore now he rather alludes to the words of David, than
making any interpretation of them. In the tenth to the Romans, S. Paul
amplifies a place of Moses two ways. The place is, Say not, who shall ascend
up into heaven, etc. neither is there any inconvenience, if in applying the
scripture to that which is presently handled, one do illustrate by way of
similitudes that which was spoken more plainly. Now the sum of all these
words is, that whereas God threatened in the Psalm, to deprive them of his
rest, the same threatening also appertains unto us: for at this day we are
called by the Gospel to a certain kind of rest. The chiefest difficulty of
this place is from hence, that many have offered violence unto it, to draw it
to another sense: for the Apostle has none other meaning, but by setting of a
certain rest before us, to spur us on forward to the desire of it; as also
to prick us on with fear, that we be not turned aside from inioying of it
through infidelity. In the mean while he shows, that the rest into which we
now enter, is of much greater excellency than that of the land of Canaan. But
let us declare the whole matter orderly.

For we which have believed, etc.] Although the works were finished from the
foundation of the world. To make a definition what our rest is, he sends us to
Moses, that is to wit, that God rested from all his works by and by after the
creation of the world: and lastly he concludes, that the true rest of the
faithful which shall endure for ever, is, when they are conformed unto God.
Now as it is indeed the chief felicity of man to be united with his God: so
ought it also to be the first end unto which all enterprises, deliberations,
and works should be referred. To what end all our enterprises, deliberations,
and works ought to be referred.
He proves this, because God who is said to have rested, denied his rest long
time after to the unbelievers: which he should have done in vain and without
cause, if thereby he had not been willing that the faithful should also rest
after his example. And therefore in the sixth verse he says, It remains that
some must enter into it: for if it be a punishment (as has been already said)
of infidelity not to enter: the entrance then is open to the believers. But
that which he by and by after adds has some more difficulty, to wit, that
another day is assigned unto us in the Psalm, because the first were excluded.
Now it seems that David's words have no such meaning. For they only signify
that God punished the infidelity of the people, by depriving them of the
possession of the land. I answer, that the consequence is good: to wit, that
the same which was taken away from them, is offered unto us: seeing the holy
Ghost admonishes us to take heed that by our own fault we be not punished as
they were. Therefore the Apostle rightly says, that the promise is renewed to
the children, because the infidelity of the fathers left the possession empty
and void: and all to this end that the children might obtain that which the
fathers despised.

For if Ioshuah had given them rest, etc] He denies not but David took this
rest for the land of Canaan, into which Ioshuah brought the people: but he
denies that it was the last rest unto which the faithful did aspire: it being
as well common to the people of that time as to us now. Certainly they had a
higher respect than unto that land: for whereas the land of Canaan was so
highly esteemed, Why the Jews desired so much to enter into the land of
Canaan.
the faithful did it for no other cause, but in regard it was unto them an
image and pledge of the spiritual inheritance. So then, after they had
obtained the possession of it, they were not to rest in the view thereof, as
though they had been come to the fulness of their desires, but were rather to
meditate of the spiritual meaning thereof. Those of whom David spoke in the
Psalm, enjoyed the possession: but yet in the mean while they were admonished
to seek a better rest elsewhere. We see that the land of Canaan was a rest but
only in shadow and figure, in such wise as it was needful for the faithful
to look further.

In this sense the Apostle says that rest was not given them by Joshua:
because the people entered into the land under his conduct, to the end they
might with the more cheerful and ready affection aspire unto heaven. And by
this it is easy to gather what difference there is between them and us. For
although they and we have one end set before us unto which we ought to aim:
yet they had more external figures, by which they were helped: which figures
we have not, We have no such need of shadows and sigures now, as the Jews
had.
neither is it needful we should; seeing the substance is plainly and
evidently set before our eyes. For howsoever our salvation consists yet in
hope, yet the doctrine whereupon it is grounded brings us directly to heaven.
Neither does Christ reach us his hand to lead us about by many circuits and
shadows, but with the same does lift us up thither by turning our senses from
this world. Now in that the Apostle separates the shadow from the truth and
substance, it is because he had to deal with the Jews, who rested too much
upon external things. Lastly, that there remains a rest to the people of God:
that is to say, a spiritual rest, whereunto God does daily call us.

For he which is entered into his rest.] We must go out of our selves to
attain true felicity. The sovereign good of man.
all was but lies and mere follies: because they held man still in himself,
whereas we must go out of our selves to attain true felicity. The
sovereign good of man then is nothing else but to be knit unto God. Then we
shall come unto it, when we are conformed according to the rule and pattern
which he sets before us in his person. Now the Apostle shows that this
conformity consists in this, that we rest from our own works: whereupon it
follows, that a man is made blessed when he renounceth himself. What is it
then to rest from our own works, but the mortification of the flesh: that is
to wit, when a man renounceth himself to live to God? For when we speak of
the rule of living well and holily, we must always begin at this, that man
being dead in himself, do suffer God to live in him: that he cease from his
own works, to give God place to work in him. For it must needs be
confessed that the life is then well ordered, when it is subject to God. Now
such is the corruption of our nature, that this will never be brought to pass,
until we cease from our own works. There is (I say) such a repugnancie
between the government of God and our affections, that he cannot work in us,
unless we rest. But for as much as the accomplishment of this rest is never
in this life, we must daily strive to come unto it. The faithful then do
enter into it, but it is upon condition that they profit daily in pressing to
the mark.

Moreover, I doubt not but the Apostle of set purpose alludes to the Sabbath
day, to the end he might withdraw the Jews from the external observation of
it. For the abolishing thereof cannot be understood, unless we know the
spiritual end for which it was instituted. And therefore the Apostle under
this one, aims at two things. For in praising the excellency of Gods grace,

11 Let us study therefore to enter into that rest, least any man fall after
the same ensample of disobedience.

12 For the word of God is lively, and mighty in operation, and sharper than
any two edged sword, and enters through, even unto the dividing asunder of the
soul and the spirit, and of the joints, and the marrow, and is a discerner of
the thoughts, and the intents of the heart.

13 Neither is there any creature, which is not manifest in his sight: but all
things are naked and open unto his eyes, with whom we have to do.

Having showed us the mark whereat we ought to aim, entrance into this rest,
to a strait course: he sets falling, as opposite thereunto: and so he continues
the similitude in both the members. Although he by and by makes an allusion to
the history, which Moses recites of those that fell in the desert, because
they had rebelled against God, Numb. 26.65. And therefore he says, after the
same manner of disobedience: signifying that the punishment of infidelity and
rebellion is represented before us, as it were in a painted table: also that we
should not doubt but the like will befall us, if we be found guilty of the
same infidelity. To fall, then is taken to perish: or to speak more clearly,
it is taken for the punishment, and not for the sin. But this metaphor is to
be referred both to the former word of entering, as also to the pitiful fall of
the Fathers, 1. Cor. 10.8.
by whose example he meant to terrify the Jews.

For the word of God is lively:] our mind (which S. Paul notwithstanding
commands, Ephesians. 4.23.) till our old man be slain by the stroke of this
spiritual sword. And therefore in another place the same Apostle says, that
the faithful are sacrificed to God by the Gospel, Phil. 2.17. why? because
they could not be brought under the obedience of God, unless their own will
were brought to nothing: neither could they otherwise receive the light of Gods
divine wisdom, unless the light of the flesh by wisdom were put out. As for
the reprobates, no such thing can be perceived in them, for either they proudly
contemn God speaking unto them, yea they spare not to deride him; or else they
murmr against his doctrine, and obstinately kick and spurn against it. The
hearts of the reprobates compared to the Anuill.
So that even as the word of God is an hammer, so have they also an heart as
the anuill, driving the blows back again, be they never so mighty. And
therefore it is impossible the word of God should pierce so far in them, as
to come to the division of the soul and of the spirit. For this cause it
seems that this title ought only to be restrained to the faithful; seeing
none but they do examine themselves thus to the quick. Notwithstanding the
cohere^ce of the text of the Apostle shows, that it is a general sentence,
which extends it self even to the reprobates. For although they be not
softened by it, but do set hearts of iron and steel against God and his word,
yet must they necessarily be shut up under their own condemnation. It is true
they laugh; but it is the laughter of an hostler, as they say; for they feel
themselves wrung as it were within: many shiftings and turnings they make that
they might not come near the judgment seat of God: but thither are they
drawn will they nill they, even by this word, against which they so proudly
exalt themselves. So then we may compare them to mad dogs, who although
they bite and scratch the chain, yet they gain nothing, because they still
remain fast tied therewith. Now howsoever this effect of the word does not
show it self at the first day, yet by the event at the last you shall know,
that the word is not preached to any man in vain. Verily it is a general
sentence which Christ pronounces when he says, The Spirit shall come and
reprove the world of sin, Ioh. 16.8. But how does the Spirit exercise this
reproof? Verily by the Gospel preached. Lastly, although the word of God has
not always this power in men, yet it has this power enclosed in it self.

Now the Apostle disputes here of the nature and proper office of it, only to
the end we might know that as soon as it has sounded in our ears, our
consciences are forthwith arraigned before Gods judgment seat, and found
guilty. As if he should say, If any man be of that mind that he thinks it
is but a beating of the air in vain when the word of God is preached, he
greatly erreth and deceiues himself. For the word is lively, and full of
secret efficacy, which leaves no part of a man untouched. This is the sum
then of these words, to wit, that as soon as the Lord has opened his sacred
mouth, all our senses ought forthwith to be open and to receive his word. Why?
because he will not speak in vain, as if his words should either vanish, or
fall to the ground, or as if no account were to be made of them: but he
speaks with efficacy to the consciences of men, that he might subject them
unto himself. The cause therefore why he gives such virtue to his word is,
that it might search all the parts of the soul; examine the thoughts, and
discern between the affections: in a word, that it might show it self to be
our Judge.

But here a new question may arise, to wit, Paul, that it is the ministry of
death, 2. Cor. 3.6.7. that it is a killing letter, that it brings nothing but
wrath, and such like. But the Apostle in this place also notes diverse other
effects. For as we have said, there is a lively killing of the soul, which is
done by the Gospel. Paul protests that his preaching was the sweet savor of
life unto life to the faithful, 2. Cor. 2.16.
and of death unto death in the unfaithful: so as God never speaks in vain,
but either he thereby brings his own to salvation; or else thereby casts the
wicked headlong into perdition. And this is the power of binding and losing
which the Lord committed to his Apostles, Matthew. 18.18. This is the spiritual
power whereof Paul glories in the 2. Cor. 10 4. And indeed it does never
promise us salvation in Christ; but on the contrary it openly denounces
vengeance to the unfaithful, who in rejecting of Christ, do plunge themselves
over head and ears in death.

Moreover, we must note that the Apostle speaks of the word of God as it is
brought us by the ministry of men. For these are but railings and pernicious
discourses of them who say, it is true that the inspired word has indeed his
efficacy, but the word which proceeds from the mouths of men, is dead and
without effect. I confess the efficacy proceeds not from the tongues of men,
neither consists it in the bare sound, but the efficacy is wholly to be given
to the Spirit of God: and yet notwithstanding all this lets not that the holy
Ghost should not manifest his power by the word preached. For in regard that
God speaks not personally himself, but by men; the Apostle does so much the
more insist upon this, that the word should not be received hand over head, or
in contempt because men are the ministers of it. Accordingly, when S. Paul
calls the Gospel the power of God, Romans 1.16. he does expressly adorn it
with this title of preaching; the which he saw to be a matter of reproach unto
some, and of contempt unto others. And where he teaches in another place, that
salvation is made ours by the doctrine of faith, he expressly gives it the
title of that which is preached, Romans 10.8. We see how God always does
precisely commend the doctrine which is administered unto us by men, to the end
he might hold us in the reverence and obedience of it. Preaching must not be
contemned.
Now in that the word is called lively, it must be supplied as having relation
unto us: which is the better understood by the second epithet: for in saying
this word is mighty, he shows wherein the life of it consists. For the
Apostles meaning is to show what the use of the word is in regard of us. Now as
touching the similitude of a sword, the Scripture uses it also in other
places: but the Apostle not content with the simple comparison, says, that the
word of God is sharper than any sword, yea than any two edged sword: because in
that time they commonly wore swords which had but one edge.

And divides between the soul and the spirit.] This word soul is often
taken for the spirit: but when the soul and spirit are joined together, then
the soul comprehends under it all the affections: and the spirit comprehends
the power or faculty of the understanding. And thus S. Paul desiring of God
that he would conserve the souls, 1 Thessalonians. 5.23.
the spirits and bodies of the Thessalonians pure and blameless unto the
coming of Christ, desires nothing else, but that they may continue pure and
chaste in mind, in will, and in all their external actions. Likewise when
Isaiah says, With my soul have I desired thee in the night, and with my
spirit have I sought thee in the morning: his meaning is that he was so attent
in seeking God, that he applied his whole mind and heart thereunto, Isai.
26.9. I know others do expound it otherwise; but I hope all that are of sound
judgment will easily agree with me. Let us now return to the present text.
The word of God reaches even to the dividing between the soul and the
spirit: that is to say, it examines the whole life of man. For it pearceth even
to the thoughts of the mind, and sounds the will, with all the desires of
the same. To the same end tends that which is added of the joints, and marrow:
for his meaning is, that there is nothing so hard or massy in man, nor nothing
so secret and hidden, but the efficacy of this word will reach into it.

And that is it which S. Paul means when he says, that prophecy serves to
reprove and judge men, even to the revealing of the secrets of their hearts,
1. Cor. 14.24. Truly howsoever it be the office of Christ to discover and bring
to light the secret thoughts of the heart, yet for the most part he does this
by his Gospel. The word then performs the office of a Judge: because it
plucks the spirit of man as out of a labyrinth in which before it lay
inwrapped, and kept it self close, and brings it forth into the Sun light,
to the end knowledge and judgment may pass upon it. For no darkness is so
thick as infidelity is: No darkness like insidelitie; nor any blindness to
hypocrisy: but the word preached discouers both.
and hypocrisy blinds after an horrible fashion. The word of God scatters
this darkness, and casts off this hypocrisy quite and clean. From thence
proceeds that discerning and judgment whereof the Apostle speaks; for the
vices which before were hidden under a vain pretense and appearance of virtue,
are now perceived and known, the deceit being taken away. Now although the
reprobates remain for a time hidden in their lurking holes, yet
notwithstanding in the end they feel that the light of the word shines even
thither, so as they cannot escape the judgment of God. And from thence arises
their murmurings and rage. For if they were not smitten with the word, they
would not manifest their fury as they do: they would rather scorn it, or
wind themselves out of the power of it: they would also be content to dissemble
the matter: but God will not suffer them to escape so. Therefore as soon as
they do begin to murmr at the word, or to be inflamed against it, they
thereby confess that they feel the force of it within them in despite of
their teeth, kick they never so much against it.

Neither is there any creature hid from him, etc.] This word And, is as much to
say in this place (in my judgment) as if he had said, For. And so to confirm
this sentence, That nothing is hidden in man, which shall not be judged by the
word of God; he takes an argument from the nature of God. No creature, says
he, can be hidden before God: nothing then is so deep in the soul, which shall
not be drawn into the light by his word, which resembles him that is the
author of it. For as it is the office of God to search the hearts, so does he
also exercise this knowledge and judgment by his word. The expositors not
taking heed to this: to wit, that the word of God is as a plummet, by the
which he dives into the bottom of men's hearts, and searches and feels
whatsoever is hidden therein, have offered violence to this whole text, and yet
were not able to wind themselves out. But all the difficulty is taken away if
you make the argument stand thus, That we are therefore to obey the word of God
purely and with a true affection of heart, because God who knows the hearts,
has assigned this office to his word to pierce even into the very deepest
thoughts of the same. They have also deceived themselves in the translation of
the Greek word, which is somewhat ambiguous. For they have translated, Of whom
we speak; where it ought rather to be turned, with whom we have to do. The
meaning whereof is, that it is God who offers himself unto us, or with whom
we have to do, and therefore we are to take heed we dally not with him as
with a mortal man: but to tremble as often as his word is propounded unto us,
because nothing is so secret which is not naked and manifest before his eyes.

14 Seeing then that we have a great high Priest, which is entered into heaven,
even Jesus the Son of God, let us hold fast our " or, confession.
profession.

15 For we have not an high Priest, which cannot or, which cannot have
compassion of our infirmities.
be touched with the feeling of our infirmities, but was in all things tempted
in like sort yet without sin.

16 Let us therefore go boldly unto the throne of grace, that we may receive
mercy, and find grace to help in time of need.

Seeing then that we have a great high Priest.] The second part of this Epistle.
The Apostle then having exhorted the Jews to receive the doctrine of Christ
with all obedience, does now show unto them what profit his Priesthood
brings. And this is the second member of his disputation in this Epistle. Now
he does very fitly join the Priesthood with the Apostleship, in that he
says, the end of them both is to bring us to God. He says, Then; because he
had touched this article also before, Chap. 2.17. and chap. 3.1.
to wit, that Christ is our high Priest: but because the efficacy of the
Priesthood is communicated unto us by doctrine only, it was needful to
prepare men's minds thereby to receive Christ. Those that profess themselves
scholars in the school of Christ, must learn what profit redounds unto them
by his priesthood: as also the use and end of it.
Now it remains that those who acknowledge him for their Schoolmaster, and
yield themselves teachable disciples under him, do also learn from his mouth,
or in his school, what profit his Priesthood brings, and what the use and
end of it is. He says in the first place, seeing we have such an high Priest,
even Jesus the Son of God, Let us hold fast our profession. Confession is
here taken for faith, as before chap. 3. Now because the Priesthood served to
confirm the doctrine, the Apostle gathers from hence that we have none
occasion to doubt or waver in the faith of the Gospel, seeing the Son of God
has ratified and confirmed it. For whosoever holds not this doctrine for sure
and steadfast, he dishonors the Son of God, and dispoyles him of the dignity
of his Priesthood. Such an excellent pledge I say, ought to give us so much the
more assurance; that without fear, we may rest our selves upon the Gospel.

For we have not an high Priest, etc.] tied to the Leuiticall Priesthood,
unless the Apostle had remedied the matter, by showing that the Son of God
is not only excellent in glory, but also uses a sweet and amiable goodness
toward us. He stays himself then in this article, when he says that he felt
our infirmities, that he might have compassion on us.

As touching this word compassion, I will not stand disputing too subtly
about it. For the question which some make is no less frivolous than curious,
to wit, whether Christ is now moved with our miseries or not? Truly the
Apostle had no intent to busy our heads with such idle speculations: but only
shows that we need not seek far for a Mediator, because Christ reaches
forth his hand unto us before we enquire after him. Secondly, that we need not
be terrified in regard of his Majesty, for he is our brother. Thirdly, that we
have no occasion to fear that he should not be touched with any compassion to
do us good as if himself had never tasted of miseries; for he has borne our
infirmities, to the end he might be the better inclined to succor us.

The whole speech then of the Apostle ought to be referred to the sense of
faith, because he does not so much dispute what Christ is in himself, but
rather what he is in regard of us. By this word of likeness, he means the
agreement of the nature; thereby signifying that Christ by putting on our
nature, has also taken our affections, not only to the end he might declare
himself to be true man, but also that he might learn by experience to give
succor to the afflicted. Not that the son of God had need of such rudiments
or instructions, but because we could not otherwise comprehend in our minds
the care which he has of our salvation. As often then as we are burdened and
faint under the infirmities of our flesh, let us remember that the Son of God
has both felt, and had experience of the like; to the end he might sustain us
by his power, that we should not be overwhelmed under them. But here it may be
asked, what he means by infirmities: for this word is taken in diverse
significations. Some think he means heat, cold, hunger, thirst, and such
other bodily infirmities: as also contempt, poverty, and the like, as we may
see in many places of Paul, but specially in the 2. Cor. 12.10. But their
opinion is the best, who with pouerties and outward miseries do also
comprehend afflictions of mind, as fear, sorrow, terrors of death, and such
like.

And indeed this restraint, without sin, should otherwise be in vain. For by
reason of the peruersitie of our nature, our affections are always vicious,
but they were exempt from all vice in Christ, because in him there was a
soueraign uprightness, and a purity most perfect. It is certain that
sicknesses, and pouerties, together with the things which are without us, are
not imputed as sins. Wherefore when he speaks of the infirmities which are
near unto sin, we need not doubt but he meant the affections of the Spirit,
to which man's nature is subject because of his infirmity: for herein the
condition of Angels is better than ours, that they are not subject to fear, or
sorrow; as also that they are not combred with cares, or with the fear of
death. Christ has willingly taken upon him these infirmities, and it was also
his pleasure to fight against them, not only to conquer them for us; but that
we should also be assuredly persuaded that he is near unto us, as often as we
feel any by experience of them. For this cause he was not only made man
essentially, but also took upon himself the qualities of man's nature. There
is always a restraint added, without sin: because we are evermore to observe
this difference between the affections of Christ, and ours: That Christ's were
always well ordered according to the true rule of justice: but ours, which
proceed from a troubled fountain, do always savor of their original
nature, because they are out of frame and disordered.

Let us therefore go boldly, etc.] face of God. And this is the principal
fruit of the spiritual doctrine, even to have full confidence to call upon
God: as one the contrary, all religion falls to the ground, All religion falls
to the ground: where assurance of salvation is taken from men's consciences.
where this assurance is taken away from men's consciences. From whence we may
easily gather that the light of the Gospel was quenched in the Papacy, where
the poor miserable people are commanded to doubt whether God will be gracious
and favorable, or whether he will be angry with them. They command men indeed
to seek God; but they show them not the way by which they may come unto him:
nay rather they even shut up the gate, which only gives them entrance. I
grant they confess that Christ is a Mediator in the General; but when it
comes to the point, they abolish the virtue of his Priesthood, and dispoyle him
of his honor. For this is a sure point, that where Christ is known indeed to
be the true Mediator, there forthwith does all doubtings vanish, that may any
way cause us to suspect whether we may have access unto God or no. Otherwise
the Apostles consequence in this place, We have such an high Priest which is
ready to help us, were to no purpose.

We ought therefore to go boldly to the throne of grace, with assurance and
confidence. For if we were thoroughly persuaded that Christ does willingly reach
us his hand, who is it that would not conceive full boldness to present
himself before this throne? That which I have said then is true, to wit, that
men do take the virtue of Christ his Priesthood away from him, as long as they
stand in doubt, and vex themselves in seeking Mediators here and there, as if
Christ alone were not sufficient: upon whose intercession whosoever rests
himself indeed, as the Apostle here commands, he may assure himself that
his prayers are heard. The foundation of this assurance is, that the throne of
God does not present such a majesty as should astonish us; but it is adorned
with a new title, that is to say, of grace: which always ought to be fresh in
our memories, when we fly the presence of God. For it cannot be but the glory
of God should swallowe us up by and by with despair, if that alone come into
our minds: and so, his throne shall be fearful unto us indeed. The Apostle
therefore to remedy this distrust, and to deliver our minds from fear and
trembling, does cloth it with grace, and gives a name unto it that might draw
us by the sweetness thereof. As if he should say, since God does hang out of his
throne an ensign of grace, and of his fatherly love toward us, we have no
cause to fear that his majesty should beat us back, or hinder us to go unto
him. The sum is, that we call upon God boldly with full confidence, since we
know that he is become favorable to us; and that we do this by the means of
Christ: as it is said, Ephesians. 3.12. By him we have boldness and confidence by
faith in him. We ought not to fear the throne of God, for it is hanged all
over with grace.
For when Christ receives us under his guard and protection, he covers the
admirable majesty of God with favor (which without him would be fearful) to
the end that nothing might appear there but grace and fatherly kindness.

That we may receive mercy.] This is not added without great cause, but
expressly to confirm and imbolden those that have need of mercy: Least any
being thrown down too far with the feeling of their misery; the way should
be shut by distrust against them. This manner of speech to find grace,
contains in it in the first place a most sweet doctrine: to wit, that all
those who resting themselves upon the intercession of Christ, shall call upon
God, shall be well assured to obtain mercy. In the mean while, the Apostle
does privily threaten all them which hold not this way, and signifies that God
will not hear them, because they have despised the only means whereby to
appease him. He adds, to help in time of need, that is to say, to obtain
whatsoever is needful for our salvation. Now this time of need, has respect
to the time of Gods calling us, according as S. Paul applies the place of
Isaiah, 49.8. to the publishing of the Gospel, Behold now the acceptable time.
2. Cor. 6.2. for the Apostle has respect to that day wherein god speaks to us.
So that if to day we hear God speak unto us, and we put off till to morrow;
the night will come, with the darkness thereof, in which we shall not be able
to do that which now we may: neither will it boot us any thing at all to
knock at the gate when it shall be shut.

CHAP. V.
1 For every high Priest is taken from among men, and is ordained for men, in
things pertaining to God, that he may offer both gifts and sacrifices for
sins,

2 Which is able sufficiently to have compassion on them that are ignorant, and
that are out of the way, because that he also is compassed with infirmity.

3 And for the sames sake he is bound to offer for sins, as well for his own
part as for the people.

4 And no man takes this honor unto himself, but he that is called of God,
as was Aaron.

5 So likewise Christ took not to himself this honor to be made the high
Priest, but he that said unto him, Thou art my Son, this day begat I thee,
gave it him: Psalm. 2.7. Psalm. 110.4.


6 As he also in another place speaks, Thou art a Priest for ever, after the
order of Melchisedec.

NOw every high Priest, etc.] all men are of one nature and flesh. But now he
touches another thing, to wit, that the Priest ought to support sinners with
compassion, because he is partaker of their infirmities. The Greek word which
the Apostle here uses, has been diversely expounded as well by Latins as
Greeks. For mine own part I think it is simply taken to apply himself to
compassion. True it is that all which is said of the Leuiticall Priests, agrees
not unto Christ. For we know that Christ was exempt from all contagion of
sin: wherefore he differs from others in this regard that he had no need to
offer sacrifices for himself: but it suffices that he also bare our
infirmities, being notwithstanding pure and void of sin. Thus as touching
the Priests under the law then, the Apostle says that they were subject to
humane infirmities: and therefore were feign to make reconciliation for their
own sins by sacrifices, that they might not only meekly bear with the
faults of others, but also might have compassion upon them. Now this part ought
so to be applied to Christ, that in the mean while we must carefully add
thereunto that exception whereof mention was made erewhile: to wit, that he
bare and tasted of our infirmities; but without sin. For although he were
always free from sin, yet notwithstanding the only feeling of those
infirmities, whereof he has spoken, were of sufficient force in him, to
incline his heart to succor us, and to make him gentle and ready to pardon
us; as also careful of our miseries. The sum is, that Christ is not only
our brother in regard of the union of our flesh and nature, but also by
partaking with us of our infirmities he is allured, nay fashioned and framed to
bear with us, and to be very lowly and gracious unto us. The Greek word
which we translate, who can, imports more than if we should say in our common
speech, is able, or, is mighty: for it is taken for one that is fit, or
capable. These words, the ignorant, and those that are out of the way, are
taken for sinners after the manner of the Hebrews. And of this we are to speak
more hereafter.

And no man takes this honor unto him, etc.] we have to note, first the
similitude, and then the diversity of it. The calling of God makes the office
lawful, for none can exercise the same in good sort as he ought, if he be not
created of God. This is common to Christ and to Aaron, that both were called of
God: but in this they differ, that in as much as Christ succeeded Aaron for a
new and diverse respect, and was ordained to be a perpetual high Priest, it
appears that the Priesthood of Aaron was but temporary, and to be abolished.
Now we see the Apostles drift. The right of the office of Priesthood was to be
reserved to Christ: he does it in showing that God is the author of it. But
this is not yet sufficient, unless it appears that the ancient Priesthood
ceased, to give place to this. He proves it, because we must have an eye to the
Condition whereunto Aaron was ordained a Priest (for it lies not in us to
stretch it further then Gods ordinance will bear) and he will by and by show
how long Gods will was, this first order should last. Christ then is a lawful
Priest, because he was ordained by Gods authority. What shall we say of Aaron,
and of those that succeeded him? Truly they had power and authority so far
forth as it was given them of God, and not as the same was attributed unto them
by the opinion of men.

Now although this be spoken in regard of the circumstance of speech which is
here handled; yet from hence may be gathered a general doctrine: to wit, that
no government is to be brought into the Church at the lust and pleasure of men,
Church government must not besquared according to men's appetites, but by the
commandment of God.
We must distinctly note both these points. For the Apostle speaks not here
only of persons, but also of the office. He denies, I say, that office which
men forge without commandment, and the express ordinance of God, to be holy
or lawful. For as it only belongs to God to govern the Church, so does he
also wholly reserve unto himself both the power of limiting the way, and the
rule of the administration thereof. From whence I conclude, that the Priesthood
of the Popedom is a bastard Priesthood, because it has been forged in the
shop of man's invention. What one text of scripture is there wherein God
commands that we should now offer sacrifice unto him for the purgation of
sins? neither has he ordained that Priests should be created to this end.
Although the Pope then ordain his shauelings for to offer sacrifice, Christ
would not run before he was sent, but waited for a calling from his father
the Apostle says that we are not to hold them for lawful: unless
peradventure they have some new privilege to exalt themselves above Christ:
who yet durst not take this honor to himself of his own motion, but waited
for a calling from his Father.

This also ought to have place in regard of persons; to the end no private man
should take this honor to himself, unless public authority go always
before. I speak of the offices which otherwise are ordained of God. It may so
fall out sometimes I deny not, but he which shall not be called of God
(howsoever for that cause he is the less to be approved of) ought
notwithstanding to be suffered, if so be his office be holy and approved of
God. Those that have a lawful outward calling, are not rashly to be rejected,
though they want the
For often times many thrust in themselves, and enter into this function by
ambition, or other unlawful and wicked means, who are no way assured of their
calling: and yet notwithstanding they must not be rejected by and by; but
especially then, when it cannot be done by the public censure of the Church.
Two hundred years before the coming of Jesus Christ, there were filthy
corruptions, and great abuses which reigned in the manner of governing, or
rather in the usurpation of the high Priest: and yet notwithstanding as
touching the office it self, the power and authority of the state remained
still, by reason the calling was of God. The persons were endured, because the
liberty of the Church was oppressed. Whereby it appears that the great and
chiefest fault is in the kind of the office: that is to wit, when men take upon
them of themselves to invent a calling in the Church, which God has no way
commanded. So much the less then are those Priests which the Pope has made,
to be endured; who to prove themselves such as ought to be held for sacred and
holy, do with full mouth incessantly allege their great titles: and yet
notwithstanding they have chosen them themselves, without asking either
counsel or leave of God.

Thou art my son, this day have I begotten thee.] It may seem that this
sentence is far fetched. For although it be granted that Christ was begotten
of God the Father, does that conclude therefore that he was ordained a Priest
by him also? But if we consider to what end Christ was revealed to the world,
we shall easily perceive that this quality does necessarily appertain unto
him. But withal, we must also call that again to mind which we have said in
the first chapter: to wit, that this generation of Christ, whereof the Psalm
speaks, is a testimony that the Father has given him to men. Wherefore this
word is not put here to signify a mutual relation between the Father and the
Son, but is rather to be referred unto men, to whom he was manifested after an
high and excellent manner. But what is it that God has manifested unto us in
his Son? is it without honor, or without any power at all? nay, has he not
rather manifested him to be such a one as is fit to be the Mediator between
God and men? And therefore this generation or begetting, contains also the
Priesthood.

As also in another place he says, etc.] David, as if it were he that should
be at the right hand of God: It is too blockish an impudency. We know it was
utterly unlawful for Kings to meddle with the Priesthood. And therefore Vzziah
for this only crime, to wit, for usurping this office which no way belonged
unto him, did so provoke the wrath of God, that he was stricken with leprosy,
2. Chro. 26.18. It is certain therefore, that this is not meant of the person
of David, nor of any of the kings which succeeded him. If they reply that
Princes are sometimes called by the name Cohenim, which is here used: I
confess it, but withal I deny that this agrees with this present place: for
the comparison leaves no ambiguitie: Melchizedec was the Priest of God. The
Psalm witnesses that this King, which he has placed at his right hand, shall
be Cohem, after the order of Melchizedec. Who sees not that this is to be
understood of the Priesthood? for it being a very rare example, and scarcely to
be found, that a man should be Priest and King together; at the least a thing
new and unheard of among the people of God: therefore he proposes Melchisedec
for an example of the Messiah. As if he should say, The Royal dignity shall
not hinder him from exercising the office of the Priest also: why? because the
figure was foreshewed in Melchisedec. And truly those amongst the Jews which
are not altogether impudent, do agree that this is here spoken of the Messiah:
moreover they doubt not, but these words do tend to the praise and
magnifying of the Priesthood.

Whereas the Greeks have translated after the order; in the Hebrew it is word
for word As, or, according to the form, or after the fashion of. Which
confirms my former speech, to wit, because it was a thing usual among the
people, that a man should be king and Priest both together, he therefore sets
this ancient example before them, by which the Messiah was figured: as for the
rest, the Apostle will handle it more particularly in the progress of the text.

7 Who in the days of his flesh did offer vppraiers and supplications, with
strong crying and tears unto him that was able to save him from death, and was
also heard in that which he feared.

8 And though he were the Son, yet learned be obedience, by the things which
he suffered.

9 And being consecrate, was made the author of eternal salnation unto all them
that obey him.

10 And is called of God an high Priest after the order of Melchisedec:

11 Of whom we have many things to speak, which are hard to be uttered,
because ye are dull of hearing.

WHo in the days, etc.] the days of his flesh, should be here taken for the
life present. Whence it follows, that by this word flesh, he means not the
substance, but the quality: as 1. Cor. 15.50. Flesh and blood shall not
inherit the kingdom of God. These fantastical spirits then do altogether
dote, who have dreamed that Christ is now dispoyled of his flesh, because it is
here said, When he was in the flesh. For there is great difference between
being a true man (although in the blessed estate of immortality) and to be
subject to the miseries and infirmities of man, which he endured whilst he
lived in this world: but now has put them off, being entered into heaven.

Let us come to the point of this text then. Christ's prayer was heard, and yet
he suffered death.
Christ which was the Son, sought for remedy to his Father, who was heard;
and yet notwithstanding endured death: that by this means he might learn
obedience. There is no word here which has not his weight. For, by the days
of his flesh, he means that the time of our miseries is determined and
limited; which must needs bring great solace unto us. It were a troublesome
estate, yea and impossible to be borne, if some hope were not set before us
that we should come from under the burden thereof in time. The three things
that follow do also bring great consolation. Afflictions do no^ exempt us out
of the number of Gods children.
What is he now that dare refuse this state and condition? there is another
reason: to wit, that if we be pressed with adversities, yet we are not
therefore out of the number of Gods children: because we see him that was the
only natural Son of God to go before us. For we are the children of God,
only by the benefit of adoption: yet he who of right may attribute this honor
to himself, receives us into his society.

Did offer up prayers and supplications, etc.] that he speaks of that prayer
which the Evangelists recite: to wit, Father, if it be possible, let this cup
pass from me, Matthew. 26.39. Also another time, My God, my God, why have thou
forsaken me? For the Evangelists recite, that in this second prayer there was a
great cry: In the first, we must not imagine that his eyes were dry, whilst
drops of blood trickled from his body, by reason of the great sorrow he was
in. For it is most certain he was then shut up under extreme anguishes. We
need not doubt then whether he were pressed with true sorrows or no, seeing he
did thus earnestly pray unto his Father for succor. But what use has this?
Truly that as often as we are pressed under temptations, we learn to fasten
all our senses upon the Son of God, who felt the like. Seeing he goes
before us then, What we are to do in temptations of spirit.
we have no cause to be out of heart. And withal we are admonished not to
sue unto any for deliverance out of our miseries, but to God alone. For what
better rule of prayer can we have than the example of Christ? Now he directed
his prayer to none but to his Father: O my Father (says he) if it be possible,
etc. Matthew. 26.39. And the Apostle shows us that we are to do the like, when
he says that Christ offered up prayers to him that was able to save him from
death. For hereby he signifies that Christ prayed rightly: because he had his
recourse to him that was truly bountiful, who is God only. His cry and
tears do also admonish us to be fervent and the more attent when we make our
prayers. Prayer ought to be seruent.
For we ought not to go to prayer retchlesly, but with seruencie of spirit.

And was heard in that which he feared. ] his, is not added in the Greek:
moreover the word which follows signifies, of, or some word like unto it.
Seeing then that the Greek Noune which is put here signifies oftentimes
rather fear, or care: I doubt not but the Apostle meant to show that Christ
was heard in that which he feared: that is to say, albeit he was overwhelmed
with sorrows and adversities, yet he fell not under the (...) flesh, Our
obedience chiefly appears in the denial of our selves.
to yield to that which is pleasing unto God, then, and never till then, does
our obedience appear. This I say is a singular and evident testimony of
perfect subjection, when as we prefer death it self, to which we are called
of God, (although it brings fear and horror) before life, which all of us do
rather naturally desire.

And being consecrate was made, etc.] Christ was consecrated into his office
of Priesthood, by the cross.
As if the Apostle should have said, the suffering of the cross and death, was
unto Christ the solemn manner of his consecration. By which word he signifies,
that all his passions tended to our salvation. And thus it appears, that they
were so far off from diminishing any thing from his dignity and excellency,
that rather they were crowns of glory upon his head. Now if our salvation be
of any pretions account with us, oh in what honor and estimation the^ ought we
to have the cause thereof. For he deals not here only with the doctrine of
example, but mounts up higher: to wit, that Christ by his obedience has wiped
out all our transgressions. Thus he was made the cause or author of our
salvation, because he obtained righteousness for us with God: and by a contrary
remedy blotted out the disobedience of Adam, with his own blood. This word
sanctified, or consecrate, agrees much better to the rest of the text, than if
it were translated, to perfect, or to fulfill. True it is, that the Greek word
signifies both; but because he here speaks of the Priesthood, he mentions
this word consecrate, or sanctify, to very good purpose. And Christ also
himself so speaks in Ioh. 17.19. For their sakes sanctify I my self. Whence
it appears, that this consecration ought properly to be referred to his humane
nature, in which he performed the office of a Priest; as also in which he
suffered.

To all those that obey him:] If we be desirous then that the obedience of
Christ shall profit us at all, let us imitate it. For the Apostles meaning is
in this place, that the fruit thereof comes to none but to those which yield
him obedience. If we would have Christ's obedience profitable unto us, we must
learn to follow his example therein.
And in this speech he also recommends faith unto us. For neither is Christ,
nor any of his benefittes made ours, but fo far forth as we receive both
him and them by faith. Although it seems he has put this word all, to show
that none are shut out from this salvation, if so be they yield themselves
teachable and obedient to the Gospel of Christ.

And is called of God, etc.] Melchisedec, which he has already touched; and
that it was needful to awaken the spirits of the Jews to the greater
attention: he so enters into the digression following, which continues till
the beginning of the seventh chapter, that yet therewithal he holds himself
still to the point. In the beginning of which digression he protests, that he
has many things to say concerning this matter, dulnes was such as they must be
prepared thereunto; that his speech might not be in vain, nor his labor
lost. He tells them that the matter is hard; not to discourage them, but rather
to whet their attention. For even as the easines of that which we have to
learn, does easily beget slothfulnes, and negligence; so on the contrary
where the matter is more obscure and hard, it stirs up in us the greater
heedfulnes to hearken. Notwithstanding he attributes the cause of the
difficulty not to the thing it self, but to them. For it is certain that God
always speaks in such cleerenes; avoiding all obscurity, or doubtfulnes of
speech, Gods word is hard, not so much in it self as by reason of our blindness
and carelesnes.
that his word is called our light: but the brightness of it is smothered by our
darkness. Which partly comes to pass by the blockishnes and dulnes of our
mind, and partly by our own carelesnes. For howsoever we be more than very
dullards to understand the doctrine of God; yet besides, there is also the vice
of untowardness planted in our affections. For we rather apply our minds to
vanity, often feel our selves to be hampered. As touching this word, of
whom, it is not to be referred to Christ, but to Melchisedec: yet not as to a
private man, but to him that was the figure of Christ, and in some sort
representing his person.

12 For when as concerning the time ye ought to be teachers, yet have ye need
again that we teach you what are the first principles of the word of God: and
are become such as have need of milk, and not of strong meat.

13 For every one that uses milk, is inexpert in the word of righteousness:
for he is a babe.

14 But strong meat belongs to them that are of age, which through long
custom have their wits exercised to discern both good and evil.

FOr when as concerning the time, etc.] This reprehension is marucilous quick
and pearcing, and all to the end he might rouse up the Jews to shake off
their slothfulnes. He says it is a very absurd thing, yea and a great shame
for them, to be yet but nouices, when as concerning the time they ought to
have been great Doctors. You should be able to teach others (says he) but you
are not yet capable your selves of the first principles. For you do not
understand so much as the least points of the Catechism. And to the end he
might shame them yet more, he speaks of the first rudiments, which is as if he
should have said, The A, B, C. True it is that we are to learn all our life
long: He is a man of knowledge that knows how much he wants.
because he is rightly said to be a man of knowledge, that knows how much he
yet lacks of perfect understanding: but yet we are so to profit in learning,
that we do not always stick fast in the beginnings. And we are to take good
heed that that which Isaiah says be not fulfilled in us; Precept must be upon
precept, precept upon precept, line unto line, line unto line, here a little,
and there a little, Isai. 28.10. But we are rather to look to our selves, that
our proceedings in knowledge be answerable to the time wherein we first began
to learn. We should not only count the years but the days since we began
to learn, that so we may look to our proceedings in knowledge.
And questionless we are not only to reckon the years, but even also the
days one after another; that so every one may stir up himself to daily
profiting. But few there are that take any account of themselves concerning the
time past, or that quicken up themselves for the time to come: and therefore
are we worthily punished for our idleness, because the greater part stand at a
stay even in the childrens Catechism. We are also further admonished that by
how much the more understanding any has received, so much the more is he
bound to strain himself to communicate thereof unto others: that so none be
wise for himself in particular only, but that every one employ his talent to
the mutual edification of his brethren.

And are such as have need of milk.] S. Paul in the 1. Cor. 3.1. uses the
like Metaphor, where he blames them for the same fault: or at the least not
very much diverse from this. For he says they were not able to bear strong
meat, because they were carnal. Milk then is the doctrine of the first
beginnings, to enter them which as yet know nothing. S. Peter takes it in
another sense, when he wills us to desire the sincere milk of the word, that
we may grow thereby, 1. Pet. 2.2. For there is a double infancy: one in
malice, and another in understanding. S. Paul says in another place, Be not
children in understanding, but in malice, 1. Cor. 14.20. So then they which are
so tender and delicate that they cannot receive a doctrine a little higher than
the first rudiments, are called children by way of reproach. For the true use of
the ministry of the word is to frame us in such wise as we may grow to be
perfect men, according to the measure of the age of the fulness of Christ; and
not to be as children wavering and carried about with every wind of doctrine:
as it is said, Ephesians. 4.13.14. I grant, those are to be borne with that have
not yet tasted Christ, if so be they be not yet capable of strong meat: but if
he which ought to increase according to the time he has had, does
notwithstanding always continue in his infancy, he is unworthy to be
pardoned. For we know that Isaiah brands the reprobates (...) among them I
say, there is no less carelessness, than if the doctrine were wholly forbidden
them. Thus for want of exercise we are blindfolded still, and destitute of all
sound judgment.

CHAP. VI.
1 Therefore, leaving the doctrine of the beginning of Christ, let us be led
forward unto perfection, not laying again the foundation of Repentance from
dead works, and of faith toward God.

2 Of the doctrine of Baptismes, and laying on of hands, etc. of the
resurrection from the dead, and of eternal judgment.

WHerefore leaving, etc.] After he has sharply reproved them, he exhorts
them that in leaving the beginnings, they go on forward aiming to the mark.
For he calls the doctrine of beginning, the rudiments by which the ignorant
are to begin, when they be received into the Church. Now in that he commands
them to leave such rudiments, or beginnings, his meaning is, not that the
faithful should forget them, but that they should not stick fast, as it were,
in them: the which is better known by the similitude of laying the foundation,
which by and by follows. For when an house is to be builded, men must never
shrink away from the foundation: and yet notwithstanding it were a mockery to
be always about that, and to go no further. For howsoever the foundation of
the building is to be laid, yet he which shall always busy himself about
that, never fitting or preparing matter wherewithal to raise up the building;
shall he not busy himself foolishly, and in vain? In a word, as we are to
begin by the foundation, so the labor of the master builder is to hasten
that the house also be raised up in due season. The like is it in
Christianity. For the foundation is laid in us by learning the rudiments: but
by and by after a more high doctrine ought to follow, which may finish up the
whole building. Wherefore those who always stick in the first rudiments, go
forward but ill; because they propound no end unto themselves. As if the master
workman employing his whole labor about laying the foundation, We ought not
to content our selves with good beginnings, but to aim to perfection.
should utterly neglect to build any thing upon it. And therefore he would have
our faith so laid in the beginnings, that it should still rise higher and
higher, until at the last it be perfected by continual increases.

Of repentance from dead works.] He had respect here to the form used in the
Catechism. From whence we may draw a probable conjecture that this Epistle
was not written by and by after the publishing of the Gospel, but rather after
there was some form of government used in the Churches. The form was, that he
which was newly instructed in religion, made a confession of his faith, before
he was baptized. Now there were certain articles, the which the Pastor
demanded of them: as may be seen by many testimonies of the ancient Fathers:
and the examination was chiefly upon the confession of faith, which we
commonly call the Symbol or Creed of the Apostles. This was as the first
entrance into the Church, for those who being already of age, meant to become
Christians; as those who before were strangers from the faith in Christ. The
Apostle makes mention of this custom, because no long time was given to such
new conuerts to be taught in the first grounds of the Christian religion. For a
schoolmaster teaches children their A, B, C: because they might forthwith
come to know greater things.

But let us consider what the Apostle says. He names repentance and faith,
wherein consists the whole perfection of the Gospel. For what other thing does
Christ command to his Apostles, but that they should preach faith and
repentance? Luke 24.47. And therefore when S. Paul meant to protest that he had
faithfully discharged his duty, he alleges for himself that he had
diligently and continually taught them from house to house, to imprint these
two things in the hearts of his Auditors, to wit, Repentance toward God, and
faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ, Act. 20.20.21. May it not seem absurd
then that the Apostle should command them here to leave faith and repentance,
wherein they were to persevere the whole course of their lives? But in adding
from dead works, he shows that he speaks of the first repentance, when men
began first to be Christians. For although every sin be a dead work, because
it begets death, or, because it proceeds from the spiritual death of the
soul; yet notwithstanding all the faithful which are already regenerate by
the Spirit of God, are not properly said to repent themselves of dead works.
True it is, that regeneration is but begun in them; but how little soever this
seed of the new life be in them, yet that is the cause why they are no more
reputed dead in his sight. Wherefore the Apostle comprehends not all repentance
in general, wherein we ought carefully to meditate, and to exercise our selves
day and night: but he only means that beginning of repentance, by which those
who being even newly converted to the faith, did enter into the way of newnes
of life. Also the word faith, signifies that brief sum of the doctrine of
godliness, which is commonly called the Articles of the Faith. Hereunto also
appertains, The resurrection from the dead, and eternal judgment. For these
two things are the greatest secrets of the heavenly wisdom: yea even the very
mark of all our religion, whereat we ought to aim all our whole life. But
because one and the same thing is taught otherwise to the rude and ignorant,
than to those that have profited somewhat already; the Apostle notes the
common form of questioning; The points of catechism used in the Primative
Church.
Do thou believe the resurrection of the dead? Do thou believe there is
an eternal life? These are things fit for children, and only for once:
wherefore to come and demand the same things again, were but to go backward.

Of the doctrine of Baptismes:] read them together; of the doctrine of
Baptismes: although I expound it otherwise than others do: to wit, that it is
a form of speech by way of apposition, as the Grammarians call it: as thus,
not laying again the foundation of repentance, of faith toward God, of the
resurrection from the dead: which is the doctrine of Baptismes, and the
imposition of hands. Therefore if these two members, The doctrine of Baptismes,
and the laying on of hands, be enclosed by a parenthesis, it will agree best
with the order of the text. For if we read them not by way of apposition,
there will an absurdity follow, in that one and the same thing is twice
repeated. For what doctrine is there in Baptism, but that which he here
recites of faith toward God, of repentance, of eternal judgment, and such
like? Moreover, Chrysostom thinks the Apostle puts Baptismes here in the
plural number, because they did in a manner abolish the first Baptism by
returning to the first rudiments. To which opinion I agree not: for this
doctrine is not appointed to many Baptismes. But he calls Baptismes, the
ceremonies and form which they used in public Baptism, or the days
appointed to baptize.

He joins the laying on of hands with Baptism, because as there were two
orders of those which were newly instructed, so was there also a double
ceremony. For those who were strangers came not to Baptism, till they had
made confession of their faith: therefore as touching these, the order of
instruction and catechizing went before Baptism. But the children of the
faithful, in as much as they were adopted from their mothers womb, and
appertained to the body of the Church, by the right of the promise, they were
baptized from their infancy: and after they were grown to some discretion,
and had been instructed in the faith, they also presented them to be publicly
catechized. Thus it was done to these after Baptism: but then an other sign
was added, to wit, the imposition of hands. This only place witnesses
sufficiently that the original of this ceremony came from the Apostles: which
notwithstanding has since been turned to superstition: which the world has
almost always been accustomed to do with good and holy ordinances, erring and
degenerating still to corruptions. For some have made us believe it is a
Sacrament, whereby the spirit of regeneration is conferred. By which fancy
they have dismembered Baptism: for they have transported that which is proper
unto it, to the imposition of hands. Know we then that this ceremony was
instituted by the first authors, to the end it might be a solemn manner of
prayer, as S. Augustine calls it. True it is that by this sign they approved
of the faith of those who were already out of the state of infancy: but they
meant nothing less than thereby to rent and tear in pieces the virtue of
Baptism. The institution of laying on of hands is to be retained: but the
superstition must be correcled.
Wherefore we are at this day to keep the pure institution, and to correct
the superstition. Besides, this place serves us to prove the Baptism of
little children. For to what purpose should one selfsame doctrine be called,
to some the doctrine of Baptismes, and to others the laying on of hands:
unless that the latter sort were instructed in the faith, after they had
already received Baptism, so as there remained no more unto them, but the
imposition of hands?

3 And this will we do if God permit.

4 For it is impossible that they which were once lightened, and have tasted of
the heavenly gift, and were made partakers of the holy Ghost,

5 And have tasted of the good word of God, and of the powers of the world to
come:

6 If " or, fall again.
they fall away, should be renewed again by repentance: seeing they crucify
again to themselves the Son of God, and make a mock of him.

ANd this will we do, etc.] Behold here a terrible and fearful threatening: but
the Apostle thus thunders, to the end the Jews should not flatter themselves
too much in their carelesnes, by despising the grace of God. As if he should
say, there is no staying till to morrow, because this opportunity of going
forward will not last always. For it is not in the power of man to pass from
the entrance unto the mark, as often as pleases him, but the finishing of our
course is a particular gift of God.

That those which were once enlightened,] impossible, for difficult, or, for a
thing that very rarely comes to pass: the which is far wide from the
signification of the word. There are some others, howbeit more in number; who
restrain it to that repentance, whereby new Conuerts were wont to be prepared
unto baptism in the ancient Church. A like matter; as if the Apostle had
enjoined them that were converted to fast, or to do some such like thing.
Moreover what great thing should the Apostle have said, if he had denied that
that kind of repentance which is but a dependence of Baptism, might be renewed
again? He threatens an horrible vengeance of God to fall upon all those that
reject the grace of God which they have once received. What gravity or weight
were then I pray you in this sentence, and what terrible thunderbolt were there
in it to fear those who were foolishly become secure and careless, if so be
it did only admonish us that there were no place left for the first repentance?
for so this would stretch it self to all kind of sin. What shall we say
then? for seeing the Lord offers mercy to all without exception: what reason
is there that any (by such an absurdity) should be debarred of it for any
cause whatsoever.

The knot then of this question is in these words, if they fall again. So then
whosoever shall understand the force thereof, shall easily wind himself out of
all difficulty. Now it must be noted that there is a double falling: the one
particular, Falls, general, and particular.
the other general: He which has failed in one kind, yea be it that he has
failed in many kinds, such a one is fallen from the state of a Christian man.
Thus all sins are so many falls. But the Apostle disputes not here of theft,
perjury, Great difference between falling into some particular sin: and a
fiuall apostacy
murder, drunkenness, adultery, or of some such like vice; but he speaks of a
final falling away from the gospel, so as the sinner offends not God only in
one kind, but wholly renounceth his grace. And to the end this may be the
better understood, there must be an antithesis supplied between the graces of
God which he has recited, and this fall. Who they be that are excluded from
hope of pardon.
For he falls away, who reuolts from the word of God, who quenches the light
of it, who depriues himself of the taste of the heavenly gift, who forsakes his
participation of the holy Spirit. This is wholly to renounce God. We see now
then, who they be whom he excludes from the hope of pardon: to wit, those
Apostatates, who run away from the knowledge of the Gospel of Christ, which
before they had received; and from the grace of God; which cannot befall any,
but such a one as sins against the holy Ghost. For he which violates the
second Table of the law, or transgresses the first table by ignorance, is not
yet guilty of such a reuolting: neither does God so deprive any of his grace
(the Reprobate excepted) as that he leaves them without any hope of pardon.

If any demand why the Apostle makes mention here of such an Apostasy,
subtle sleights draws us away: so as we are fallen, Satan draws not the
wicked into this searefull sin at the first push, but by d^grees: we are
therefore to prevent great faults by avoiding the less. After a long neglect
of holy duties, follows an alienation of the mind and affections.
whilst we think we stand. Thus we fall by degrees, till at the last we
run headlong into destruction. And it is a thing which common experience does
daily teach us in very many. Therefore it is not without cause that the Apostle
forewarneth all the Disciples of Christ to look unto themselves in time. For
long negligence grows easily more and more upon us as a Lethargy: and after
that follows an alienation of mind and affections. Now we are yet to note by
the way with what titles and commendations he adornes the knowledge of the
Gospel. He calls it an inlightening: from whence it follows, that men are
blind till Christ, which is the light of the world, do inlighten them. He
calls it the taste of the heavenly gift: thereby signifying, that the gifts
which are conferred unto us in Christ, the partaking of the holy Ghost: the
taste of the good word of God: the taste of the powers of the world to come:
whereby he signifies, that by faith we are received into the heavenly kingdom,
that in spirit we might behold that blessed immortality, which otherwise is
hidden from our minds.

Let us assure our selves then that the Gospel is not known of us to any
purpose, but by the illumination of the holy Ghost: and that in such wise, that
being carried above (...) But if any having fallen do again recover himself,
we may say that such a one came not so far as to an utter revolt, howbeit
otherwise he had committed grievous sins. Seeing they crucify again to
themselves the Son of God. He adds this also to defend Gods severity
against the slanders of men. For if God should pardon Apostataes, he must
needs give his Son as a mocking stock unto them: unworthy they are then
that God should pardon them. Moreover, the reason why he says that Christ is
crucified again, is because we die with him under this condition, to exercise
our selves continually in newnes of life. Those then which fall back again
into death, have need of a second sacrifice: as we shall see in the tenth
chapter. Crucify to themselves: that is to say, as much as in them is. For so
they endeavor to do. And Christ should be brought again in triumph by
mockage, and dishonor, if men could return to him when they list, after they
have let loose the bridle unto themselves to Apostasy and reuolting.

7 For the earth which drinks in the rain that comes often upon it, and
brings forth herbs meet for them by whom it is dressed, receives blessing
of God.

8 But that which bears thorns and briars, is reproved, and is near unto
cursing: whose end is to be burned.

9 But beloved, we have persuaded our selves better things of you, and such as
accompany salvation, though we thus speak.

10 For God is not unrighteous, that he should forget your work, and labor
of love, which ye showed toward his name, in that ye have ministered unto the
Saints, and yet minister.

FOr the earth etc.] it should ever bring forth fruit in us, if we either
suffer it to be choked, or to be corrupted in us. But as the similitude is very
fit; so also are we wisely to apply it to the Apostles meaning. The earth,
says he, which drinks in the rain, presently after seed time if it brings
not forth of the kernel a bastard or wild grass, is at the length brought to
the ripeness of good corn, by the blessing of God: so also they that receive
the seed of the Gospel into their hearts, and of this seed do bring forth a
good and natural blade, do always grow better and better, till they bring
forth ripe fruit. Contrariwise, the earth which has been plowed and watered,
and yet brings forth nothing but thorns and briars, gives no hope to the
reaper:

And therefore the only remedy is, that the labourer set this field on fire,
which is so full of naughty and unprofitable grass. So they also, who by
their loose and wicked affections, do corrupt the seed of the Gospel, that in
their life they give no token at all of profiting and going forward, they show
themselves to be cast-awaies, so as they give no hope of any good harvest. The
Apostle then in this place not only handles the fruit of the Gospel: but still
holds on his exhortation, that we should embrace the gospel with a cheerful
and ready affection. And that as soon as seed time is done, there do by and
by some fruit appear. Thirdly, that after much and often watering, increasings
do follow. Whereas we have put meet herbs, or profitable, others translate
Herbs of season. Both significations agree well, but the last is referred to
the time, the first to the qualitic. As for the allegorical senses
wherewithal expositours do please themselves, I let them pass, because they
are far wide from the authors meaning.

But beloved we are persuaded better of you, etc.] he says, that though he
has thus spoken, it was not because he had conceived so hard an opinion of
them. And truly whosoever he be that does indeed desire to profit by teaching
or exhorting, ought thus to deal with his Disciples, to wit, that he rather
increase affection in them, than any way diminish the same. For there is
nothing that does more discourage us to hear the word of God, than when we see
we are reputed for desperate persons. For this cause the Apostle here protests
that he admonishes the Jews, because he had good hope of them, and desired to
bring them to salvation. We gather from this practice of the Apostle, It is
profitable that the elect themselves should be sometimes sharply reproved.
that it is needful to reprove sharply, and with great vehemency, not the
Reprobates only, but even the Elect themselves, and those whom we account as
the children of God.

For God is not unjust, etc.] These words import as much as if he should have
said, because God is not unrighteous, that he should forget your works. By
this it may seem that he buildes their salvation upon works, and brings in
God as one indebted unto them. Thus the Sophisters who oppose the merits of
works to the grace of God, do debate this point, and insist upon it very
much; God, say they, is not unjust. For from hence they gather, that it should
be unjust with God, if he give not to the merit of works, the reward of
eternal salvation. No other cause of our salvation but Gods free mercy.
what it is that is due to works. The Scripture every where shows none other
cause of our salvation, than the free mercy of God. Now whereas God in many
places promises reward to works, this depends upon his free promise, by which
he has adopted us for his children, and reconciled us unto himself, not
imputing our sins unto us. Reward then is appointed unto works, not for any
merit that is in them, Reward is not given unto works for any merit, but upon
Gods mere liberality.
but by the mere liberality of God. Yea even this free recompense of works
proceeding from the free bounty and liberality of God, has no place till we
be received into favor by the means of Christ. We gather from hence then,
that God in doing this, pays nothing that he owes us, but keeps and fulfilles
that promise, which of his free good will he has made, God beholds not our
works, but rather his own grace in our works.
because he beholds both our selves and our works with favor and pardon; or
to speak yet more properly, he considers not our works so much, as his own
grace in our works. Now ye see how it is, that he forgets not our works,
because in them he acknowledges both himself, and the work of his Spirit.
This is also that righteousness which the Apostle means, to wit, because he
cannot deny himself. Thus this place is agreeable to the sentence of S. Paul,
where he says, he which has begun a good work in you will perform it to the
day of Christ, Philip. 1.6. For what shall God find in us, whereby he might be
moved to love us, unless it be that which he has given us of his own before?
In a word, the Sophisters deceive themselves, who imagine a mutual relation
and correspondencie between the righteousness of God, and that merit of our
works: for in this regard God rather respects himself, and his own gifts,
that he might perfect unto the end, that which he has begun in us by his
free goodness, being no way provoked thereunto by any service that comes from
us. Thus (I say) you see what the righteousness of God is in the reward of
works; to wit, because he is faithful, and true of his promise, and so has
made himself debtor to us: not in receiving any thing of us, but in promising
us all things freely; as says S. Augustine.

Your labor of love.] By this word he signifies that we must not spare, nor
fly any pains, if we will do our duty toward our neighbors: for the
question is not only of helping them with silver, but also with counsel, and
industry, and by all the ways and means we can. There is need then (...)
remember then that we have not such a Christian life as is perfect in all his
parts, Faith and charity must go together.
unless we apply our studies to follow faith and charity together.

For the full assurance of hope.] Because many who made profession of the
Christian faith, were distracted with diverse opinions, or else were inwrapped
with many superstitions, he requires that they be so settled in the certainty
of faith, that they now waver no more, nor remain in suspense, carried about
as they had been wont with every new invention of man's brain. Now this
commandment belongs to us all: for as the truth of God is sure and stable in
it self, so also is it required that our faith which is built and rests it
self thereupon be true, certain, and surmounting all doubtings. See here then
what this Greek word Plerophoria imports, Plerophoria.
to wit, an assured persuasion, whereby the spirit of every faithful man
concludes and resolves in it self, that it is utterly unlawful to call into
doubt or question those things which God (that cannot lie nor deceive) has
once pronounced. It is a sin to doubt of the truth of that which God has
pronounced.
Hope, is here taken for faith, because of the affinity which is between
them. Notwithstanding it seems the Apostle did expressly place it here, because
he spoke of perscuerance. We may also gather from hence, how far faith is off
from that general apprehension which is common both to the wicked and even to
the Devils themselves. There is great difference between true faith, and a
general apprehension.
For they also believe that God is just and true: but yet notwithstanding from
hence they conceive no good hope at all, because they do not therewithal
apprehend the fatherly goodness of God in Christ. Let us know then that true
faith is always coupled with hope.

He says to the end, or even unto perfection: because they might know they
were not yet come thereunto, and therefore that they should bethink themselves
to profit in faith more and more. He uses this word care, or diligence, to the
end they might understand that they were not to nuzzle themselves up still in
carelesnes, but to bend themselves courageously to travail toward this
assurance in good earnest. For it is not a small matter to ascend above the
heavens; especially such as we be who are scarce able to creep upon the
ground. And withal, that it is no small matter to leap over so many stumbling
blocks of offense: neither is there any thing more difficult than to hold our
meditations in heaven and upon heavenly things, because all the whole strength
of our nature bends downwards; Satan also is not wanting to draw our minds
toward the earth and earthly things by infinite devices. For this cause
therefore the Apostle commands us to fly all carelesnes and sluggishnes of
heart.

But that ye follow those who by faith and patience.] following, and imitation.
It is as much then as if he had said, it behooues you to have a cheerefulnes of
heart in perseuering. But this yet has greater weight, when he aduertiseth
them that the Fathers themselves did not obtain the promises, but with an
inuinceable strength of faith: for examples do represent the matter unto us
with ye greater liuelines. If the doctrine should only be proposed simply and
plainly, it would not move us so much as when we see that that which is
required of us, is fulfilled in the person of Abraham. Now the example of
Abraham is brought in, not because there was none other, but because his
example was the most excellent above all others. For Abraham had this in common
with all the faithful to believe: but it is not without great cause that he
was established, and called the father of all the faithful. No marvel
therefore if the Apostle do make special choice of him amongst others: as of
him unto whom he would all men should look as often as they would find a
clear mirror of faith. He says, faith and patience, as if he should say, a
constant faith which has also patience joined therewith. For faith is first
required: but because many who at the beginning might seem to have an
admirable faith, have yet notwithstanding by and by waxen careless; patience
is a true approbation of that faith which is not vain, nor such as will vanish
with the time. When he says that we obtain, and receive the promises by
faith, he beats down the opinion of (...) by his own name? This you see is
the principal thing now in hand: but we are here to note two things by the
way: first,

Now whereas the scripture does sometimes use other forms of swearing; that
does not cross this doctrine. For the faithful do not swear by the heaven
or by the earth, as if they did attribute any divinity unto them, but by such
indirect oaths, they have respect to God only. For there are diverse kinds of
oaths. this place as has been said, teaches, It is lawful to take an oath.
that there is a lawful use of an oath among Christians: the which we are to
note well against those giddie spirits, who would willingly bring out of use
that holy rule of an oath which God has given in his law. For out of question
the Apostle here speaks of the manner of an oath, as of an holy thing allowed
and approved of God. And it is also to be noted that he does not only say
that it was thus in use in old time, but also testifies that it lasts even
yet to this day. Let us then take an oath for an help to maintain the truth,
when we want other proofs.

So God, willing more abundantly, etc.] Our salvation is in great account with
God seeing he sticks not to confirm us in the assurance thereof by his oath.
We may also gather from hence, in what estimation our salvation is before god:
seeing that to provide for the certainty thereof he not only supports our
incredulity, but leaving as it were part of his own honor, and yiedling much
more to our weakness then he should, does yet notwithstanding by this means
graciously remedy the same.

To the heirs of promise.] It seems he specially speaks of (...) who take
hope in this place for the thing hoped for: but we rather add hereunto, that
the Apostle speaks not of a naked promise hanging in the air, but of a
promise which we receive by faith: or to speak in one word, hope here
signifies the promise apprehended by faith. By this word to obtain, as also by
the word hope, he notes out such a constancy as he has touched heretofore.

Which hope we have as an anchor of the soul, etc.] It is a goodly similitude
in that he compares faith to an anchor cast out and fast rooted in the word of
God. For the truth is, that whilst we flote up and down in the salt sea of
this world, we are not stayed upon sure and firm ground, but we reele as a
ship to and fro in the midst of the sea, yea even in a troublesome sea
tossed with floods and waves. For the devil he cease not to raise up
infinite storms and tempests that might at once ouerturne and drown our
ship, if so be our anchor be not deeply fastened even to the very bottom.
And indeed let us turn our cies whither soever we will, we shall perceive no
firm land whereupon to stand safely: but which way soever our senses do turn
them, we shall see nothing but water: yea such waters, whose waves do swell,
and roar, lifting up themselves on high, and threatening our destruction. But
as the anchor is cast into the midst of the water, into an obscure and hidden
place, and whilst it lies so hidden, it keeps the ship in safety, that it
is not drowned of the waves, unto which it is exposed and laid open: so ought
we to fix and fasten our hope in God, who is invisible. Herein stands the
difference; that the anchor is cast downwards, because it finds fastening in
the earth: and our hope is raised up on high, and flies into heaven, because
it finds nothing upon earth, Our hope finds no so^ting upon earth: and
therefore we cast it not downwards but upwards.
or in the world upon which it may safely rest and stay it self securely:
neither ought it to rest it self upon the creatures, but only upon God. And
as the cable to which the anchor is fastened, ioynes the ship with the earth
by a long and invisible distance; so the truth of God is a cable by which we
are knit unto him, so as there can be no distance of place so far off,
neither yet any darkness be it never so thick, that can let us to cleave still
fast unto him. Being thus made fast unto God, howsoever we must fight indeed
daily against infinite storms and tempests, yet are we notwithstanding so out
of danger, that we shall not perish with our ship. And therefore he says,
that it is an anchor both sure and steadfast. For no tempestuousnes of waves can
be so great, that they should be able to rent the anchor in pieces, or to
break the cable, or that the ship by means thereof should be cloven in
twain. This indeed falls out upon the Sea: but the power of God is far
otherwise to sustain and keep us: and is otherwise also, as well in regard of
the efficacy of hope, as of the stablenes of the word of God.

And it enters into that which is within the veil.] We have said already,
that faith shall find nothing which shall not be fleeting and vanishing, till
it come near unto God: of necessity therefore it must pearce even into
heaven. But because the Apostle has to do with the Jews, he alludes to the
ancient Tabernacle, and says that they must not rest themselves in the things
which are seen, but that they must enter even into the secret place, which is
hidden behind the veil: as if he should say, you must pass beyond all the
external figures and old shadows, that faith may rest it self upon Christ
alone. Now we are to note this reason well, Faith must pass beyond all
external shadows, that it may rest it self upon Christ alone.
to wit, that as Christ is entered into heaven, even so ought our faith to
ascend up thither after him. For by this we are taught to cast the eye of our
faith upon nothing else. For men shall lose all their labor to seek God in his
majesty, seeing it is too high for them to attain unto: but it is Christ who
reaches us his hand to bring us into heaven. And this was shadowed out of old
even under the Law. For the high Priest entered into the Sanctuary not only in
his own name, but also in the name of all the people: he bare, as you would
say, the twelve tribes in thither in his breast and upon his shoulder, when in
remembrance of them, twelve precious stones were imbroidered upon his
breast plate, and their names engraven upon the two precious stones which he
(...) God, adornes him with this title; Rejoice greatly O daughter Zion (says
he) behold thy righteous King comes to thee, Zach. 9.9. thereby signifying
unto us that the righteousness whereof without this we should be destituted,
is brought unto us by the coming of Christ.

The second similitude which the Apostle notes, of peace. Now this peace is the
fruit of that righteousness whereof he spoke. Herehence it follows that
wheresoever the kingdom of Christ shall be spread, there of necessity must
this peace be in abundance, as is showed by these places following; Isai. 2.4.
and 9.7. and 11.6. and 65.25. In what sense the Hebrews usually take this word
peace.
and other the like. Moreover, because peace, according to the Hebrews,
signifies prosperity, or an happy estate; we may take it in this sense even
in this place: notwithstanding I had rather understand it of that inward peace,
which sets consciences at quiet and in security before the throne of God.
We cannot possibly esteem of of this benefit according as the excellency
thereof does require, Peace of conscience can never be rightly esteemed, till
we have been exercised with the disquietnes thereof.
unless we be taught by the contrary, what misery it is to be tormented
continually with unquietness of conscience: which all of us must needs feel
till such time as we being reconciled unto God in Christ, have our consciences
thereby quieted.

Verse. 3. Without father.] I had rather to say so, than of an unknown father,
as Erasmus does translate. For the Apostle meant to signify something more
expressly, than to say that the race of Melchisedec was unknown, or base, and
of little renown. Neither do I greatly stand about the discussing of an
objection which some do make here: to wit, if we take it so, the truth should
not be answerable to the figure, because Christ has a father in heaven, and a
mother in earth. For the Apostle presently after expounds his own meaning,
without kindred. He does then exempt Melchisedec from the common order of being
borne: thereby showing that he was eternal, so as none are to go search out
among men from what race he newly issued. It is certain that he was begotten
of a father and a mother: but the Apostle speaks not of him as of a private
man: but rather as of one clothed with the person of Christ. And therefore he
forbids us to consider ought in him but that which the Scripture teaches. For
in handling all those things which belong to Christ, it is needful to deal
with such reverence, that we know nothing but that which proceeds out of the
mouth of God. Now seeing the Spirit of God, bringing in the rarest and most
excellent King of that time, yet makes no mention at all of his birth, neither
yet afterward speaks any one word of his death; is it not as much as if by
this means his eternity had been set forth unto us? Now that which was
shadowed in Melchisedec, was truly manifested in Christ. Thus then we are to
content our selves with this mediocritie, that when the Scripture proposes
Melchisedec unto us as a man that was never borne, or which never died; it
shows unto us as in a mirror, that there is neither beginning nor end in
Christ.

Moreover, from hence we also learn what reverence and sobriety is required
to be in us, as touching the spiritual mysteries of God. For the Apostle is
not only willingly ignorant of that which he finds not in the whole
Scriptures, but would that we should be ignorant of it also. For questionless
it is not lawful to pronounce any thing of Christ at randon, nor yet after our
shallow capacity. Melchisedec then is not to be considered here as a man of
some mean place, but as an holy and sacred figure of Christ. Neither are we to
think that either his genealogy or death was omitted to be spoken of by
chance, or unadvisedness: but that the holy Ghost rather did it of purpose, to
the end he might raise up our minds above the common order of men. For this
cause their conjecture is very unlikely who say, that Melchisedec was Shem one
of the sons of Noah. For come we once to speak of a certain and known man,
this third similitude between Melchisedec and Christ will not be firm. But
was likened to the Son of God. That is to say, so far forth as the manner
of likeness would bear. For the proportion must always be held which is
between the (...) if one should say, because they were of the number of
children, or sons: for the Apostle reasons not, as though the Priests
received the tithes, because they were of the number of the sons of Leui: but
he makes a comparison of this whole tribe with Melchisedec on this manner; when
God gave power and authority to the Levites to demand tithes of the people,
therein God did appoint, and establish them above all the rest of the
Israelites, although they were all begotten of one father. Now Abraham, who was
the father of them all, did yet pay tithes to a Priest, which was a stranger:
it follows then, that all the successors of Abraham are inferior to this
Priest. Thus the right given to the Levites, was particular above all the rest
of their brethren: But Melchisedec is placed in an high degree above any of
them, so as he holds them all underneath him. Some think the Apostle speaks
of the tenths, which the Levites paid to the chief Priests, as Numb. 18.26,
27, 28. But there is no reason why we should so restrain a general speech.
For that which I have said is the most probable.

And blessed him which had the promises.] Melchisedec. Melchisedec blessed
Abraham: whereof it follows, that Abraham is the lesser. But to the end he
might enlarge the matter, he again adorns Abraham with an excellent title. For
by how much the more excellent Abraham is, by so much the more is the dignity
of Melchisedec extolled. To this he has respect when he says, that Abraham
received the promises, wherein he signifies that Abraham is that excellent
personage, and the first father of that holy nation, with which God made the
covenant of eternal life. For it was no small honor unto him, that he only
amongst all others should be chosen, as the man whom God betrusted with the
right of adoption, and with the testimony of his love. Yet all this hindered
not, but that he, with all these prerogatives should submit himself to the
Priest Melchisedec. Thus we clearly see how great this Melchisedec was, to
whom Abraham subjected himself in two things:

And without all contradiction, etc.] Isaac blessed his son Jacob, and Jacob
blessed Ephraim and Manasses, the sons of Joseph. Genesis 27.27. Genesis 48.15. For
this was not a mutual act, wherein the son may do as much for the father:
but to the end this blessing might be duly and lawfully performed, it was
required that he which did it should be a superior, and should be in
authority also above him whom he blessed. Which is the better understood by
the 6. of Numbers, 27. where commandment being given to the Priests to bless
the people, the promise is by and by added: to wit, that those whom they
blessed, should be blessed of God. The blessing I say which the Priests
pronounced was confirmed and ratified with such authority, that it was not so
much the authority of men as the authority of God. For even as in offering of
sacrifices the Priest did represent the person of Christ, so also in blessing
of the people he was but the minister and imbassadour of the high God. In this
sense also is that blessing to be taken, whereof mention is made, Luke 24.50.
where Christ after he had lead his Apostles out of Bethania, lifted up his
hands on high and blessed them. No doubt he took this gesture of lifting up
the hands from the high Priests, to the end he might show himself to be he
by whom God the Father blesses us. This blessing also is mentioned, Psalm.
116.17. and 118.1. Now let us apply this sentence to that which he handles.
Seeing the blessing of the Priest is a work of God, so it is also a witness
of preheminencie, and of the excellent honor which God imparted unto him.
Melchisedec then took unto himself the highest degree in that he blessed
Abraham. For he did it not at randon, but according to the right and authority
of his Priestly function: it follows then that he is Abraham's superior. And
yet with Abraham did God contract the covenant of salvation. To conclude then,
even this man although he were the most excellent of all others, yet he had one
more excellent than he above him: to wit, Melchisedec.

Of whom it is witnessed that he lives.] Melchisedec lives, because no
mention is made of his death. True it is this has no place in others, but
there is great reason why it should have place in Melchisedec, because he is
the image and figure of Christ: for in as much as the question is here of the
spiritual kingdom of Christ, and of his Priesthood; humane conjectures ought
to have no place: neither is it lawful to know any more than that which the
scriptures do set before us. Yet we are not to gather from hence, that this
man who met Abraham, should be yet living: as some have foolishly imagined. For
this is to be referred to the quality of the person which Melchisedec
sustained: to wit, in that he represented the person of the son of God.
Moreover the Apostle minds to show by these words, that the dignity of
Melchisedecks Priesthood is perpetual, whereas the Priesthood of the Levites
was but for a time. For thus he frames his argument, Those to whom the law
assigns tithes to be paid, are mortal men: in which is showed that the right
of that Priesthood was once to be abolished, in regard they ended their lives.
But the scripture makes no mention at all of the death of Melchisedec, when it
speaks of the tithes that were paid unto him: thus then he limits not the
right of his Priesthood within any compass of time, but rather closely shows
that it endures for ever. Now this he adds, to the end it might not seem that
the law which immediately followed did derogate any thing from the first, as the
custom in other things is. For otherwise some might have replied that this
right of Priesthood which Melchisedec enjoyed, is now abolished, because God
gave another law by Moses, by which he transported it over to the Levites. But
the Apostle preuents this reply, when he says that the tithes were paid to the
Levites for a time, because they lived not always: but that Melchisedec kept
the right for ever which God had once given him, because he was immortal.

And to say as the thing is, etc.] He proceeds on further, Leui himself who
was then in the loins of Abraham, was not exempt from this subjection, because
Abraham in paying of tithes, did subject both himself, and his posterity also
to the Priesthood of Melchisedec. But an objection may be thus framed to the
contrary, Judah also, of whose seed Christ was begotten, paid tithes. But
this difficulty will be easily removed, Abraham, as one amongst the rest, but
by a special privilege is exempt from the common order. And that is it which
himself says, Mat. 22.42. If he be the son of David, how then does David
call him Lord? We see now that this argument from Leui to Christ holds not.
Moreover, seeing Melchisedec is the figure of Christ, what reason is there that
he should be set to fight (as you would say) against him? For this common
principle is to be held, That which is placed beneath, does not oppose it
self against the principal to which it is referred. Wherefore, seeing the
figure is less than the truth, it cannot, neither ought it to be opposite
against it. For this combat ought to have place among things of equality. Now
the Apostle has fully showed by these five members, what comparison there is
between Christ and Melchisedec. And hereby is refuted the brainsicke
speculation of those who seek the principal similitude in the offering of
Bread and Wine. We see that the Apostle examines all things here very carefully
and curiously (as it were) one after another. Name, place, perpetuity, tithes,
and the right of blessing.
He observes the name of the man, the place of his kingdom, the perpetuity of
his life, the right of tithes, and the right of blessing. Surely these things
were of less importance than the oblation. Shall we say that the Spirit of
God had forgotten himself, so as to stay in these lesser things, and to omit
that which is the principal, and wherein the pith of the matter lay? And I do
the more wonder that so many of the ancient Doctors of the Church have been so
far besotted with this opinion, as to stand disputing here about the oblation
of the Bread and Wine. Thus they say; Christ is a Priest after the order of
Melchisedec: but Melchisedec offered bread and wine, it follows then that the
sacrifice of bread and wine belongs to the Priesthood of Christ. The Apostle
will speak fully hereafter of the ancient sacrifices: but of this new
sacrifice of bread and wine, will he not speak a word. How is it then that the
Doctors of the Church came to be of this opinion? Truly even because one error
draws on another, for having forged a sacrifice of the Supper of Christ,
having received no such commandment from him: and so when they had once
corrupted the supper by adding a sacrifice unto it, they then made what shift
they could (now here, now there) to borrow some colors to patch up their error
withal.

The application of this oblation of bread and wine pleased them as a thing
seeming fit for the purpose: and by and by after it was received; but without
judgment or discretion. For who will grant that these personages had a more
clear sight than the Spirit of God? and yet notwithstanding if we receive
that which they teach, the holy Ghost should be condemned of unadvisedness,
because he observed not a thing of so great consequence, especially seeing he
handles this matter of set purpose. By this I conclude, that the ancient
Fathers did forge unto themselves such a sacrifice as Moses never thought of.
For he says not that Melchisedec offered bread and wine to God; but rather to
Abraham, and his company. For these are his very words: And Melchisedec King
of Shalem brought forth bread and wine, and he was a Priest of the most high
God. Therefore he blessed him, etc. Genesis 14.18. This first fact which he
recites was performed as he was a King, to wit, to feed such as were weary in
the way returning from the battle. As touching the blessing it appertained to
his office of Priesthood. And therefore if any mystery were in this oblation,
it was no otherwise fulfilled in Christ, than when he nourishes us when we are
hungry and wearied with travail. Now the Papists deserve to be laughed at
again and again, who after they have denied that there is any more bread and
wine in the Mass after consecration, do yet notwithstanding come in chanting
their song of the sacrifice of bread and wine.

11 If therefore perfection had been by the Priesthood of the Leuits (for under
it the law was established to the people) what needed it furthermore, that
another Priest should rise after the order of Melchisedec, and not to be called
after the order of Aaron?

12 For if the Priesthood be changed, then of necessity must there be a change
of the law.

13 For he of whom these things are spoken, pertains to an other tribe,
whereof no man served at the altar.

14 For it is evident that our Lord sprung out of Judah, concerning the which
tribe Moses spoke nothing touching the Priesthood.

IF then perfection etc.] the old time, because the Priesthood and the law was
set over to him. Well, we see the Apostles drift. He contends to prove that
the ceremonies ceased, seeing Christ is come with commandment to publish the
new covenant. How can any thing be gathered from hence, that somewhat should be
transported over to the ministers of Christ? for the only person of Christ is
opposed to Moses and Aaron. By what title then I pray you, dare the Roman
Antichrist attribute unto himself any authority? Truly it is not my purpose
to stand to refute so sottish an impudency: but it were very needful to make
this his pride (so full of sacrilege) known unto the readers, to the end
they might be able clearly to see and acknowledge how this good servant of the
servants of Christ, cares not very much for the honor that is due to the
master, and how like a beast he rentes the scriptures in pieces, to color and
cloak his tyranny withal.

For he of whom these things are spoken, etc.] Because the Apostle directs his
speech to such as confessed Jesus the son of Marie to be the Christ; it is
evident that Christ sprung out of Judah, because this was then commonly known:
notwithstanding the principal assurance was grounded upon the promise. Seeing
then that they did acknowledge him to be Christ, it was also necessary that
they should be persuaded that he was the son of David. For he which was
promised could not descend of another tribe.

15 And it is yet a more evident thing, because that after the similitude of
Melchisedec, there is risen up another Priest,

16 Which is not made Priest after the law of the carnal commandment, but
after the power of the endless life.

17 For he testifies thus, Psalm. 110.1.
thou art a Priest for ever after the order of Melchisedec.

18 For the commandment that went before, is disanulled, because of the
weakness thereof, and unprofitableness.

19 For the law made nothing perfect but the bringing in of a better hope made
perfect, whereby we draw near unto God.

20 And for as much as it is not without an oath (for these are made Priests
without an oath:

21 But this is made with an oath by him that said unto him, The Lord has
sworn, and will not repent, Psalm. 110.4.
thou art a Priest for ever, after the order of Melchisedec.)

22 By so much the more is Jesus made a surety of a better Testament.

ANd it is yet a more evident thing, etc.] person of the Priesthood: now from
the nature of the Priesthood, and from the reason, for which it was instituted.
The old Priesthood, says he, was instituted consisting of outward ceremonies:
but in the Priesthood of Christ, there is nothing but that which is Spiritual.
It appears then that the old was temporary and transitory: but it is
manifest that this Priesthood of Christ is perpetual. The carnal commandment
is taken for the bodily ceremonies, that is to say, outward. We know with what
solemn observations both Aaron and his children were ordained Priests. Now
that which was fulfilled in Christ by a secret and heavenly power of the holy
Ghost, was figured in the institution of Aaron, by oil, by diverse garments, by
sprinkling with blood, and other earthly ceremonies. Now this kind of
observation in ordaining the Priesthood was agreeable to the nature of that
Priesthood. Whereof it followed that even the Priesthood it self was subject
to change. Although (as we shall see afterward) the Priesthood was not so
carnal, that it was not also spiritual: But the Apostle has respect only to
that difference which was between Christ and Aaron. So then howsoever the
signification of the shadows was spiritual, notwithstanding the shadows
themselves are rightly termed earthly, because they consisted of the elements
of this world.

(...) published a long time before David: he was then in his kingdom when he
pronounced this prophecy of the creating of a new Priest. This is then a new
law which disanulleth the former.

For the law made nothing perfect, etc.] Because he had spoken somewhat
harshly of the law, he now sweetens this sharpnes, and corrects it, as it were.
For he graunts some profit to be in it, that is, that it showed the way, by
which men might come to the end of their salvation. Yet notwithstanding even
that was far off from perfection. Thus the Apostle reasons then, The law gave
but an entrance: therefore it was needful that some thing of more perfection
should succeed and come after. For the children of God are not always to stay
themselves in the rudiments of children. By this word of bringing in, he means
that there was somewhat in the law in regard of a preparation, even as children
have little beginnings given them, to prepare them thereby afterward to
attain to an higher knowledge: but because the particle Epi whereof the Greek
word is composed, signifies a following, when one thing succeedes another; I
have thought good to translate, But is come in, or was added. For in mine
opinion he puts two introductions: Melchisedec: the second in the law, which is
last in regard of time. Now by this word law, he means the Leuiticall
Priesthood, which came in after the Priesthood of Melchisedec. By a better hope
he means, the state of the faithful under the kingdom of Christ. And withal
he has some respect to those of the Fathers, who not contenting themselves
with their present estate, aspired to one further off. And thereof it comes,
that Christ said, Many kings and prophets have desired to see the things which
ye see, Luke 10.24. Wherefore the law as a schoolmaster lead them by the
hand, pointing out a further thing unto them.

By which we draw near to God.] Here is a close antithesis between us and the
fathers. For herein we are promoted to a more excellent dignity than they,
because God now communicates himself familiarly unto us, whereas he only
appeared to them darkly and a far off. And this is an alluding to the form
of the Tabernacle, or of the Temple. For the people remained far off in the
court, and none approached near unto the Sanctuary but the Priests: and as
touching the inward Sanctuary, none entered thereinto but the high Priest. But
since the Tabernacle is taken away, God does familiarly manifest himself unto
us: which he did not to the Fathers. He then who yet holds, or any way prefers
the shadows of the law; he not only thereby darkens the glory of Christ, but
also depriues us of a singular benefit: because as much as in him is, he
places a wall of separation again between God and us: to the approaching
toward which bounty and liberality the way is now made plain for us by the
Gospel. Whosoever therefore yet sticks in these ceremonies, he wittingly
depriues himself of this great benefit of drawing near to God.

Was not without an oath.] Aarons: so that for the honor thereof he was
content to confirm it with an oath. For when he ordained the Priests in old
time, he used no oath: but as touching Christ, it is said, the Lord has sworn:
which doubtless was done to the end his Priesthood should be adorned; and also
to show the excellency thereof. We see the reason why he alleges the Psalm
once again: to wit, to the end we should know that in regard of Gods oath, more
dignity is attributed to the Priesthood of Christ, than to any other. Now we
are to remember this principle again, that the Priest is created to be a
surety of the covenant. And for this cause the Apostle co^cludes, that the
covenant which God made with us by the hand of Christ, is much more excellent
than the old covenant, whereof Moses was the Mediator.

23 And among them many were made Priests, because they were not suffered to
endure, by reason of death.

24 But this man, because he endures ever, has a Priesthood which cannot
pass from one to another.

25 Wherefore he is able perfectly also to save them that come unto God by him,
seeing he ever lives, to make intercession for them.

26 For such an high Priest it became us to have, which is holy, harmeles,
undefiled, separate from sinners, and made higher than the heavens:

27 Which needs not daily as those high Priests to offer up sacrifice, first
for his own sins, and then for the peoples: for that he did once, when he
offered up himself.

28 For the law makes men high Priests, which have infirmity: but the word of
the oath that was since the law, makes the son who is consecrated for
evermore.

ANd amongst them many were made Priests, etc.] He touched this comparison by
the way heretofore: but because the matter required to be further weighed, and
better considered of, he now declares it more fully. Although the sense of his
disputation is otherwise than before. For heretofore he gathered that the old
Priesthood ought to end, because mortal men were ordained to exercise the
same: and now he simply shows why Christ continues an everlasting high Priest.
The which he does by an argument called It is when things are separated one
from another by a negative, as here to dye, and not to dye.
A disparatis. The reason why the Priests in old time were many, was, because
death put an end to their Priesthood: but there is no death which hinders
Christ from exercising his office. He then is the alone and perpetual high
Priest. Thus the diversity of the cause makes diverse effects.

Wherefore he is able also perfectly etc.] This is the fruit of the eternal
Priesthood, those that come to God, by this he signifies the faithful, who do
only enjoy the salvation obtained by Christ. In the mean while he shows what
it is that faith ought to behold in Christ the Mediator. For it is the chief
happiness of man to be knit unto his God, who is the welspring of life, and of
all felicity: but all of us are shut out from having access unto him by our
own unworthiness. Therefore the proper office of the Mediator is to succor us
in this regard; to reach us his hand, to bring us into heaven. Now he always
alludes to the old shadows under the Law. For although the high Priest had
the names of the twelve tribes upon his shoulders, and that he bare also the
signs thereof continually upon his heart, Exodus 28.12.29. yet he entered
himself alone into the Sanctuary, whereas the people tarried without in the
court. But resting now upon Christ, and having him our Mediator, we enter by
faith even into heaven: No veil lets us from approaching unto God now, if we
believe in Christ.
because there is no veil to hinder us, but God with open face does appear
unto us, and with an amiable countenance calls us to come boldly and
familiarly unto him.

Seeing he ever lives, etc.] Can we sufficiently esteem this pledge of Gods
love toward us, that Christ now lives rather for us, than for himself? He was
received into eternal blessedness, that he might reign in heaven: but the
Apostle preaches that it was for us. Wherefore both the life, the kingdom,
Christ with all that he has, is ours.
and the glory of Christ are appointed to our salvation, as to their proper
end: and Christ has nothing which we may not be bold to apply to our
commodity: because he was once given us of the Father upon this condition,
that all he has should be made ours. Now the Apostle also immediately shows by
the effect that Christ performs this office of Priesthood, because the proper
office of a Priest is to make intercession for the people, that he might
obtain favor of God for them. Christ does this always, because he is risen
again from death for this end. Therefore he justly attributes unto him the
name of a Priest, because of his office of intercession.

For it became us to have such an high Priest, etc.] just, innocent, and
without spot, are necessarily required to be in a Priest. Now this honor
agrees to none but to Christ. It follows then that that which was required to
be in the Priests under the Law for the right exercising of their function, was
wanting in them. We may therefore conclude that there was no perfection in the
Leuiticall Priesthood: and that of it self it was unlawful, further than it
was serviceable unto Christ, and was a figure or representation of him. For
even the very outward ornaments of the high Priest showed this imperfection:
otherwise to what end served so rich and costly garments, wherewith God caused
Aaron to be adorned when he was to perform the divine service; were they not
signs of an angelical holiness and excellency, far exceeding all humane
virtues? Now these signs were applied unto him, because the substance was not
present there in effect. It appears then that there was no other sufficient
Priest but Christ.

Separate from sinners.] This member comprehends all the rest. For there was
some holiness, some innocence, and purity in Aaron; but only in a small
measure. For all these virtues were blemished with many spots in him. But Christ
which is exempt out of the common order of sinful men, is only and alone free
from sin. And therefore there is none other in whom we can find true holiness
and perfect innocence. For in that it is said he is separate from us, it is
not, as if he would shut us out from having communion with him: but because
this excellency is proper to him above us, that he is void of all impuritie.
All prayers that depend not upon Christ's intercession are rejected, Question.
Now we may gather herehence, that all those prayers which depend not upon the
intercession of Christ, are rejected. But a question may be made, whether the
Angels also be separate from sinners. And if they be, what should hinder them
from exercising the office of the Priest, or that they should not be our
mediators for us to God? Angels no lawful mediators, and why.
Now there is no place that shows where God has done the Angels this honor.
And therefore it should be an usurpation full of sacrilege in them, if they
should intrude into this office, not being called thereunto. Moreover (as we
shall see in the beginning of the chapter following) he must be a man that must
be a Mediator between God and man. Although the last condition which the
Apostle here recites (to wit, made higher then the heavens) were only
sufficient of it self to resolve this question. For none can knit us to god,
but he which attaineth unto God. Now this is not given to the Angels
themselves: Ephesians. 4.10.
for it is not said of them that they are made higher then the heavens.
Wherefore it belongs to none but to Christ to reconcile us to God, seeing there
is none but he that is ascended far above all heavens. Now this manner of
speech is as much as if he had said, that Christ is exalted above all the
orders of creatures: so as he is placed above the Angels.

Which needs not daily, etc. Christ's sacrifice absolutely perfect.
because he is not tainted with any spot of sin: and his sacrifice was such,
that the only offering of it, is sufficient to the end of the world: for he
offered himself.

For the law makes men high Priests.] vices of men, how weak the Priesthood
was, as if he should say, seeing the law ordaines not true Priests indeed; it
must needs follow of necessity that this defect must be amended by somewhat
else. Now it is corrected by the word of the oath. For Christ is not ordained
as a common man, but as he is the son of God, not subject to any infirmity,
but decked and adorned, with an high and sovereign perfection. He adds
further that the oath is after the law, to show that God not contenting
himself with the Priesthood of the law, was minded to ordain and establish
something that should be better. For in the ordinances and statutes of God,
that which comes after, turns the things that were before into a better
estate; or else abolisheth utterly those things which had a place only for a
time.

CHAP. VIII.
1 Now of the things which we have spoken, this is the sum, that we have such
an high Priest, that sits at the right hand of the throne of majesty in
heavens,

2 And is a minister of the Sanctuary, and of the true Tabernacle which the
Lord pitched, and not man.

3 For every high Priest is ordained to offer both gifts and sacrifices:
wherefore it was of necessity that this man should have somewhat also to offer.

4 For he were not a Priest, if he were on the earth, seeing there are Priests
that according to the law offer gifts:

5 Who serve unto the pattern and shadow of heavenly things, as Moses was
warned by God when he was about to finish the Tabernacle. See said he, that
thou make all things according to the pattern showed thee in the Mount.

6 But now our high Priest has obtained a more excellent office, in as much as
he is the Mediator of a better Testament which is established upon better
promises.

NOw the sum of that we have spoken, etc] To the end the readers might know
what the matter is, which he now handles, he shows it is his intent to prove
that the Priesthood of Christ is spiritual, by which the Priesthood of the law
was abolished. True it is, that he always holds on his purpose: but because he
contends with diverse arguments, he interlaced this admonition, that he might
always keep the readers attentive to the end and scope of his speech. He
has heretofore proved Christ to be the high Priest: now he strives to prove
further that his Priesthood is heavenly, whereby it follows, that by his
coming, that which Moses instituted under the law is abolished, in regard it
was earthly. Now because Christ suffered in the baseness of the flesh, and by
taking upon himself the form of a servant, made himself of no reputation in
the world, Philip. 2.7. The Apostle sends us to his ascension, by which not
only the shame of the cross was swallowed up, but also that base and abject
condition which he had by clothing himself with our flesh. For we must
esteem of the dignity of Christ his Priesthood, by the virtue of the holy
Spirit, which was manifested in his resurrection, and ascension. Thus then
stands his argument, Seeing Christ is ascended to the right hand of God, to
reign triumphantly in heaven, he is not a minister of the earthly sanctuary,
but of the heavenly.

As touching this word of holy things, or of the sanctuary, the Apostle
expounds himself when he adds, of the true Tabernacle. But some may ask
here, Moses built, or made at randon? For in these words there is a close
opposition. I answer, that this truth whereof he speaks, is not opposite to a
lie; but to the figures only: as also when it is said, Ioh. 1.17. The law was
given by Moses, but grace and truth came by Jesus Christ. speaks of the death
of Christ, he respects not the outward act so much, as the spiritual fruit
that came thereof. He suffered death after the common manner of men; Two things
to be considered in Christ's death.
but in that he blotted out sins as a Priest, this was by a divine power. The
shedding of his blood was a thing outward: but the purgation it wrought and yet
works is a thing inward and spiritual. In a word, he died on earth, but the
power and efficacy of his death reached to heaven. As touching that which
follows, some turn it thus; Of the number of those which offer gifts
according to the law, etc. But the words of the Apostle have another
signification: therefore I had rather resolve it thus; Whilst there are, or
seeing there are Priests. For his meaning is to prove one of the two, either
that Christ is not a Priest, if so be the Priesthood of the law remain,
because it is without sacrifice: or rather that the sacrifices of the law do
take an end as soon as Christ shows himself. But the first member is absurd,
because it is not lawful to spoil Christ of his Priesthood. It remains then
that we confess the order of the Leuiticall Priesthood to be now abolished.

Who serve unto the pattern, etc.] I take this word to serve, in this place,
unto, must be understood in the Greek text, or else some other word like unto
it which also we have put, to wit, in the. Truly this sense agrees better; than
as others turn it, Which serve to the pattern, and shadow of heavenly things:
and the construction of the Greek text does easily bear this sense. To be
short, he teaches that the true service of God consists not in the legal
ceremonies: and therefore when as the Leuiticall Priests executed their office,
they had only a shadow, and an inferior pourtraiture, which is far beneath
the true and natural pattern. For indeed the Greek word which we translate
pattern, or samplar, signifies so much. So that he preuents an objection which
might be made to the contrary. For he shows yt the service of God after the
custom of ye fathers, was not unprofitable; because it had an higher
signification, to wit, heavenly.

As it was answered to Moses when he was to finish the Tabernacle.] This place
is in Exodus 20.40. And the Apostle alleges it to prove that the service of
the law was but as a picture, to shadow forth that which was spiritual in
Christ. God commands that all the parts of the Tabernacle should be answerable
to the chief pattern, which was showed unto Moses in the mountain. But if so
be the form of the Tabernacle had a further end than that which was seen with
the eye; as much then is to be said of the ceremonies, and of all the
Priesthood. From whence it follows, that there was no stabilitie in any of all
these things, but that we must still come unto that which was shadowed out by
them. Behold an excellent place, because it contains in it three sentences
worthy to be noted. Moses was commanded to frame them all according to the
first pattern, which was heavenly. Therefore their opinion is too profane
which say, that the ceremonies were only commanded to serve as a bridle for
staying the inconstancy of the people, least they should have gone to seek
out strange ceremonies among the Gentiles. This indeed is something which they
say, but not all. For they leave out that which is of much more importance: to
wit, that they were exercises to hold the people in the faith of the Mediator.
Yet notwithstanding it is not needful that we should be over curious, so as to
seek out some high or profound mystery in every pin, and in every small
piece of the Tabernacle, as Hesichius, and the greater part of the ancient
authors, who have travailed too curiously in this behalf: for whilst they go
about subtly to divine in things to them unknown, they have failed very
blockishly, and showed themselves ridiculous bablers. So then we must keep a
mean herein: which we shall do when we desire to know no more than that
which is revealed to us in Christ.

Secondly, See that thou make all things according to the pattern: and, Take
heed thou make nothing more than the pattern) are in weight one, We must not
go an hairs breadth from Gods commandment, in things pertaining to his
worship.
as much as the other. Wherefore, in requiring straightly that we keep the
rule which he has given us, he therewithal forbids us to turn aside an
hairs breadth from it. By this means all services devised by men fall flat to
the ground, and those which some call Sacraments, which notwithstanding were
never ordained of God.

Thirdly, according to the pattern which he showed thee.

But now our high Priest, etc.] Even as heretofore he gathered the excellency
of the covenant by the dignity of the Priesthood, so now also he maintains,
that the Priesthood of Christ is more excellent; because he is the Mediator
and Ambassador of a better covenant. Both the one and the other were
necessary, because it was needful that the Jews should be turned from the
superstitious observation of ceremonies, which were so many impediments to
hinder them from going directly to the pure and simple truth of the Gospel.
Now the Apostle says that it was reason that both Moses and Aaron should give
place to Christ, as to the more excellent: because the Gospel is a more
excellent covenant than the law, and the death of Christ much more noble than
the sacrifices of the law. But that which he adds is not without some
difficulty; to wit, was established upon better promises. For it is certain,
that even the very same hope of eternal life which we now have, was set before
the ancient Fathers which lived under the law. The grace of adoption being as
common to them as to us. Their faith then must needs be built upon the same
promises.

7 For if that first Testament had been unblameable, no place should have been
sought for the second.

8 For in rebuking them he says, Behold the days will come, Ier. 32.31, 32,
33, 34. Romans 11.27. Chap. 10.16.
says the Lord, when I shall make with the house of Israel, and with the house
of Judah a new Testament.

9 Not like the Testament that I made with their fathers, in the day that I
took them by the hand, to lead them out of the land of Egypt: for they
continued not in my Testament, and I regarded them not, says the Lord.

10 For this is the Testament that I will make with the house of Israel, After
those days says the Lord, I will put my laws in their mind, and in their
heart I will write them, and I will be their God and they shall be my people.

11 And they shall not teach every man his neighbor, and every man his brother
saying, Know the Lord, for all shall know me, from the least of them to the
greatest of them.

12 And I will be merciful unto their unrighteousness, and I will remember
their sins and their iniquities no more. The 12. verse is expounded after
verse 10.


13 In that he says a new Testament, he has abrogated the old: now that which
is disanulled and waxed old, is ready to vanish away.

FOr if the first Testament, Jeremiah, the which we will entreat of by and by.
But it may seem that this agrees not very well, that he should affirm that
there had bin no necessity to seek a place for a second covenant, if so be the
first had been unblameable: and that he adds withal, that the people are
reproved, so as for their default a remedy was given by the new covenant. And
is it not a wicked thing to affirm, that for the sin of the people, the
fault should therefore be cast upon the covenant of God? It seems then that
the argument is unfound. For although God should condemn the people an hundred
times, yet are we not to conclude that the covenant should therefore be
faulty. written in their hearts. Wherefore god protests that the heart must
be corrected, before it can be holy, and confirmed. The Apostle therefore has
just cause to affirm, that a new covenant was to be established.

Behold the days come, etc.] The Prophet speaks of the time to come. He
reprooues the people for their disloyalty, that having received the law, they
did not persevere in the faith. The law then is this covenant which God
complains the people brake. And to remedy this evil, he promises a new
covenant; not like the first: the fulfilling of which prophecy imports the
abolishing of the old Testament. But it seems the Apostle does misalleage this
prophecy to make it serve his purpose. Moses, when he says, I have made a
covenant with you, which covenant you brake. The law indeed was clothed as it
were, with ceremonies: but now the body being destroyed and dead, what use is
there of the garments? for it is a common prouer be well enough known, that
the appurtenance or accessarie is of the nature of his principal. It is no
marvel then, if the ceremonies which are but hangbies (as you would say) of
the old testament, with the whole ministry of Moses be abolished. And it is
always the usual custom of the Apostles, when they contend about ceremonies,
to dispute generally of the whole law. So then, although this prophecy of
Jeremiah stretches it self further than to the ceremonies, yet
notwithstanding because they are included under the name of the old Testament,
the Apostle fitly applies this prophecy to his present purpose. Moreover, all
do confess, that by the days whereof the Prophet makes mention, is signified
the kingdom of Christ. He names the house of Israel, and the house of Judah,
because the posterity of Abraham was divided into two kingdoms: therefore it
is a promise that the whole body of all the elect shall be gathered again
together in one: howsoever in times past they were severed.

Not according to the covenant which I made, etc.] covenant which then was in
force, and the new covenant the which he gave them hope of. Otherwise the
prophet would have said, I will renew and establish again with you, the
covenant which was broken by your default: but he now says expressly, that it
shall not be like unto it. Whereas he says, that the Covenant was made in that
day when he took them by the hand to bring them out of bondage: he aggrauates
the crime of their revolt, by the repetition of so great a benefit: although
he condemns not the ingratitude of one generation only: but, as those which
were delivered, revolted by and by, and their successors likewise fell often
into the same fault after the^: so he does in this speech challenge the whole
nation of disloyalty, and of breaking the covenant. When he says he despised
them, or regarded them not, he gives them to understand, that although they
were once adopted to be his people, yet that should profit them nothing,
unless he succor them by a new remedy. The prophet has other terms,
according as the matter is couched together in the Hebrewe text: but that is of
no great importance as touching the point now in question.

For this is the covenant, etc.] There are two principal articles in this
covenant. The first is touching the free remission of sins: the second of the
inward reformation of the hearts: there is a third, but that depends upon the
second: and that is the illumination of the mind with the knoweledge of God.
Now there are here many things worthy our observation. for we have a contrary
law, engraven within them, Gods word never takes place in our hearts, till he
has softened them by his spirit.
in such wise that multitudes of froward and wicked affections do reign
therein, which do daiely provoke us to rebellion. In vain it is then that God
does publish his law unto us by the voice of man, if withal he do not write
it in our hearts by his holy Spirit: that is, unless he frame us and turn us
to his obedience. Now by this it appears what free will is, and what
uprightness there is in our nature, before God have regenerated us. I grant
that we both will, and choose, and that freely, without constraint: Free Will.
but our will is carried away even with a furious violence to resist God, and
is not able in any thing to subject it self to his righteousness. This is the
cause why the law brings nothing but destruction and death with it, whilst it
remains written in tables of stone: as S. Paul teaches, 2. Cor. 3.3. To be
short; then do we receive that which God commands with obedient hearts, when
he changes and corrects the natural peruersitie of them by the work of his
Spirit: otherwise he shall find in us nothing but corrupt affections, and a
heart wholly inclined to evil. For this sentence of God is clear and evident,
that a new covenant must be made, by which God ingraues his laws in our
hearts, because otherwise it shall be altogether fruitless and unprofitable
unto us.

The second article is as touching the free remission of sins. The 12. verse is
expounded here. There remain wicked and corrupt affect ons even in the best
after regeneration: and therefore the Prophet had good cause to add this
second article.
yet will I notwithstanding pardon their sins. This also is a very necessary
article. For God never so frames and fashions us in obedience to his
righteousness, but there still remains in us many wicked and corrupt
affections of the flesh: yea and the corruption of our nature is regenerate but
only in part: for every hand-while we feel wicked lusts, and naughty
affections to boil in us. And from thence issues that combat where of S.
Paul complains, Romans 7.23. where he testifies of himself, in the person of
all the faithful, that he saw another law in his members, rebelling against
the law of his mind, so that he obeyed not God as he ought to have done, but
failed therein many ways. What good or holy desire then soever it be which we
have to live religiously, yet we shall be always guilty before God of eternal
death, because our conversation is always far off from the perfection of the
law. There is no stabilitie in the covenant then in regard of us, unless God
do freely forgive us our sins. But this is a special privilege belonging
only to the faithful, who have embraced the covenant offered them in Christ:
that is to say, to be assured that God favors them, and that the sins to
which they are subject hurts them not, Paul also does sufficiently show 2. Our
city of refuge is the remission of sins in Christ's blood.
Cor. 5. And indeed this is the city of our refuge, unto which if we flee not
by faith, it is impossible but we shall be plunged into continual
desperation. For all of us are fast locked under condemnation, and can no
otherwise be loosed, but by running to the mercy of God, whereby we are
absolved.

And they shall be my people.] This is the fruit of the covenant, to wit, that
God takes us for his people, and testifies that he will be the protector of our
salvation. For this manner of speech, and I will be their God, imports so much.
For he is not the God of the dead, neither receives he us under his safeguard,
but to make us partakers of his righteousness, and of life: Psalm. 33.12. Psalm.
144.15.
for David cries excellently in the Psalms; Blessed are the people who have
the Lord for their God. Now we need not doubt but this doctrine belongs even
to us also. For although the Israelites occupied the first place, and were the
right and lawful heirs of the covenant: yet their prerogative hinders not us
to have our portion in it. So that the wider and larger the kingdom of Christ
spreads, so far has this covenant of salvation his efficacy. But some may
ask whether there were no certainty nor efficacy of the promise under the
law: they tasted not of Gods fatherly kindness in the remission of their sins?
Jeremy to the coming of Christ. I answer, Abraham was so excellent that the
like is not to be found at this day in all the world: I answer,

(...) Sanctuary. the candlestick and the table, whereupon the show bread was
set. But he calls this place in the plural number, the holy places. There was
then that secret place which was called the holiest of all, Golden censor, or
rather, the Arc of the covenant ouerlaid with gold: the two Cherubims, the
golden pot filled with Manna, Aarons Rod, and the two Tables. Hitherto the
Apostle follows the description of the Tabernacle. Now where he says, that
the pot into which Moses had put the Manna, and that Aarons rod which budded,
was in the Arc, with the two Tables: this may seem to contradict the holy
history, Aarons rod should be put before the Testimony; wherefore it is
probable that they were enclosed in the Arc with the two Tables: but when the
Temple was builded, every one of these things was placed by order. And indeed
the holy history recites this as a new thing, to wit, that there was nothing
in the Arc but the two Tables.

Of which things we will not now speak particularly.] of the Apostle, shall
herein curiously stay himself; such a one shall do it without ground. I
confess indeed that it may so fall out, for some respect, that this long
repetition may have place: but for the present, it is better to bethink us of
the matter which he handles. Now to descant beyond measure, as some do, is
not only unprofitable, but also dangerous. Some things there are here which
are not obscure, which also are fit for the edification of our faith: but we
had need to use discretion in our choice therein, and to keep a modest and
sober course, to the end we desire not to know more than that which it has
pleased the Lord to reveal unto us.

6 Now when these things were thus ordained, the Priests went always into the
first Tabernacle, and accomplished the service.

7 But into the second went the high Priest alone once every year, not without
blood, which he offered for himself, and for the ignorances of the people.

8 Whereby the holy Ghost this signified, that the way into the holiest of all
was not yet opened, while as yet the first Tabernacle was standing.

9 Which was a figure for that present time, wherein were offered gifts and
sacrifices that could not make holy, concerning the conscience, him that did
the service.

10 Which only stood in meats and drinks, and diverse washings, and carnal
rites, which were enjoined, until the time of reformation.

11 But Christ being come an high Priest of good things to come, by a greater,
and more perfect Tabernacle not made with hands, that is, not of this building,

12 Neither by the blood of goats and calves: but by his own blood entered he
in once unto the holy place, and obtained eternal redemption for us.

NOw these things thus ordained, etc.] most difficulty. He says that the
Priests which performed the services about the sacrifices, were always
accustomed to enter into the first Tabernacle: but the high Priest entered only
once every year with a solemn sacrifice into the holiest place of all. And of
this he gathers, that whilst this Tabernacle of the law was standing, the
Sanctuary was yet closed up, and the way was no otherwise opened into the
kingdom of God, but by the overthrowing of this first Tabernacle. We see then
how that even the figure of the old tabernacle did admonish the Jews that
they were to aspire further. Those then who wittingly do shut up the passage,
by retaining the shadows of the law still, do very foolishly. Therefore to
this purpose, in the 8. verse, he takes the first Tabernacle in another sense
than heretofore. For in the sixth verse, it signified the common Sanctuary; but
here it signifies the whole body of the Tabernacle. For it is set as opposite
to the Sanctuary of Christ, whereof he will speak by and by. He says that
the taking down thereof was to our great profit, because that by the ruin of
it, access is given us to come the more familiarly to God.

For himself.] Sagaga, which properly signifies error: yet notwithstanding it
is taken generally for all kind of sin. For indeed, we never sin but we
are deceived by the intisements of Satan. True it is that the Apostle means
not a simple ignorance (as they call it) but under this word he also
comprehends voluntary sins. But, as I have said, there is never any sin
committed without error or ignorance. For although a man do sin wittingly
and willingly, yet notwithstanding he must be blinded by his lust, so as he is
unable to judge rightly, even forgetting himself, and God likewise. For men
never run upon their own ruin willingly, unless being first inwrapped by the
fallacies and bewithchings of Satan, they err from a right judgment.

Which was a similitude.] made according to the first. For his meaning is that
this Tabernacle was a second portraiture answerable to the former. For the
picture of a man ought so to be compared with the man himself, that when we
see the picture, our minds may by and by conceive the personage of him that is
represented thereby. Moreover he says, that it was a sign for the present
time: to wit, whilst the outward observation stood in force: to the end he
might restrain the continuance and use thereof to the time of the Law. For it
agrees with that which he adds immediately, to wit, that all the ceremonies
were ordained till the time of reformation. Neither is the verb of the present
tence which he uses repugnant hereunto, when he says, in the which sacrifices
are offered. For in that he has to do with the Jews, he speaks by way of
yielding, or granting; as if he were of the number of them that offered
sacrifices. As concerning these words, gifts and sacrifices, there is the same
difference that is between the general, and the special.

Sanctify as touching the conscience.] That is to say, which do not pearce
unto the soul, to give true sanctification unto it. In stead of the word to
sanctify, others translate to consummate or finish: which I reject not:
notwithstanding me thinks to sanctify, seems more fitting to the scope of
the text. Now to the end the readers may the better understand what the
Apostles meaning is, we must note the Antithesis that is between the flesh and
the conscience. He says that those who offered sacrifices under the Law, could
not be washed by them spiritually, or inwardly within the conscience. His
reason is added, because all the ceremonies were carnal. What leaves he now
more unto them? they only purge, or sanctify the body, seeing the Apostle
thereby means, that these earthly figures reach not unto the soul. For
although such figures were true testimonies of perfect holiness, yet had they
not this holiness in them, neither could they give it unto men. For it was
needful that the faithful should be brought to Christ by such helps, to the
end they might seek that in him which was wanting in the figures. Paul calls
them, Gal. 4.9. Whereas he says, until the time of reformation, he alludes to
the prophecy of Ierem. 31.37. for the new covenant succeeded the old, as a
reformation of it. He does purposely name, meats and drinks, and such other
things which were of no great importance: because men might the more certainly
judge by these small and light observations, how far off the Law was from the
perfection of the Gospel.

But Christ being come an high Priest, etc.] Now he brings forth the truth of
the things which were under the law, to the end that turning away their eyes
from the figures, they might look unto Christ in whom the substance was to be
found. For he which believes that all that which was then shadowed out, was
truly manifested in Christ; will no longer entangle his mind about shadows,
but will embrace the truth and the very body it self. Now we must diligently
note the parts wherein he compares Christ, with the high Priest who was in old
time under the Law. once then is common to them both: but to the earthly Priest
it was yearly: and to the heavenly Priest eternally until the consummation of
ye world. The offering of blood is common to the^ both: Christ an high Priest
present, etc. do not rightly express the Apostles meaning. For he signifies
that the Leuiticall Priests having performed their office unto the time
appointed for them, Christ was put into their place, as we have seen chap. 7.

By this clause, of good things to come, are signified eternal good things.
For as in this place the time to come is opposed to the time present, so also
are the good things to come, to those present. The sum is, that we are
brought into the kingdom of heaven by the Priesthood of Christ, and are in
such wise made partakers of spiritual righteousness, and of eternal life,
that it is unlawful for us to desire any better things. Christ therefore has
wherewithal for to hold us and satisfy us in himself. By a greater and more
perfect Tabernacle, etc. Although some expound this place d^^ers ways, yet I
doubt not but the Apostle understands it of the body of Christ. For as the
Leuiticall Priests in former time entered into the most holy place by the common
Sanctuary, so Christ is entered into the heavenly glory by his body: because
ordained to bring men to Christ: (the eternal salvation of the soul only
depending on him) so the sacrifices were true testimonies of this salvation.
What means the Apostle then, when he mentions the purification of the
flesh? Surely he speaks of the figurative or sacramental purgation, in this
sense; If the blood of beasts were a true witness of purgation, The blood of
beasts purified sacramentally: but Christ's blood does it really.
so as it sanctified, and did purify sacramentally: how much more shall Christ
himself who is the truth, I say not bear witness of purgation by outward
ceremony, but shall indeed give it to the consciences? And therefore it is an
argument from the signs to the thing signified: because the effect of the
thing far excels the truth of the signs.

Who by the eternal Spirit, etc.] Now he shows very plainly, from whence the
death of Christ takes his dignity, to wit, from the virtue of the Spirit, and
not from the outward act. the eternal Spirit, to the end we might know, that
the reconciliation which he made was eternal. When he says without spot,
although he alludes to the sacrifices of the law, where the beasts that were
sacrificed ought to be free from imperfection or fault: yet notwithstanding
his meaning is that Christ only is the proper and lawful sacrifice to appease
God. For some fault might always be found in the others. And for that cause he
said before that the covenant of the law was not so perfect, but some fault was
to be found therewith. Christ's sacrifice absolutely perfect in all points
But this perfection which is in Christ, has nothing in it which is not full
in all points.

By dead works, he understands those works which beget death, or which are
fruits of death. For even as the life of the soul consists in the conjunction
that we have with God; so those who are estranged from him by sin, are very
rightly esteemed dead. Now we are to note the end of this purgation: to wit,
that we should serve the living God. For although we be washed by Christ,
Nothing we do is acceptable in Gods sight, till we be purged by the blood of
Christ.
yet it is not that we should by and by go wallow our selves afresh in our
dung: but that our purity might serve to the glory of God. Moreover, the
Apostle hereby teaches us, that nothing proceeds from us which can be
acceptable unto God, till we be purged by the blood of Christ. For seeing we
are all of us enemies of God, before we be reconciled, he must in his justice
hate all our works. The beginning therefore of the true and lawful service of
God, is reconciliation. Furthermore, seeing there is no work of ours so pure
and clean without spot, that of it self can be acceptable and well pleasing
unto God: therefore it is necessary that the blood of Christ should come
between to wash away all the spots that are in them. Thus we must note the
seemly antithesis which he makes between the living God; and dead works.

And therefore he is the Mediator of the new Testament, through death, which
was for the transgression. If this be found in Christ alone, and is not to be
found in any other, it follows that he is the true and only Mediator. He
also touches the virtue and efficacy of his death, when he says yt the price
was paid for sins, which could not be purged by the blood of beasts under the
former Testament. By which words he would have the Jews to pass from the law
to Jesus Christ. For if the weakness of the law is so great, that all the
remedies which it gives to wash away sins, do not accomplish that which
they signify: what is he that would rest himself in them, as in a sure
haven? This only point, I say, ought to be a sufficient spur unto them to
desire a reformation of the law: because whilst they rest still in that, it
cannot be avoided but they must fall into a perpetual anxietie of conscience.
They must needs be in perpetual anguish of conscience, that rest only in the
do^trine of the law.
Contrariwise, when we are once come to Christ, nothing remains that may
torment us, because in him we find and obtain full and perfect redemption.
Thus then by these words he shows the weakness of the law, to the end the
Jews should no longer rest in it: and withal teaches them to keep
themselves close to Christ, because in him is to be found whatsoever can be
desired to quiet their consciences. Paul says, that the law was an ordinance
that was against us. For when the sinner presented himself, and did publicly
confess that he was indebted to God, and in offering of an innocent beast did
acknowledge himself worthy of eternal death: what gained he by his
sacrifice, unless we might peradventure say that he sealed to his own death
by this obligation? In a word, they had no better means to assure them of the
remission of their sins, than in looking unto Christ. Now if the only
beholding of Christ did wash away their sins, they could never be delivered
from them, if they should still have rested in the law. True it is that David
says, Psalm. 32.1. Blessed is the man to whom the Lord imputes not sin: but
to attain the joyful tidings of this blessedness, it was necessary for him to
turn his eyes from the law, and to fasten them upon Christ. For he shall never
be delivered from condemnation, that abides in the law.

They which were called received the promise, etc.] The covenant which God has
made with us tends to this end, that we being adopted of him for his children,
are at the last made inheritors of eternal life. The Apostle shows that we
obtain so great a benefit by the means of Christ: from whence it appears
that the accomplishment of this his covenant is in him. As touching the promise
of the eternal inheritance, he takes it for the heritage promised: as if he
should have said, The promise of eternal life has no otherwise had his effect
toward us for our enjoying of it, but by the death of Christ. It is very sure
that life was promised in old time to the Fathers, and the same which is now at
this day, was from the beginning the heritage of the children of God: but we
enter not into the possession of it, unless the blood of Christ do go
before. He makes express mention of those which are called: to the end he
might move the Jews with the greater care, who were partakers of this
vocation. For it is a special favor of God when the knowledge of Christ is
given us: and therefore so much the more ought we to take heed, that in
despising so inestimable a treasure, our spirits do not wander elsewhere. Some
take this word called here, for elected: but unfitly, as I think. For the
Apostle teaches here the very same thing that S. Paul does Romans 3.25. to wit,
that righteousness and salvation was obtained for us by the blood of Christ, but
we receive it by faith.

For where a Testament is, etc.] Berith, in the Hebrew tongue, signifies
Covenant, and not Testament. But because the Greek word Diathece, has these
two significations, to wit, of the Covenant, and of the Testament: for this
cause the Apostle alluding to the second signification, affirms that the
promises could not otherwise be of any weight or stabilitie, unless they had
been sealed by the death of Christ. Which he proves by the common right of
Testaments: the effect of which is deferred till the death of the Testator.
Although it may yet seem that the Apostle grounds his speech upon too weak a
reason: so as that which he says may easily be refuted. For God made no
Testament under the law, but made a Covenant with the ancient people. And thus
the Apostle could not gather from the thing it self, neither yet from the
name, that the death of Christ was necessary. For if he would infer by the
matter it self, that it was needful Christ should die, because the Testament
is not ratified, till the death of the Testator come between: some might
presently reply, that Berith (which word Moses uses here and there to this
purpose) is a Covenant made between the living: so as we cannot think
otherwise of the matter. As touching the name, he simply alludes, as I have
said, to the signification of the Greek word Diathece, which has two
significations: and therefore he chiefly insists upon the thing. Neither is
this repugnant to that which some might say, that it was a covenant which God
made with his people. For this covenant was like a Testament, because it was
established, and confirmed by blood. This principle then must be retained, that
God never used signs at randon, nor without cause. Now so it is that God in
confirming of the Covenant intermingled blood therewithal. It follows then
that it was not a contract between the living (as they say) but such a
contract as required death to come between. For a Testament has this
condition proper unto it, that it begins to take effect after death. If we then
consider that the Apostle conte^ds rather about the substance, than the name:
moreover if we come to weigh with our selves that he takes that (which I have
said) for a thing without controversy, to wit, that God has ordained nothing
idly or in vain; there will be no great difficulty.

18 Wherefore neither was the first ordained without blood.

19 For when Moses had spoken every precept to the people according to the law,
he took the blood of calves, and of goats, with water and purple wool and
hysope, and sprinkled both the book and all the people,

20 Saying, This is the blood of the Testament, Exodus 24.8.
which God has appointed unto you.

21 Moreover, he sprinkled likewise the Tabernacle with blood also, and all the
ministering vessels.

22 And almost all things are by the law purged with blood, and without the
shedding of blood there is no remission.

23 It was then necessary, that the similitudes of heavenly things should be
purified with such things: but the heavenly things themselves are purified with
better sacrifices than those.

WHerefore also etc.] Martyria, that is to say, witness) to praise and extol
the same; amongst other commendations should use these words; Surely this
Covenant must needs rightly be called Testimony, to which the heavenly Angels
gave testimony from above; to the which there were also so many credible
witnesses here on earth, to wit, all the holy Prophets, Apostles, and so
infinite a company of Martyrs: yea to the sealing whereof even the Son of God
was given as a witness thereof in his own person: if one should speak on this
manner, no man would say there were any absurdity in it. And yet
notwithstanding the propriety of the Hebrew word Theuda, does not expressly
conclude this: but because nothing is said herein which agrees not very well to
the matter, no wise man will stand to descant too curiously about the word.
Thus then the Apostle affirms that the old Testament was dedicated with blood.
From whence he gathers that men were thereby admonished, it could not be
otherwise stable and effectual unless death came in between. For he denies
that the blood of beasts which was then shed, was able to ratify an eternal
covenant. And that this may be the better understood, the manner of sprinkling
which Moses here recites is to be noted. Covenant was dedicated, not as though
it had any prophanes in it self, but because there is nothing so holy which
men profane not by their uncleanness, if God himself should not prevent and
remedy the same by renewing all things. This consecration then was made in
respect of men, who only stand in need of it.

He afterward adds, the Tabernacle, with all the vessels, We can neither
seek, nor serve the true God, till faith apprehend the blood of Christ.
yea and the book it self also was sprinkled with blood: by which ceremony
the people were advertised that it was impossible either to seek God, or to
behold him unto salvation, or to serve him duly, unless faith had always an
eye to the blood that came between. For first of al we must needs grant that
the majesty of God is fearful, For as soon as they were to call upon God,
they turned toward the Sanctuary: and it is a manner of speech common in the
Scripture, to say they presented themselves before the face of the Lord, when
they appeared in the Temple.

This is the blood of the Testament.] The word and the Sacrament must go
together.
if the word did not go before? therefore the sign is but as a thing hanging
and depending upon the word. And we must note withal that this word is not a
mumbling of it like a charm used in some magical arre, but that which is
distinctly pronounced with a loud voice; and it must also be spoken to the
people: all which the words of the covenant which was appointed unto you, do
show. Therefore they abuse the Sacraments, nay they wickedly corrupt them,
Exposition of the word, the life and soul of the Sacrament.
when as there is no exposition of the commandment added; which exposition is,
as you would say, the life and soul of the Sacrament. The Papists then who
separate the understanding of the things signified from the signs, do retain
the dead elements only without any efficacy. This place admonishes us, that
all the promises of God are then profitable unto us, when they are established,
and confirmed by the blood of Christ. For when S. Paul witnesses, 2. Cor. 1.2.
that all the promises of God are Yea and Amen in Christ, The promises profit us
nothing, unless faith see them written in our hearts with the blood of Christ.
it is then performed when his blood is engraven in our hearts as a seal: or
rather when we not only hear God speak: but do also therewithal see Christ
presenting himself for a pledge of those things which the word utters. If
so be this thought possess us: to wit, that all that which we read is not
only written with inck, but with the blood of the Son of God: and that when
the Gospel is preached this blood distilleth with the voice; surely we shall
be so much the more attentive, and shall receive the word with much greater
reverence, than ever we did before.

The sprinkling, whereof Moses makes mention, was once a figure of this.
Although there be more to be understood in these words, than Moses expresses.
For ye hear him not say that the book was sprinkled, but the people: neither
makes he any mention at all of goats, or of wool died in purple, nor of
hysope. Now as touching the book, although it cannot be plainly proved that
it was sprinkled, yet there is some probable conjecture of it, whereby we may
gather that it is so, because it is said, that Moses took the book before all
the people and read it in their hearing, after the sacrifice was ended: Exodus
24.5.6.7
to the end the people might enter into an obligation unto God, answering to
the solemn covenant pronounced by the mouth of Moses. As touching the rest, it
seems to me the Apostle has intermingled diverse purgations, of which we may
give the same reason. And surely no inconvenience is in it; seeing he handles a
general point touching the purgation of the old Testament, which was made by
blood. Now whereas they made a sprinkle of hysope, and of purple wool, we
need not doubt but they represented the mystical sprinkling which is made by
the holy Spirit. The virtue of Hysope.
We know that Hysope has a singular virtue to purge and to digest superfluous
humors: so Christ uses his spirit as a water-sprinkle to sprinkle us with his
blood, when as he gives a lively feeling of repentance, David also in the 51.
Psalm alludes to this when he says; Purge me O Lord with hysope, and I shall
be clean. Those who will be sober in searching out the meaning of these
things, will content themselves with that which we have touched upon this
place, and will spare their labor to go search out higher speculations.

And almost all things under the law, almost, it seems his meaning is to show
that there are some other things which are purged after another manner. And
indeed they often used washings with water both to cleanse themselves withal,
as also other impure things. Notwithstanding even this water had no virtue to
cleanse but as they had it from the sacrifices: so as the Apostle says true,
when for a conclusion he sets down, that without shedding of blood there was
no remission. Wherefore impuritie was imputed until such time as it was
cleansed by sacrifice. And as out of Christ there is neither purity nor
salvation, so without blood nothing could be pure nor healthful: for Christ
must never be separated from the sacrifice of his death. But the Apostles
meaning was simply to say, that this sign was added always in a manner. And
if it fell out that the purgation were not sometimes so made, yet
notwithstanding it depended upon the blood, seeing all the ceremonies did as
you would say borrow their virtue from this general purgation. Neither are we
to imagine that every particular man among the people was sprinkled: (for if it
had bin so, how could so little a portion of blood have satisfied so great a
multitude?) notwithstanding the purgation came to all. So then this word
almost, is as much as if it had been said, The use of this ceremony was very
frequent, so as it was very seldom left out in ordinary purgations. For
whereas Chrysostom thinks that by this word is signified an improprietie,
because all was there in figures only, it is nothing near the Apostles
meaning. There is no remission. By this means men were shut out from before
the face of God: for in as much as he is justly angry with them all, they
could not promise themselves to find any favor with him, till he were
appeased. There is but one means to procure reconciliation: which is the blood
of Christ.
Now there was but one mean whereby to appease him: to wit, by the
satisfaction which was made by blood. Wherefore we must look for no pardon of
sins, if we bring not blood. Which we then do, when by faith we have our
recourse to the death of Christ.

It was then necessary, etc.] To the end none should object, then which some
do ask, and quite from the purpose, to wit, whether Christ was not always
present there. For the Apostle disputes here only of the intercession, by
which he entered into the celestial Sanctuary.

Not that he should offer himself often, himself, and not a beast. And then
he notes another difference, to wit, that he did not often offer this
sacrifice, as under the law, where they often, yea and almost continually
reiterated their sacrifices.

For then he must have often suffered, since the foundation of the world,
because that in all times since the beginning there have bin sins which have
had need of purgation. If then the sacrifice of Christ had not been effectual
from the beginning, Christ's sacrifice effectual from the beginning.
none of the Fathers had obtained salvation. For seeing that of themselves they
were culpable before God, and deserved his wrath, they had bin destitute of the
remedy of redemption, and had had no means to escape the judgment seat of
God, unless Christ by enduring of death once, had suffered from the beginning of
the world to the end thereof, for the obtaining of Gods favor for men. And
therefore let us satisfy our selves with this only sacrifice, unless
peradventure we expect many deaths of Christ. By this it also evidently
appears how frivolous that distinction of the Papists is, The frivolous
distinction of the Papists, touching the bloody and unbloody sacrifice.
in which subtilty they so much please themselves, when they say that the
offering up of Christ upon the cross was bloody; but the sacrifice of the
Mass, which they forge to be offered up every day, is without blood. For if
this subtle shift may have place, the Spirit of God shall be blamed of
vnadursednes, because he remembered not himself concerning this. For the
Apostle takes it for a thing out of question, that there is no sacrifice
without death. I pass not, that the ancient Doctors have spoken thus: for it
is not in the power of men to forge what sacrifices they list. This principle
of the holy Ghost remains sure, that sins are not purged by sacrifices,
unless there be effusion of blood. Therefore it is an invention of the devil,
to hold that Christ should be often offered. But now in the end of the world he
appeared once, etc. He calls the end of the world, that which S. Paul calls
the fulness of time, Gal. 4: for the time was then expired, which the Lord had
ordained by his eternal decree. And by this means the curiosities of men are
answered, to the end they should not presume to enquire; some, why it came not
sooner; others, why rather then, than at another time: for we ought to rest and
stay our selves in the secret counsel of God, who best knows to give a reason
of it, although it be not manifested to us. To be short, the Apostle signifies
that the death of Christ fell out just at that time wherein his Father sent him
into the world for that purpose: who as he has in his own power the lawful
government of all things, so has he the times also, seeing he ordreth them by
an admirable wisdom, howsoever it be often hidden from us. Moreover, this
consummation or end, is opposed to the imperfection of the time past: for God
did so keep the people of the old Testament in suspense, that one might easily
judge it was not yet come to a firm and settled estate. For this cause S. Paul
teaches in the 1. Cor. 10.11. that the ends of the world are come upon us,
signifying thereby that the kingdom of Christ has brought the fulfilling of all
things. But if the fulness of time were then when Christ appeared to purge our
sins, they do him great injury and outrage who would that his sacrifice
should be renewed; as if all things were not fulfilled at his death. He then
appeared once: for if the thing should be done the second, or the third time,
there should be imperfection in the first oblation: which were a thing
repugnant to perfection. For the destruction of sin, by the sacrifice of
himself. This agrees with the prophecy of Daniel, by which the end of the
sacrifices was foretold, after the promise made of the sealing up, and
abolishing of sins. For to what end should purgations serve after the
destruction of sins? Now this destruction consists in this, that sins are
no more imputed to those who have their refuge to the sacrifice of Christ: How
sin is said to be destroyed.
for although necessity be laid upon us to ask pardon every day, because we
do every day provoke the wrath of God afresh against us, notwithstanding for as
much as we are always reconciled to God by the pledge of Christ his only
death, and not otherwise: therefore it is rightly said that sin is destroyed
by it.

And as it is appointed unto men to die once, Lazarus, and such other, the
solution is easy, to wit, 1. Cor. 15.51. 1 Thessalonians. 4.17.
so that those which in a moment shall be dispoyled of corruption by a sudden
change, are excepted out of this number. For in this manner of speech he
comprehends none but those which of long time have waited in the dust for the
redemption of their bodies. He shall appear the second time without sin. The
Apostle still aims at this mark, to wit, that we should not vex our selves
with vain and froward desires after new purgations, because the death of
Christ alone, is sufficient for us. And therefore he says, that he once
appeared with sacrifice to purge away sins, and that by his second appearing
he shall openly manifest what efficacy his death has had, so as sin shall
no more have power to hurt. To abolish sins, that is, by his satisfaction to
deliver those from the fault, and from condemnation which have sinned. He says
many, for all: as in Romans 5.15. True it is that Christ's death profits not all:
but this comes to pass, because their incredulity hinders them. But it were
in vain to contend hereabouts in this place, because the Apostle disputes not
whether the death of Christ profits a few or many: but his plain meaning is,
that he died for others, and not for himself. Wherefore he opposes many, to
one only.

But what means he by these words, that Christ shall appear without sin? By
the word sin, some understand the purgation or sacrifice purging sin: as Romans
8.3. and 2. Cor. 5.21. and in many other places of Moses: but in my judgment,
he meant something more special, to wit, that when Christ shall come he shall
manifest how true it is that he has abolished sins: so as there shall be no
more need of any other sacrifice to appease God. As if he should say, when we
shall come before the judgment seat of Christ, then we shall feel that
nothing was wanting in his death. To which that also is to be referred which he
adds by and by after, To salvation to those which look for him: Others do
construe it otherwise on this manner; To those that look for him for
salvation. But I think the other sense is more proper. For his meaning is,
that those shall feel a full salvation from Christ, who with quiet minds do
rest upon it. For this looking for, is to be referred to the circumstance of
the present matter. True it is that the Scripture in other places attributes
this in common to all the faithful; that they wait for the coming of the
Lord, to the end that by it they may be discerned from the unbelievers; to whom
also the only mention of this his coming is fearful as soon as they hear
tell of it: but because the Apostle contends now that we ought to rest our
selves satisfied in the only sacrifice of Christ, he calls it the looking for
of Christ, when being contented with this only redemption, we lust not after
new remedies or helps.

CHAP. X.
1 For the law having the shadow of good things to come, and not the very image
of the things, can never with " or, with the same.
those sacrifices, which they offer year by year continually sanctify the
comers thereunto.

2 For would they not then have ceased to have been offered, because that the
offerers once purged, should not have had no more conscience of sins.

3 But in Leuit. 16.14.
those sacrifices there is a remembrance again every year.

4 For it is impossible that the blood of Bulls and goats should take away
sins.

FOr the law having the shadow, etc.] He borrows this similitude from the art
of painting: for he takes this word shadow in this place, otherwise than it is
taken, Col. 2.17. where S. Paul calls the old ceremonies, shadows, because
they had not the very substance of the things in them, which they did
represent. But the Apostle says here, they were like rude draughts, which are
but the shadows of the lively painting. For painters are wont to draw that
which they purpose to counterfeit or represent with a cole, A similitude
setting forth the difference between the law and the Gospel.
before they set on the lively colors with the pensill. The Apostle then puts
this difference between the law and the Gospel: to wit, that that which at
this day is drawn and painted with fresh and lively colors, was only
shadowed out under the law by a rude or gross draught. Thus he yet again
confirms that which he said before, to wit, that the law was no vain thing,
neither the ceremonies thereof unprofitable. For although it had not the
perfect image of heavenly things, as if the workman had put his last endeavor
to it, yet even this rough draught was greatly profitable to the Ancient
Fathers: albeit our condition be now much better. And let us observe, that even
those things which are now set before our eyes, were showed to them a far
off. The Jews and Gentiles have but one means of salvation for the substance:
the diversity stands only in the manner of revelation.
And therefore both we, and they have the same Christ, the same righteousness,
the same sanctification, and the same salvation: there is no difference or
diversity, but in the manner of setting them forth. I think by these words of
good things to come, he means eternal good things. I confess indeed that
the kingdom of Christ which we now enjoy, was long ago foretold to come: but
the words of the Apostle signify that we have the lively pourtraiture of good
things to come. He means then that sample and spiritual pattern, the full
enjoying whereof is deferred until the day of the resurrection, and to the
world to come. And yet I do again confess that these good things began to be
revealed from the beginning of Christ his kingdom: but the question is now,
that the good things to come in this place are not only so called in regard of
the old Testament, but because we also do yet hope and wait for them.

Which they offered year by year continually:] He speaks chiefly of the
yearly sacrifice, whereof mention is made Leuit. 16. although in naming one
kind, he comprehends the whole. Thus he reasons then, Where there is no more
conscience and remorse for sin, there also is no more need of oblations. Now
under the Law they offered one and the same offering often. Therefore it
follows that God was not satisfied; the condemnation taken away, neither the
consciences of men quieted: for if it had been otherwise, they would then have
ceased to offer any more sacrifices. Moreover, we are diligently to observe,
that he says with the same sacrifices, which had the like reason. For they
were esteemed rather by the same ordinance of God, than of diverse beasts. And
this argument alone is sufficient of it self to refute the subtlety of the
Papists, by which they think they finely avoid the absurdity of excusing the
sacrifice of the Mass. For when we tell them it is superfluous to reiterate
the sacrifice, seeing that which Christ has once offered retains his virtue
for ever; they by and by reply, the sacrifice offered in the Mass, is not
another, but the same. This is their solution. But how does the Apostle here
contradict it? Thus, the sacrifice which is offered and many times reiterated:
although it be the same, is not effectual, nor sufficient for the purgation of
sins. An objection of the Papists answered, wherein they say they offer not
an other sacrifice, but the same which Christ offered.
Let the Papists now cry a thousand times if they will, that the sacrifice
which they offer every day, is the same sacrifice which Christ has once made
upon the Cross, and none other: I will always maintain against them by the
mouth of the Apostle, that if the oblation of Christ had this virtue to appease
God, then this his sacrifice has not only put an end to other oblations, but
also that it is unlawful to reiterate the same: whereby we see, that it is an
execrable sacrilege, to offer Christ in the Mass.

But in those sacrifices there is a remembrance, remembered, it is to the end
the condemnation of them might be taken away, by the remedy of the sacrifice
presently offered: he means not every remembrance then, but that which
brings such a confession of faults, and of the condemnation which they
deserve before God, that it should be needful to have a sacrifice, to procure
a remedy. Such is the sacrifice of the Mass amongst the Papists. For they
forge that the grace of the death of Christ is there applied unto us, that our
sins might be done away. But if the Apostle rightly collecteth that the
sacrifices of the law were weak, because they were reiterated every year to
obtain pardon: truly then a man may gather by the same reason that the
sacrifice of the death of Christ was weak, if it must be celebrated every
day, to the end the virtue of it may be applied unto us. Let them paint out
their Mass then with what colors soever they will, yet shall they not be
able to avoid this fault, to wit, that in the same their sacrifice, they
blaspheme, and offer wicked outrage unto Christ.

For it is impossible that the blood of goats, etc.]

5 Wherefore when he comes into the world, he says, Sacrifice and offering
thou would not: Psalm. 40.9.
but a body have thou ordained me.

6 In burnt offerings and sin offerings thou have had no pleasure.

7 Then said I, Lo, I come (in the beginning of the book it is written of me)
that I should do thy will, O God. (...) God, unless it were, as you would
say, covered with this form. It is necessary then that we come to the
kingdom of Christ, before this be perfectly accomplished in all points, to wit,
that God required no sacrifices. There is such another place in the 16. Psalm,
verse. 10. Thou will not suffer thine holy one to see corruption. For albeit God
should have delivered David from corruption as touching himself, yet this was
truly and only fulfilled in Christ. There is great weight then in this speech,
when he promises that he will do the will of God, for he leaves no place for
the sacrifices. From hence then we gather, that he cease not to obey God
perfectly, although he use no sacrifices: which yet could not be true, till
after the abolishing of the law. I deny not but David as well in this place,
as in the 51. Psalm, ver. 18. does not so lessen the estimation of the
external sacrifices, but that he still preferred that which was principal:
and yet we must not doubt but he stretched his sight to the kingdom of Christ
in both places. The Apostle then witnesses that Christ is rightly brought in
speaking in this Psalm: where amongst the Commandments of God, the sacrifices
which God so straightly required under the law, are not set in the last place.

But a body have thou ordained me.] The words of David do signify another
thing: for in the Psalm it is, Thou have pierced mine ears. Which manner of
speech some think to be drawn from an ancient custom of the law. For if
there were any which made none account of being set free at the Iubile, but
would subject himself to perpetual bondage, his ear was to be pierced with
an a^le, Exodus 21.6. This is the sense then after their opinion; Lord, I am thy
servant for ever. Notwithstanding I take it otherwise: to wit, that he yields
himself teachable and obedient. For we are deaf, till God have opened our
ears: that is to say, till he has corrected the dulnes and obstinacy which
is rooted in us. And yet there is a close antithesis between the rude and
ignorant people (to whom the sacrifices were as shadows or remembrances
without virtue) and David, to whom God had more lively revealed the lawful and
spiritual use of the same. Now the Apostle following ye Greeks says, A body
have thou ordained me. For the Apostles were not so scrupulous to recite the
very words; provided that they always kept themselves from abusing the
Scriptures falsely to their own advantage. We must always weigh and consider
to what end they alleged testimonies. For as touching the drift and scope of
the place, they were wary not to draw the Scriptures by violence to a wrong
sense: but as touching the words and other things which concern not the matter
they entreat of, they give themselves great liberty.

In the beginning of the book, etc.] book we understand the law, which
prescribes the rule of holy life to all the children of God. Although another
exposition seems more true and proper: to wit, that he confesses himself to
be of the number of those who yield themselves obedient unto God. I grant that
the law commands all of us to obey God: But David means that he is numbered
among those who are called to obey God. And after, he protests that he obeyed
this vocation, when he says, I desired to do thy will. Which specially agrees
unto Christ. For although all the faithful do aspire to the righteousness of
God, yet there is none but Christ which may be said to be wholly addicted to
do the will of God. And yet notwithstanding this place ought to kindle in us a
readiness to obey. For, for this cause Christ is set before us, as the
pattern of perfect obedience, to the end that all which are his, should
enforce themselves to follow his steps, striving who can be foremost: yea that
they altogether with one consent may answer the calling of god, as also in
their whole life to give approbation that these words, Lo I come, are truly
fulfilled in them. To the same purpose also is that to be referred which
follows: It is written of me that I should do thy will, O God. As it is said
elsewhere, that the end of our election is, to be holy and without blame before
him. Ephesians. 1.4.

He takes away the first, that he may establish the second.] Here you see why
and to what purpose this place is alleged: to wit, to the end we might know,
that the full and perfect righteousness under the kingdom of Christ, has no
need of the sacrifices of the law. For the will of God, as touching the rule
of perfection, is established, though they be taken away. It follows then,
that since the sacrifice of Christ is come, the sacrifices of beasts ought to
cease; seeing they have nothing in common with him. For (as we have said) David
in this place had no occasion to reject the sacrifices for any fault coming
from them: seeing he bends not his speech against hypocrites, neither reprooues
he the superstitious abuse of Gods worship and service therein; but denies
that the use of sacrifices should be required of a faithful man, which was
taught in holiness: testifying that such a one may perfectly obey God without
them.

By which will we are sanctified.] David to his purpose, he now by occasion
turns some words to his profit: rather to deck and beautify the matter
withal, than precisely to follow the exposition of the said place. David
protests, not so much in his own person, as in the person of Christ, that he
is ready to do the will of God. This extends it self to all the members of
Christ. For the doctrine of S. Paul is general, where he says, This is the
will of God, even your sanctification, that every one of you should abstain
from uncleanness. 1 Thessalonians. 4.3. But because the example of this obedience was
in Christ far more excellent than in any other, principally by taking upon
him the form of a servant, and then in presenting himself to the death of the
cross: for this cause the Apostle says, that Christ has satisfied the
commandment of his father, in offering himself a sacrifice; and that we by
this means have been sanctified.

When he says by the offering of the body of Jesus Christ, he alludes to that
part of the Psalm, A body have thou ordained me, at the least it is so in the
Greek. And thus he signifies that Christ found sufficient matter in himself
wherewith to appease his father: Christ alone is sufficient to fulfill
whatsoever God requires.
so as he needed no supplies from any other. For if the Leuiticall priest had
had a fit body, the sacrifices of beasts had been superfluous. But Christ
alone suffices, and of himself is sufficient to fulfill whatsoever God
requires.

11 And every Priest stands daily ministering, and often times offers one
manner of offering, which can never take away sins.

12 But this man after he had offered one sacrifice for sins, sits for ever
at the right hand of God,

13 And from henceforth carries, Psalm. 110.2. 1. Cor. 15.25.
till his enemies be made his footestoole.

14 For with one offering has he consecrated for ever them that are sanctified.

15 For the holy Ghost also bears us record: for after that he had said
before.

16 This is the Testament that I will make unto them after those days, says
the Lord, I will put my laws in their hearts, Ier. 31.33.
and in their minds I will write them.

17 And I will remember their sins and iniquities no more.

18 Now where remission of these things is, there is no more offering for sin.

ANd every Priest, etc.] which agrees not with Christ's. For all the faithful
have a full and absolute consecration in his only oblation. Although we may
expound the Greek word, He has finished, or perfected, consecrated: because
the question is now touching the things which concern the service of God. When
he says, those which are sanctified, under this word he comprehends all the
children of God: and admonishes us therein that we lose time to seek the
grace of our sanctification any where else.

But least men should make themselves believe that Christ is now idle in
heaven, he says again that he is set at the right hand of the Father.

For the holy Ghost also bears witness, Jeremy the second time. Heretofore
he alleged it to another end: to wit, to show that it was necessary the old
Testament should be abolished, in regard a new was promised, that it might
correct the weakness of the old. But now he aims at another thing. For he
only grounds himself, and stands upon this speech, Their sins, and their
iniquities will I remember no more: and thereof gathers, that there is no more
use left for sacrifices, seeing that sins are done away. It may seem this
consequence is not very firm. For howsoever heretofore there were innumerable
promises of the remission of sins in the Law, and in the Prophets; yet
notwithstanding the Church ceased not for all that to offer sacrifices still
for themselves: and therefore remission of sins excludes not sacrifices. But
if we do yet more nearly consider of every point; the Fathers had also the
same promises of remission of sins under the law that we now have: and resting
their faith upon the^, did call upon God, and rejoiced that they obtained
pardon. And yet notwithstanding all this, the Prophet as if he spoke of some
new thing not yet heard of, says, that there shall be no more remembrance of
sins before God, under the new Covenant. From this we gather, that sins are
now pardoned after another manner than they were in old time. But this
diversity consists neither in the word, nor in faith, but in the ransom of
the remission.

God now then no more remembers sins and iniquities, because the purgation
has been made for all, once. For otherwise the Prophet has affirmed in vain,
that it should be a benefit, and grace of the new Testament, That God would
remember our sins no more. Furthermore, seeing we are come to the end of the
disputation which is here handled touching the Priesthood of Christ; the
readers are to be advertised in few words, that the invention of the Papists
touching the sacrifice of the Mass, is no less refuted in this place, than
the sacrifices of the law are hereby abolished. They maintain that their Mass
is a sacrifice to do away the sins both of the quick and the dead: The
Apostle on the contrary says, that even this sacrifice of Christ ought not to
be reiterated of any: neither does he only say that this sacrifice of Christ is
one, but also that it was offered once. Add hereunto that he often attributes
to Christ alone the honor of the Priesthood, so as none is sufficient or meet
to offer Christ, but Christ himself only. None fit to offer Christ but
himself.
They have yet an evasion, when they call it an unbloody sacrifice: but the
Apostle without exception affirms, that to make a sacrifice, death is
required. Moreover, the Papists have yet another shift, when they reply that
the Mass is an applying of the only sacrifice once done. But the Apostle
teaches on the contrary, that the causes why the sacrifices of the law were
abolished by the death of Christ, was because that in them men remembered
sins. Four maine reasons proving the Mass to be full of sacrilege.
Whence it appears that this kind of applying which they have forged, is
ceased. In a word, let the Papists turn them on which side they list, yet shall
they never be able to avoid it, but that the present disputation of the
Apostle does still openly discover that their Mass is full of sacrilege.

For first of all the Apostle is witness, one, but also that it was but once
done, so as it is unlawful to reiterate the same: In the Mass, although they
buzze that it is the same sacrifice, yet notwithstanding it appears that they
do it every day: and themselves confess it. only sacrifice which Christ once
offered upon the cross: and discernes us from the Fathers by this mark, that
the manner of often sacrificing is abolished by the coming of Christ: The
Papists to the end that Christ his death may be fruitful and profitable unto
us, require daily applyings which is done by sacrifice: and thus Jews and
Christians should differ in nothing one from another, but in the external
sign.

19 Seeing therefore brethren, that by the blood of Jesus we may be bold to
enter into the holy place.

20 By the new and living way, which he has prepared for us, through the
veil, which is his flesh:

21 And seeing we have an hie Priest, which is over the house of God.

22 Let us draw near with a true heart in assurance of faith, our hearts being
pure from an evil conscience,

23 And washed in our bodies with pure water, let us keep the profession of our
hope without wavering (for he is faithful which has promised)

SEeing then brethren, etc.]

First he says, that we have liberty to enter into the holy places.] This
privilege was never given to the Fathers under the law. For it was forbidden
the people to enter into the visible Sanctuary: unless the high Priest bare
the names of the twelve tribes upon his shoulders, and twelve precious stones
upon his breast, for a remembrance of all the people. But now it is far
otherwise. For we have entrance into heaven, not by figure only, but in very
truth by the means of Christ: because he has made us royal Priests, 1. Pet.
2.9. He says by the blood of Jesus: because that when the high Priest entered
every year, the door of the Sanctuary was (...) to a fained, and a double
heart. In this word assurance, he shows what the nature of faith is: and
withal admonishes us that the grace of Christ cannot be received, but of
those which bring with them an assured and certain persuasion.

He calls it the clensing of the heart from an evil conscience, either when
we are accounted pure before God, body washed with pure water, many take it for
Baptism: but it seems more probable to me, that the Apostle alludes to the
ancient ceremonies of the law: so as by this word water, he signifies the holy
spirit, as Ezech. 36.25. speaks, saying, I will pour clean water upon you,
etc. Now the sum of the whole matter is this, that we are partakers of
Christ, if being sanctified in body, and in soul, we come to him: besides,
that this sanctification is an assured faith, a pure conscience, and a
cleanness both of body, and soul, which proceeds from the holy Ghost, and
is accomplished by him: and not a sanctification which consists in an outward
pomp of ceremonies. To the same purpose S. Paul exhorts the faithful to purge
themselves from all filthiness of the flesh, and spirit, seeing God has
adopted them for his children. 2. Cor. 7.1.

Let us keep the profession, etc.] Because he here exhorts the Jews to
perseverance, As hope springs out of says, so does ^t also nourish the same.
he calls it hope, rather than faith. For even as hope springs out of faith,
so also it nourishes faith, and maintains it unto the end. Furthermore he
requires confession: because it is no true faith, if it show not it self forth
before men. And it seems he does privily reprove the dissimulation of those,
who to get favor of their nation, were too scrupulous in the observation of
the ceremonies of the law. He would not have them to believe with the heart
alone then, but also to show by effects in what honor and estimation they had
Christ. Further, we are diligently to note the reason which he by and by
adds, to wit, that god who has promised, is faithful. That God is
faithful. Now this truth consists in the promise. For before we believe, it is
required that Gods voice go before. Secondly, we are taught, The promise of
God, the only object of faith.
And from this place we gather also, that there is a relation and mutual
correspondencie between the faith of men, and the promises of God: for if God
promise not, who can believe?

24 And let us consider one another, to provoke unto love, and to good works.

25 Not forsaking the fellowship that we have among our selves, as the manner
of some is: but let us exhort one another, and that so much the more, because
ye see the day draws near.

26 For if we sin willingly after that we have received and acknowledged the
truth, there remains no more sacrifice for sins,

27 But a fearful looking for of judgment, and violent fire, which shall
devour the adversaries.

And let us consider one another.] Jews should not be displeased to see the
Gentiles made partakers with them, and to be united with them into the same
body of the Church. Now in the first place he says, Let us consider one
another: for the^ God gathered his Church both of Jews and Gentiles, amongst
whom in former time there had been always great discord, so as this society
was as if one would have made fire and water to have agreed together. And
therefore the Jews withdrew and separated themselves, thinking it an
unreasonable thing, that the Gentiles should be compared with the^. Against this
perverse provocation of envy which pricked them forward, the Apostle sets a
contrary provocation, to wit, of love: for the Greek word which he uses,
signifies an earnestnes of contention. To the end then that the Jews who were
inflamed with envy, should not enter into combat against the Gentiles, he
exhorts them to an holy emulation: to wit, that they should stir up and
provoke one another to love. That which by and by after follows, confirms
this exposition: Not forsaking (says he) the fellowship, or our assembling.
The composition of the Greek word is to be noted, which signifies not simply
an assembly, or a congregation, but a congregation augmented with new
encreasings. The wall being then broken down, God assembled those together
which had bin strangers from the Church, to knit them unto his children, Ephesians.
2.14. Thus the Gentiles were a new and unwonted increasing of the Church. The
Jews took this as a great dishonor to them, so as many among them revolted
from the Church; thinking they had sufficient occasion so to do, because of
such a mingling of the Gentiles with them. For they could not easily be
persuaded that they ought to lose their prerogative. Why so? they thought that
the right of adoption belonged to them properly and particularly. The Apostle
then admonishes them that they should not be stirred up to forsake the Church
because of this equality: and to the end they might not think that he
admonishes them without cause, he gives them to wit, that it is a common vice
whereof they were guilty. We now understand what the Apostles meaning is, and
what necessity there was that constrained him to make this exhortation. Yet we
must from hence gather a general doctrine. For this disease reigns every
where among men, to wit, that every man is ready to prefer himself before
his brother, but especially those who seem to have somewhat in them more
excellent than others, can hardly endure that their inferiors should be made
their equals. Moreover there is almost in all of us such emulation, that every
one would willingly make Churches apart, if it were possible: why? because it
is hard to apply a man's self to the manners of others. The rich they envy one
another. And scarcely shall you find one among an hundred that would bestow so
much as the naming of one of their poor brethren, It is very difficult to
nourish and conserve the band of love and amit^e among brethren.
much less to esteem them as brethren, were it not that they are drawn unto
it either by some likeness and agreement in manners, or by other allurements
of outward profit and commodity: otherwise it is more than difficult to
nourish amongst us this perpetual concord.

Wherefore this admonition is exceeding needful even for us, to the end we may
be stirred up and provoked thereby to love, rather than to envy, and that we
separate not our selves from them with whom God has coupled us, but that we
love all those with a brotherly affection, who are united with us by one
consent of faith. And in very truth, by how much the more Satan watches by
all means to pluck us out of the Church, or craftily, A means to preserve
vniti^^
and as it were by stealth, to withdraw us from the same: so much the more
ought we to be careful to seek, and to love unity. And this we shall do
when none of us takes liberty to please himself, more than he ought, but
rather all of us aiming at this mark, even to provoke one another to love: and
that there be no other emulation amongst us, but to exceed one another in good
works. For certainly the contempt of our brethren, our peevishness, envy; the
over excessive love and estimation of our selves, and all other wayeward
prouocations, do sufficiently testify both to our selves and others, (...)
account of every day as if it were the last.

For if we sin willingly.] He shows what a severe vengeance of God is near
to all those who revolt from the grace of Christ: for being once deprived of
that only salvation, they are destinate already as it were to certain
perdition. Nouatus with all his route armed themselves heretofore with this
place, The error of Nouatus.
to take away all hope of pardon indifferently from all those which should fall
into sin after baptism. Those which were not able to refute his falsehood,
thought it better not to give credit to this Epistle, than to consent to such
an absurdity: but the true exposition of this place, although it should
receive no help from any other place but it self, will be sufficient to
repel the impudency of Nouatus. By this word, if we sin, The Apostle means
not those that sin in this or in that regard, but those who having forsaken
the Church, do wholly estrange themselves from Christ. For he entreates not
here of some particular kind of sin, but expressly reprooues those who
wittingly and willingly rejected the society of the Church. Now there is great
difference between particular faults, Great difference between particular
faults, and a general apostasy.
and such a general falling away, by which we do wholly cut our selves off
from the grace of Christ. And because this can befall none but those who have
been already enlightened, therefore the Apostle says, If we sin willingly
after we have received the knowledge of the truth: as if he should say, If we
do wittingly and willingly reject the grace which we have received. Now we
may see well how far off this doctrine disagrees from the error of Nouatus:
And that the Apostle here only comprehends Apostaraes, it does evidently
appear by the deduction of the text. For it tends to show, that those who were
once received into the Church, should not forsake the same, as some were
accustomed to do. He says, that there remains now no more sacrifice for
sins, for those who do thus; because they willingly sinned after they had
received and acknowledged that truth.

But yet Christ always offers himself to poor sinners which are fallen
into some one kind of sin or other, so as they need not seek any other
sacrifice to take and put away their sins. He says then, that there remains
no more sacrifice for them, who turn away themselves from the death of Christ:
which a man never comes to do by one particular sin; but when therewithal
faith is wholly renounced. Now howsoever this severity of God be fearful and
horrible, and is set forth to fear men, yet it cannot be accused of cruelty.
For seeing the death of Christ is the only remedy by which we are delivered
from eternal death, those who endeavor as much as they can to abolish the
same; with the virtue and benefit of it, do they not deserve that despair
only should be allotted for them? God does always draw them to reconciliation
with him, who abide in Christ, they are sprinkled with his blood, their sins
are always blotted out by his perpetual sacrifice. And if it be so, that we
must not seek salvation out of him, let us not wonder if all those who
willingly forsake him, are deprived from all hope of pardon. So much signifies
this word no more. For the sacrifice of Christ is available to the faithful,
even to the very last breath, although they sin often: and even for this
cause it is, that it always holds his strength and vigor, because it cannot
be avoided that they should not be subject to sin, as long as they dwell in
the flesh. The Apostle speaks then of them only, who woefully abondoning
Christ, do deprive themselves of the benefit of his death. This member, After
they have acknowledged the truth: is put to aggrauate their ingratitude. For he
who willingly and of deliberate malice quenches the light of God kindled in
his heart, what excuse hat he, or can he allege for himself before God?
Wherefore, let us learn not only with reverence, and a ready teachablenesse
to receive the spirit of truth which is offered us, but also constantly to
persevere in the knowledge of it, to the end this sharp vengeance of the
contempt thereof fall not upon us.

But a fearful looking for of judgment.] He means the torment of an evil
conscience, which wicked contemners do feel within them, who as they never
had any taste or (...)

Under two or three witnesses.] This serves nothing to the present matter, but
it is a part of Moses his policy, to wit, that two or three witnesses were
required to convince the offendour of his offense. Notwithstanding we gather
more certainly of this, what crime the Apostle meant to note out unto us. For
if this had not been added, a door had been opened to many false
co^^ectures. But now the matter is out of all question, None ought to be
condemned but such as are convinced by witaesses.
that he speaks here of Apostasy. Yet we must note herewithall this equity
which almost all Politiques have followed: to wit, That none be condemned, till
he be convicted by witnesses.

Which treads under foot the Son of God.] This is common both to the
Apostataes of the law and the Gospel: to wit, that both the one and the other
do perish without mercy: but the manner of their ruin is diverse. For the
Apostle threatens not bodily death alone, to the contemners of Christ, but also
eternal damnation. For this cause he says, that these have deserved a most
grievous torment. Now he sets forth the revolt of Christians by three forms of
speech. For he says first, that by this means, the son of God is trodden
under foot: 2. that his blood is counted a profane thing: 3. that they
despite the spirit of grace. Now it is worse to tread under feet, than to
despise: and the dignity of Christ is far above the dignity of Moses. And
note also, that he does not simply oppose the Gospel to the law, but the
person of Christ, and of the holy Ghost, to the person of Moses only. And
counts the blood of the Testament as an unholy thing. He aggrauates this
ingratitude, by making comparison of the benefits. Questionless it is a great
villainy to profane the blood of Christ, which is the matter of our
sanctification. Now they do it which revolt from the faith: for the eye of our
faith looks not upon the bare and naked doctrine, but to the blood by which
our salvation is established. And therefore he calls it the blood of the
Testament, because the promises thereof are then ratified and confirmed unto
us, when this pledge of our redemption is added.

But he shows what the mean of this ratification is, when he says, by which
we are sanctified: because the blood which Christ shed should nothing profit
us, if we were not sprinkled therewithal by the holy Ghost. From thence comes
both our purgation, and holiness. Notwithstanding he alludes to the ancient
manner of sprinkling, which served nothing at all to true sanctification, Four
effects which the holy Ghost works in us.
but was only a shadow or figure of it. The spirit of grace. He calls it the
spirit of grace, because of the effect, for as much as by him and his virtue,
we enjoy that grace which is offered us in Christ.

For we know him that has said, vengeance belongs unto me, etc.] These two
places are taken out of the 32. of Deuteronomy. 35. Now seeing Moses there promises
that God will show vengeance upon them that have wronged his people, it seems
that that which is there spoken of vengeance, is here improperly wrested to the
matter in hand. For what should the Apostles drift now be? He says that the
impiety of those who have mocked God, shall not go unpunished. And S. Paul in
the 12. to the Romans 19. following the true meaning of this place of Moses,
applies it to another end. For exhorting us to patience, he commands us that
we (...) them by another means. As often then as the troubles which we have
suffered for Christ shall come into our minds, let them be so many goades in
our sides to prick us forward to profit more and more.

Partly while ye were made, etc.] We see to what manner of persons he speaks,
to wit, to such whose faith had been tried by no small experiences: and yet he
cease not to exhort them to greater things. Wherefore let no man deceive
himself through false flatteries, as if he were come to the goal, or had no
more need to be stirred up by others. Now he says that they were made gazing
stocks by reproaches, and afflictions, as if they had bin brought upon
scaffolds. Whence we may gather that the persecutions which they endured were
great. But we must diligently observe the other member where he says, they
were made companions of the faithful in their persecutions. For seeing the
cause for the which all the faithful do suffer, is the cause of Christ, yea and
the common cause of them all: therefore whatsoever one of them endures, the
rest ought to bear the burden with them, and to take it to heart as if they
themselves did endure it. And truly thus we must do, unless we mean to
separate our selves even from Christ himself.

And suffered with joy the spoiling of your goods.] children of God have this
very feeling in the combats which they endure for the glory of Christ.
Wherefore, the affection of the flesh can never so ouerwhelme them with grief,
that they should not lift up their minds to heaven, and by this means enter
into a spiritual joy, as in the example of Steven. And so much does the reason
which he afterward adds emport. Knowing (says he) in your selves how that
you have in heaven, a better, and an enduring substance. They then endured with
joy the spoiling of their goods, not because they took pleasure in being
spoiled of them simply, but having their minds directed to the recompense,
they easily forgot the grief which they had conceived in the feeling of the
present evil. Those that have a true taste of the heavenly riches, shall never
be so overwhelmed with sorrow for the loss of the earthly but they will
quietly bear the same for the cause of Christ.
And surely where the taste of heavenly riches bears rule, there neither the
world nor all his allurements have such savor, that the feeling of poverty or
reproach can ouerwhelme the minds of such with sorrow. Wherefore, if we will
patiently and joyfully bear all things for Christ, let us accustom our selves
to meditate upon this felicity often, in respect of which all the things of
this world are but filth and dung. In the mean while we must not let that pass
which he says, knowing in your selves. For whosoever shall not resolve
himself in particular, that the heritage which God has promised to his
children does also appertain unto him, it shall profit such a one nothing at
all to have such a general knowledge.

Cast not away therefore your confidence, etc.] confidence, because that if we
cast that away, we even deprive our own selves of the reward which is set
before us. Faith the foundation of an holy life.
Whence it appears that this confidence is the foundation of a good and an
holy life. Whereas he uses the word of recompense, or reward, he thereby
diminishes nothing from the free promise of salvation. For although the
faithful know that their labor shall not be in vain in the Lord, yet
notwithstanding they wholly rest themselves upon the only mercy of God. But
we have elsewhere very often spoken sufficiently of this matter, Reward
impungs free imputation of righteousness.
to wit, how the name of reward does nothing at all impung the free imputation
of righteousness.

36 For ye have need of patience, that after ye have done the will of God, ye
might receive the promise.

37 For yet a very little while, and he that shall come, will come, and will
not tarry.

38 Now the just shall live by faith: but if any withdraw himself, my soul
shall have no pleasure in him.

39 But we are not they which withdraw our selves unto perdition, but follow
faith unto the conservation of the soul.

For ye have need of patience, etc.] He says that patience is necessary, The
necessity of patience.
our courage would quail us a thousand times, before we should ever attain
to the middle of our course. True it is that the inheritance of eternal life
is already assured us: but because this our life is appointed unto us as a
place for to run our course in, we must endeavor to attain to the end
thereof by patience. Now there are many stumbling blocks which present
themselves before us in our way, which will not only offer to slack our pace,
but wholly to break off our enterprises, unless we be furnished with a
marvelous constancy to resist, by buckling our selves to withstand them.
Satan goes about it finely by laying all sorts of incombrances in our way, to
discourage us. In a word, Christians shall never set two steps forward without
wearines, if they be not supported by patience. Wherefore this is the only
means which makes us to persevere constantly. Otherwise, we shall neither
obey God, neither yet shall we ever enjoy the inheritance promised unto us,
which he here calls the promise, according to the figure called Metonymia.

Yet a little while, etc.] To the end we should not wax faint with
endeavoring, he admonishes us that the time shall not be long. Now there is
nothing more fit to put life and courage into us, if at any time we faint, than
when hope is given us of a speedy and short issue. As if a Captain or great
man of war should say to his soldiers, the end of the wars are near, if
so be you fight lustely, even a little while: so the Apostle admonishes us,
that if we wax not weary, nor faint hearted, the Lord will come shortly, who
will deliver us from all adversities. Now to the end the consolation might
have the greater weight and authority, he alleges the testimony of the
Prophet Abacuk, chap. 2.4. But in regard he followed the Greek translation,
The text of Abacuck expounded.
he straieth somewhat from the words of the Prophet. First of all I will
recite them as they stand in the text of the Prophet, and after we will
confer them with that which the Apostle here recites. The Prophet having
spoken of the horrible discomfiture of his nation, and being feared with his
own prophecy, could not see what way in the world to take, but gets himself
as it were out of this world, and betook himself to his watch tower. Now our
watch tower is the word of god, by the which we are exalted up into heaven.
Being thus got into his tower, he receives a commandment to write a new
prophecy, by which the assurance of salvation might be brought to the
faithful. Notwithstanding because men are naturally importunate, and so hasty
in their affections, that they evermore think that God is too slow, what
haste soever he makes; for this cause he says, that the promise shall come,
and shall not tarry. Though God hasten never so fast for our deliverance, yet
we always think him too long.
Although he by and by adds, If it tarry; wait: thereby signifying, that
that which God promises cannot come so quickly, but we always imagine it
comes very late. As the ancient proverb among the Latins imports: to wit,
when we desire a thing, even haste it self is slownesse. It follows
afterward, Behold he that lifts up himself, his soul shall not continue
strong; but the just shall live by faith. By which words he testifies, that the
unfaithful shall not remain firm and stable, let their forces and helps be
never so many in which they trust: because the true and stable life (...) help
himself with the Greek translation, which agreed very well to the doctrine he
handled heretofore: as also now he applies it thereunto very fitly. He warned
them before to take heed, least in forsaking the Church, they did not
therewithal at the last wholly estrange themselves from the faith and grace of
Christ: now he shows that they are called, yet in such wise as they ought
never to withdraw themselves. And again he makes an opposition between faith,
and withdrawing: as also he opposes the conseruing of the soul, against
perdition. Let us note then that this sentence also belongs unto us. For if God
has showed us so great a favor as to give us the light of his Gospel, even to
us (I say) who by this means are called to salvation; ought we not to know
that the end of our vocation is to profit more and more in the obedience of
God, endeavoring without ceasing to approach nearer and nearer unto him?
Behold the true conservation of the soul: for in thus doing, we escape
eternal perdition.

CHAP. XI.
1 Now faith is the ground of things, which are hoped for, and the evidence of
things which are not seen.

Whosoever made this the beginning of the eleventh chapter, has very unfitly
disioyned the scope and drift of the text. For the meaning of the Apostle is,
to prove his former speech touching the necessity of patience. He alleged
the testimony of Habacuck, who says that the Just shall live by faith: now he
shows what remains; to wit, That faith can no more be separate from
patience, than from it self. Thus stands the order of the words then, We shall
never attain to the end of our salvation, unless we be furnished with
patience. For the Prophet affirms that the just shall live by faith. Now faith
calls us to things very far off from us, which we do not as yet enjoy: it
necessarily then comprehends patience in it self. Thus then this proposition,
That faith is a foundation, serves as the Minor of the syllogism: whereby also
it appears that they much deceive themselves, who think this place to be a
full definition of faith. For the Apostle speaks not here of the whole nature
of faith, but he made choice of a part fitting his purpose; to wit, that faith
is always joined with patience. Let us now come to the words. He calls it
subsistence, or ground of things hoped for. It is evident that we hope not for
that which we have in our hands, but for those things which are yet hidden from
our senses, or at least wise, the inioying whereof is deferred to another time.
The Apostle then now teaches the very same thing which S. Paul does, Romans
8.24. for having said, that we see not that which we hope for, he infers
thereupon, that we wait for it by patience. So our Apostle admonishes us that
believe not God so much in regard of things present, as in regard of those
things the expectation whereof is yet in suspense. Furthermore the appearance
of co^tradiction, which is in this speech, wants not his grace. Faith, says
he, is the foundation or possession wherein we have already set sure footing
(for the Greek word Hypostasis which he uses, signifies so much.) But of
what things? of things absent, which are so far off from being under our
feet, that they do very much surmount the reach of our understandings.

There is the same consideration in the second member, where he calls it the
evidence, or certification of things which are not seen. For evidence, makes
things to appear; and commonly appertains unto those things only which we
feel and perceive. Thus then at the first view these two things seem to be
contrary, and yet notwithstanding they agree very well in this part of the
definition of faith. For the spirit of God discovers hidden things unto us,
whereof there can no knowledge of them come unto us in regard of our natural
understanding. For life eternal is promised us, and yet in the mean time we
die. We hear of the blessed resurrection, but yet for all that we are
environed with rottenness. We are pronounced just: and yet notwithstanding
sin dwells still in us. We hear that we are blessed: but yet are we thoroughly
bitten with hunger and thirst. God cries with a loud voice that he will by and
by assist us: but yet it seems when we cry, that he stops his cares.
What should we now do in these cases, if we were not built upon hope, and if
in the midst of darkness our minds did not lift themselves up far above all that which is in this world, having the word, and the Spirit of God for our
guides to go before us? Wherefore faith is well called a subsistence of those
things which yet consist in hope, and the evidence of things not seen. Whereas
S. Augustine does sometimes translate the Greek word Elenchus, which the
Apostle here uses, by a noune which comes of the verb To overcome, I do
not dislike it: for he does faithfully express the Apostles meaning. But yet I
had rather call it an evidence or showing, because it is less constrained.

2 For by it our elders were well reported of.

3 Through faith we understand, Genesis 1.3. Ioh. 1.10.
that the world was ordained by the word of God, so that the things which we
see, are not made of things that did appear.

4 By faith Abel offered unto God a better sacrifice than Cain, by the which
he obtained witness that he was righteous, God testifying of his gifts: by the
which faith also he being dead yet speaks.

FOr by it, etc.] He will entreat of this matter to the very end of the
chapter, to wit, that the ancient Fathers obtained salvation by faith only,
and that they were no otherwise acceptable and wel-pleasing unto God, but by
it. The Jews had some reason to reverence their ancestors greatly: but yet a
sottish and unbridled admiration of them had so possessed their minds, that it
hindered them much from suffering themselves to be wholly ruled under Christ his
government; and this they were carried unto, either by ambition, or
superstition; or both. For hearing that Abraham's seed was holy and blessed,
they were so puffed up with this title, that they looked rather unto men, than
unto God. Moreover, they had herewithall a stubborn and inconsiderate manner
of imitation, because they considered not what it was that deserved imitation
indeed in their Fathers. By this means they rested in the ancient ceremonies,
as if all religion and perfection of holiness had consisted in them. The
Apostle confutes this error, and teaches what was the chief and principal
virtue in them, to the end their successors might understand how they might
resemble their forefathers in truth. The Patriarchs had no other hand whereby
they were knit unto God but faith.
Let us remember then that the Apostles special and chief drift of his speech
is, to show that all the Fathers who from the beginning were approved of God,
were no otherwise conjoined with him but by faith: that so the Jews might know
that they had no other mean to be allowed of God, and to be knit in an holy
unity with their Fathers, but by faith: so that as soon as they left faith,
they by and by banished themselves from the Church, and were no longer
accounted Abraham's lawful children, but bastards.

By faith we understand, etc.] Paul also by this condemns all men as guilty
of ingratitude, because that when they knew God, they did not give that honor
which to him belonged, Romans 1.21. And to say the truth, it had bin impossible
that the feeling of religion should always have (...) word of God; next that
they depend on nothing but upon his free promises. In the first place he says,
that the sacrifice of Abel was not esteemed for any respect better than his
brothers, but only because it was sanctified by faith. For in very truth the
fat of the beasts had no such sweet savor, that God should be appeased in
respect thereof. The person of a man must be accepted, before his sacrifice can
be allowed: who is accepted of God then but he whose heart is purged by faith?
And the Scriptures do show sufficiently for what cause sacrifices were well
pleasing unto him: for these are the words of Moses, God had respect to Abel
and to his gifts. From whence we may easily gather, that his sacrifices were
acceptable unto God, because he himself pleased God. And from whence came it
that he pleased him, but because his heart was purged by faith.

God testifying of his gifts.] He confirms that which I have said, to wit,
that there comes no works from us that are acceptable to God, till such time as
we our selves are received into favor: or (to speak more briefly) no works
are reputed for just before God, No works are accounted for just before God
but those that proceed from a righteous man.
but the works of a righteous man. For see the argument of the Apostle; God
testified of the gifts of Abel, by the which he obtained the praise of
righteousness before him. Now this is a profitable doctrine, and so much the
more worthy to be noted, because the truth of it cannot easily be persuaded
unto us. For when we see some brightness to shine, be it in any work
whatsoever, we are suddenly rapt up into an admiration of it, and we think
God cannot justly reprove it: but he who only looks to the inward purity
of the heart, rests not at all in the outward visors of works. Let us learn
then that no just work can proceed from us, till such time as we be justified
our selves in the sight of God. He being yet dead. This he also attributes to
faith, to wit, that God testified he had care of Abel after his death, as well
as during the time of his life. For when he says that he spoke being yet dead,
he signifies that which Moses recites: to wit, that God was moved by his cruel
death to take vengeance of it. Whereas then it is said, that Abel, or his blood
cried; both the one and the other are figurative speeches. Now this was a
singular testimony of the love of God toward him, that he had a care of him
after he was dead. And from hence it appears that he is of the number of the
Saints of God, whose death was precious unto him, as it is in the 115. Psalm,
verse. 15.

5 By faith was Enoch translated, that he should not see death: Genesis 5.24.
neither was he found: for God had translated him; for before he was
translated, he was reported of, that he had pleased God.

6 Now without faith it is impossible to please God, for he that comes to God
must believe that God is, and that he is a rewarder of them that seek him.

BY faith Enoch, etc.] Abraham, and his posterity. Enoch.
He shows that Enoch was translated by the means of faith. But first of all
we must understand the reason why God took him out of this world after such an
extraordinary manner. It was an excellent testimony, whereby all men might
know how greatly he was beloved of God. For at that time impiety, and all
manner of corruptions reigned every where: if he had died after the common
manner of men, none would have thought he had been so presented by the
providence of God, that he should not be infected with the common contagion of
the time: but in regard he was caught up without dying, the hand of God did
therein manifestly show it self from heaven, by pulling him as it were out of
the midst of the sire. It is no small sign of honor then you see which the
Lord showed him in this translating of him.

Now the Apostle affirms that he obtained this by faith. It is true indeed
that Moses declares how he was a just man, and one that walked with God: but
for as much as faith is the beginning of righteousness, therefore this love of
God toward him is rightly attributed to faith. As touching curious questions
wherewith curious heads are wont to entangle themselves, it is better to pass
by them in silence. Curious questions are to be avoided.
They ask forsooth what became of Enoch and Helias. And (...) ed with the
feeling of his goodness, He that has not a true taste of Gods goodness, will
never seek to God, nor call upon ^im.
hoping for salvation at his hand: for we either despise, or fly from God, if
we behold not salvation in him. Now let us remember that we must believe
this, and not content our selves with a bare and naked opinion of it. For
although the wicked, and unbelievers do sometimes conceive something like unto
it, yet for all that they do not therefore come unto God, because they are not
stayed upon a firm and steadfast faith: this is the second part of faith, by
which we obtain favor with God: to wit, when we are certainly persuaded that
we have salvation in him.

But many do maliciously corrupt this second member, by drawing from it the
merit of works, and the confidence of meriting. Merit of works
For see how they frame their argument: If we be acceptable to God by faith,
because we believe him to be a rewarder of them that seek him: faith then (say
they) has respect to the merit of works. But the only way to ref^^e this
error, The means how to seek God.
is to consider of the means by which we seek God. For we must not be so
foolish to think we seek God, when we err from the right way of seeking
him. Now the scripture assigns this to be the mean and way to seek God:
Which assurance far surmounteth our capacity, specially when every man
descends into the consideration of himself. For we must not only hold this
general proposition, Knowledge profits not, unless there be application.
that God is the rewarder of them that seek him: but every man must apply the
profit and fruit of this doctrine to himself in particular: to wit, we must
know that God respects us, that he has such a tender care of our salvation,
as he will never suffer us to perish: that he hears our prayers, and will be
our perpetual and exceeding great reward. Now seeing we can have none of all this without Christ, it must needs follow of necessity that our faith have
always an eye unto him, and that in him alone it is to rest and content it
self. Faith must content it self in Christ alone.


Thus from these two members we may gather how, and wherefore it is impossible
to please God without faith. For justly does he hate us all, seeing we every
one of us are accursed by nature: and as for any remedy to do us good in this
case, we have none at all in our selves. Wherefore it is necessary that God
prevent us by his grace. Which he does when we so acknowledge him to be God,
that we be not turned aside from him elsewhere by any perverse superstition:
as also, when we promise our selves to have assured salvation in him. Now if we
would yet have a more ample declaration of this point, we must begin at this,
to wit, that we shall never benefit our selves in any thing whatsoever we
expect or enterprise, unless we look unto God. No other end of living well,
but to serve to Gods glory.
For there is none other end of living well but to serve to his glory: to
which end we shall never be able to attain, unless the knowledge of him go
before. This is indeed but the one half of faith, and would stand us in no
great stead, unless confidence be joined therewithal. Wherefore, faith is
then perfect and entire to obtain us favor with God, when we have this
settled confidence, that we secke him not in vain, and when we assure our
selves of undoubted salvation in him. Now who is he that will trust in God to
be the rewarder of his merits, unless he be blinded with pride, and
bewitched with a perverse love of himself? And therefore this confidence, or
assurance whereof we speak, rests it self only upon the free grace of God,
and not upon works, neither upon the proper dignity of men. But seeing this
grace of God is no where ^o be found, but in Christ, there is none other but he
to whom our faith must have regard.

7 By faith Noah being warned of God of the things which were as yet not
seen, Genesis 6.13.
moved with reverence, prepared the Arc to the saving of his household,
through the which Arc he condemned the world, and was made heir of the
righteousness, which is by faith.

THis was a singular example of virtue: Noah.
to wit, that all the world being plunged in pleasures, and making themselves
believe they should escape unpunished, as if there had been no judgment of God
to come upon them, Noah alone should set before his eyes the divine vengeance,
Moah, and his family exscaped the flood. Hence it follows, that in what time
soever men lived, yet they were no otherwise approved of God, neither did they
ever any work that was worthy of praise, but by faith. Let us now see what the
Apostle sets before us in the example of Noah to consider of: first, warned
of God of the things which were yet not seen, feared. Secondly, that he built
an Arc: thirdly, condemned the world by this building: lastly, that he was
made heir of the righteousness which is by faith. The nature of faith.
and are far distant from our sight. When he was admonished that the flood
should come after an hundred and twenty years; first of all the length of
time might have taken all fear away from him, and the thing it self also was
incredible: In the mean time also he saw the wicked give themselves over to
all manner of pleasures without any care of God at al: In a word, a man might
have thought that this terrible news of the flood was nothing else but a vain
scarre-crow. But Noah bare such reverence to the word of God, that turning his
eyes from beholding of things present, he so feared the ruin wherewithal God
had threatened the world, as if it had been present.

The faith then which he had in the word of God framed him to that obedience,
by which he gave a testimony in the building of the Arc. Paul calls the
Gospel (by which the righteousness of God is offered us unto salvation) the
word of faith, Romans 10.8: It seems then it is an improper speech to say, that
faith moved Noah to reverence. The true object of faith.
that they are rightly and truly her object: and therefore we say that Christ
is the true object of faith, in whose person the heavenly Father is merciful
unto us, and in whom are sealed up, and confirmed, all the promises of
salvation. How faith is said to be the cause of fear
And yet notwithstanding this is no hindrance why faith should not look unto
God, and that it should not with reverence receive whatsoever he commands.
Or if we will have it in fewer words, The nature of faith is to hear God
speak, and without any doubting at al to receive whatsoever proceeds out of
his holy and sacred mouth. Faith then you see is no less subject to ye
commandments and threatenings, than it is to the free promises. But because we
are never touched as we should, and as need requires with the commandments
of God to yield him that obedience he requires, neither yet moved by his
threatenings to seek by prayers, to prevent, and turn away his wrath, unless
we have first apprehended the promises of grace, Why the Gospel is called
the word of faith. Romans 10.8.
so as we can boldly acknowledge God to be our merciful Father and the author
of our salvation: for this cause the Gospel is called, as of the principal
part of it, the word of faith: and thus we do put a mutual relation, or
correspondencie, between faith and the Gospel. Yet howsoever faith in some
things do look directly to the promises of God: so also does she no less
look unto the threatenings, so far forth as is necessary for us to be led
to the fear and obedience of God.

To the saving of his household.] He here shows the obedience of Noah, which
issues from faith, as water from a fountain. The building of the Arc was
both a long work, and of great labor: he might have been hindered, yea a
thousand times might this work have been broken off, had there been no other
impediments than the scoffs and mocks of the wicked: for no doubt they came
running upon this holy personage from every coast to gaze at this strange
building. Whereas then he did thus constantly bear all their outrageous and
proud assaults, he showed that he had a wonderful power wrought in his
affections to obey. But whence came it that he so constantly obeyed God, but
that he had before rested in the promise which gave him good hope of safety,
and that he should persevere in this confidence unto the end? For it had been
impossible for him, of his own free will to have endured so many troubles; to
have overcome so many hindrances, and to endure so constant in his purpose,
Faith the mother of obedience.
unless faith had gone before. Faith then is the only mistress, or mother of
obedience: whence we may gather on the contrary, that infidelity is the
only let that keeps us from obeying of God. Infidelity only hinders
obedience.
And at this day the incredulity of the world does manifest it self in this
respect after a very fearful manner, to wit, in that there is so little
obedience.

By which he condemned the world.] If we say that Noah condemned ye world
because he was saved, referring this word by the which, to his safety, it
should be too constrained a sense: again, that it should be understood of
faith, the scope of the text will hardly suffer it: we must therefore
understand it of the Arc. Now it is said that he condemned the world by the
Arc for two causes. In what sense Noah is said to condemn the world.
to the end he should not perish with the wicked? Wherefore if he and his
family had not been preserved as a little remnant, the condemnation of the
world had not been so evident. In that Noah then obeyed the commandment of
God, he by his example condemned the obstinacy of the world: And in that he
was so miraculously delivered from the gates of death, it was an instruction
that the whole world was justly destroyed, the which God would doubtless have
saved, if it had not been unworthy of so great a mercy. And was made heir of
that righteousness which is by faith. This is the last thing which the Apostle
would have us to observe in the person of Noah. Faith the root and cause of
righteousness.
Moses tells how he was a just man: the Apostle testifies that faith was the
root, and the cause of this his justice, or righteousness. The which is true,
not only because a man will never yield himself in truth, and unfeignedly
obedient to God, unless he be first settled upon the promises of his fatherly
good will, confidently believing that himself, and all his actions are
acceptable unto him: but also because the life of a man, be it never so holy,
if it once come to be examined according to the strict rule of Gods justice,
can in no wise be wel-pleasing in his sight without remission of sins. You
see then it is necessary that righteousness be grounded and vpheld by faith.

8 By faith Abraham, Genesis 12.4.
when he was called, obeyed God, to go out into a place, which he should
afterward receive for inheritance, and he went out, not knowing whither he went.

9 By faith he abode in the land of promise, as in a strange country, as one
that dwelt in tents, with Isaak and Jacob heirs with him of the same promise.

10 For he looked for a city having a foundation, whose builder and maker is
God.

11 Through faith Sara also received strength to conceive seed, Genesis 17.19.
and 21.2.
and was delivered of a child when she was past age, because she judged him
faithful which had promised.

12 And therefore sprang thereof one, even of one which was dead, so many as
the stars of the sky in multitude, and as the sand of the sea shore which is
innumerable.

Abraham. HE comes now to speak of Abraham: who was the principal father of
the Church of God upon earth: of whose name the Jews boasted, as if by this
only title they had been exempt out of the common order of men, because they
were descended from his holy stock and lineage. Now he shows them what they
ought especially to have, if they would be reputed among the children of
Abraham: and by this means brings them to faith: because even Abraham himself
had nothing worthy of praise, but that which proceeded from thence. Two trials
of faith.
By these two testimonies was the faith of Abraham clearly proved: first, by
his readiness to obey: secondly, by his constancy in perseuering. Being called.
The ancient Latin Translator and Erasmus refer this to the name: which should
be a very cold and silly sense. For mine own part I had rather expound it
of the oracle, by which Abraham was called to go out of his country: for he
banished himself out of the same in such sort, that yet in the mean while he
did nothing without the commandment of God. And in very truth, A principle of
faith.
it is one of the principles of faith, that we move not so much a foot,
unless Gods word go before to show us the way; nor unless it give us light
as a lantern: as David says, Psalm. 119.105. Wherefore let us learn to
observe this all our life long: that we take nothing in hand, but accordingly
as we are called thereunto of God.

To come to the place which he should afterward take for an inheritance.] With
the commandment he had a promise, that God would give him the land for an
inheritance: he by and by embraced this promise, and was no less joyful of
it, than if he had been put into present possession of it. Behold a singular
proof of faith. First, Another trial of faith.
to forsake that we have in hand, as they say: secondly, to go seek things
which are very far off from us, and altogether unknown unto us. For when God
commanded him to go forth, he assigned him no certain place where it was his
pleasure he should inhabit, but left his mind perplexed, and in suspense.
Come (says he) to the place which I will show thee. Wherefore did he defer
to show him the place, but to the end his faith should be more and more
exercised? Genesis 12.1 Again, the love of his own country might not only have
slacked Abraham's readiness, but also wholly have locked up his heart from going
out of his house. His faith then was excellent, seeing it brake through all
difficulties, and did thus fly to the place whither the Lord called it.

By faith he remained, etc.] This is the second member, constrained to flee
into the land of Gerar. But the Apostle contents himself to comme^d his
perseverance in one word, in saying that he was as a stranger in the land of
promise. For the condition of a stranger was contrary to the promise. When
Abraham then constantly sustained this tentation, it was an excellent virtue in
him, but yet such as proceeded from no other cause than faith. With Isaak and
Jacob. His meaning is not that they dwelled together in the same tents or in
one time, but he makes Abraham a companion with his son, and his sons
son, because they were travelers in the heritage which was promised to them:
and yet fainted not, although God made them wait a long time. For by how much
the more their hope was deferred, by so much the more their tentations
increased, if they had not manfully repulsed all the doubts and assaults by the
buckler of faith.

For he looked for a city, etc.] He gives a reason wherefore he attributes
their perseverance unto faith: to wit, because they looked unto heaven: and
this was to see those things which yet were not to be seen. For although it
was to their great commendation that they had already entertained the
assurance of the promise into their hearts which God had made unto them of
enjoying the land, so as after some good space of time, the thing should be
accomplished and given them indeed: yet in that they did not wholly stay
themselves in the hope of that only, but pierced even unto heaven it self, in
this they did show yet a more clear and evident mark of their faith. He
calls heaven a city that has a foundation, because it shall endure for ever,
whereas there is nothing in this world that is not earthly and transitory. But
this manner of speech may seem absurd, when he makes God to be the creator of
heaven; as if he had not created the earth also. I answer, that because in
earthly buildings, besides the matter, there is also the hand and men's
industries, therefore the workmanship of God is not opposed to them in this
place amiss. For whatsoever is built of men, tastes of the instabilitie of
those that made it: as on the contrary, the perpetuity of the heavenly life
agrees to the nature of him who is the builder of it, to wit, God. Furthermore,
to the end that we never wax weary in following God, the Apostle teaches
that all encombrances are lightened by waiting for this heavenly life.

By faith Sara also, etc.] Sara, Sara. Women have interest in the matter of
eternal life, as well as men.
the whom he notes out before all others, because she is the mother of all the
faithful. But it is wonderful that her faith is commended, seeing she is
manifestly convicted of infidelity; for she laughed at the word of the Angel,
Faith commended, though it were mingled with distrust.
but because she corrected her distrust after she was admonished, she is
notwithstanding that, allowed of God, and her faith commended. Whereas then at
the first she rejected this message of the Angel, as a thing incredible, yet
as soon as she understood that it proceeded from the mouth of God, she
received it in obedience. And from hence we gather a very profitable doctrine,
that howsoever our faith do somewhat waver and halt, yet it cease not for
all that to be approved of God; Distrust must not be nourished.
provided that we let not loose the raines to distrust. Now the sum is, that
the miracle which God did when Isaac was begotten, was the fruit of the faith
of Abraham and his wife, by which they apprehended and felt the power of God

Because she judged him faithful that had promised.] These reasons are to be
diligently observed, which do express the virtue and nature of faith. If a
man should only hear that Sara conceived by faith, he should not yet
understand all: but this exposition which the Apostle adds, takes away all
difficulty. For he says, that Saraes faith consisted in this, that she
judged God to be faithful; and that in his promises: which sentence contains
two members. For first we are (...) with so many helps?

Confessing that they were pilgrims, and strangers.] Jacob confessed this,
when he answered Pharaoh, that the days of his pilgrimage were few and evil,
in respect of the peregrination of his fathers; as also that these his days
were full of many evils, Genesis 47.9. If Jacob acknowledged himself to be a
stranger in that land which was promised him as a perpetual inheritance, it
thereby appears, that he was not of this world; If the Fathers under the law
who were compassed about with so many dark clouds, did notwithstanding aspire
unto heaven: how much more ought we, to whom Christ now reaches his hand
to dravv up thither?
but did set his affections on things that were far above in the heavens. And
therefore the Apostle infers that the Fathers did evidently show by this their
manner of speech, that they had a better country in heaven. For if they were
strangers and pilgrims, then had they another country wherein they had a
certain dwelling. Now if these men in the mids of so many dark clouds, did
yet in spirit soar even unto the heavenly country, what ought we to do at
this day, we I say, to whom Christ does so apparently stretch forth his hand
from heaven, to lift us up thither? If the land of Canaan could not keep them
back; how much more ought we to stand upon our deliverance, and freedom; we
(I say) to whom there is no certain abode promised in this world?

And if they had been mindful, etc.] He preuents an objection which might
be made to the contrary: to wit, that they were therefore strangers, because
they had left their country. The Apostle replies, surely, when they called
themselves strangers, they thought not of Mesopotamia, for if they had been
desirous thereof, it remained still in their power to have returned back
again. But they banished themselves from thence of their own accord: and which
more is, they renounced it, as though it did nothing at all appertain unto
them. They meant another country then, which was out of this world.

Wherefore God is not ashamed to call them, etc.] I am the God of Abraham, the
God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob, Exodus 3.6. Truly it is no small honor,
when God makes himself famous, as it were, with the names of men also when by
this mark he will be discerned (as you would say) from Idols. The Apostle
shows that this privilege was also founded upon faith, because that as the
holy Fathers aspired unto the heavenly country; so God also for his part held
them to be of the number of his citizens. But we must gather from hence that we
have no place among the children of God, unless we renounce the world: We
shall have no inheritance in heaven, unless we count our selves strangers in
the earth.
as also that we shall have no inheritance in heaven, unless we be strangers on
earth. Furthermore, from these words, I am the God of Abraham, of Isaac, and
of Jacob, the Apostle rightly gathers that they are heirs of heaven: because
God is not the God of the dead, but of the living.

17 By faith Abraham offered up Isaac, Genesis 22.10.
when he was tried, and he that received the promises offered his only
begotten Son.

18 (To whom it was said, Genesis 21.12.
In Isaac shall thy seed be called.)

19 For he considered that God was able to raise him up even from the dead:
from whence he received him also after a sort.

20 By faith Isaac blessed Jacob and Esau concerning things to come.

21 By faith Jacob when he was a dying, blessed both the sons of Joseph, and
leaning on the end of his staff, worshipped God.

22 By faith Joseph when he died made mention of the departing of the children
of Israel, and gave commandment of his bones.

(...) quick, yet were they all but flea bitings in regard of this tentation,
to wit, that having received the promises, he is then commanded to put his
son Isaak to death. For all the promises were founded upon this, In Isaak
shall thy seed be called, Genesis 21.12: so that this being taken away, there
remained unto him no more hope of blessing, or of grace. The question is not
here then as touching any earthly matter, but of Abraham's eternal salvation,
yea of the salvation of the whole world. How many, and how great anguishes of
mind think we was this good personage cast into, when it came into his heart
that with the loss of his sons life, the hope of eternal salvation should
be clean cut off and extinguished? And yet notwithstanding by faith he went
on valiantly (ouercomming all these thoughts) to put that in execution which
was commanded him of God. If this his constancy deserves the title of an
admirable virtue, thus to hold out in the midst of so many hard encumbrances,
then doubtless that faith which only was the cause that made Abraham thus
constantly to persevere, must of necessity deserve to carry away the prize.

But hereof arises no small difficulty: Abraham's faith be thus highly
commended, seeing he forsook the promise? For as it is true that obedience
springs from faith, so also is it as true that faith springs out of the
promise. Abraham then being destitute of the promise, his faith also must
needs vanish. But the death of Isaak (as we have already said) was as a
clean extinguishing of all the promises. For Isaak must not now be considered
as a private person among others, but as he in whose loins Christ was
enclosed. Abraham gave God this honor, to to wit, able to raise up his son
again even from the dead. Therefore he rejected not the promise that was made
unto him, but did extend the truth and virtue thereof far above the life of
his son, because he limited not the power of God within so narrow a
compass, as to think that Isaak being dead, How Abraham may be said to hope
above hope.
that also should therefore be bound, or quenched. By this means he kept the
promise still, because he tied not the power of God to the life of Isaak, but
had this certain persuasion, that it would show it self no less powerful
even in his dead ashes, than in quickening and restoring his life again.

From whence he recovered him after a sort.] As if he should say, this hope did
not deceive Abraham. For it was as a kind of resurrection, when Isaak was thus
delivered out of the midst of the shadow of death. The Greek word Parabole,
which we translate figure, or similitude, is interpreted diverse ways by the
expositors. For mine own part, I take it simply for a word of similitude, as,
either after a sort, or such a like speech. For howsoever Isaak was not raised
up in very deed, yet notwithstanding he seemed after a sort to be raised up,
when he was suddenly and miraculously delivered by such an unexpected favor
of God. Yet I reject not that which others think, to wit, that our flesh which
is subject to death, is shadowed out in the ram which was put in the place of
Isaak. I confess that to be true also which others teach, that the image of
Jesus Christ was painted forth in this offering. But I speak now of that which
the Apostle meant to say, and not of all things that might rightly be gathered.
Now in my judgment, the true sense is, that Abraham recovered his son, even
as if he had been given him from death into a new life.

By faith Isaak blessed, etc.] This also was a work of faith, Isaak.
For whereas the thing is not yet effected, but the naked word only appears,
there faith must needs be said to reign. But in the first place we are to
observe what good use this blessing had of which he speaks. For to bless, is
generally taken to pray that good may come to those for whom we pray. But there
was another thing rather in the blessing of Isaak; for it was as if he had put
the person of his son Jacob into the possession of that land which God had
promised to him, and to his heirs. But what of all this? Surely he had nothing
in this land but the right of burial. These high words then, Let peoples obey
thee, and let the nations do thee service, seem to be ridiculous, Genesis 27.29.
For what authority was he able to give another, who was scarcely free there
himself? We see then that this blessing is grounded upon faith, because Isaak
had nothing to give his sons but the word of God. Esaw, seeing he was a
reprobate, and rejected of God. Jacob was the elect of God, and this election
was ratified and confirmed by the blessing of the father.

By faith Jacob when he was a dying, etc.] The purpose of the Apostle is, Jacob.
to attribute whatsoever came to pass amongst this people and was worthy of
memory, unto faith: notwithstanding, because it had been a thing too long to
recite every particular example, he chooses out some amongst many: as this
which he now recites. For the tribe of Ephraim did so surmount the others,
that they were in a manner hidden under his shadow. For the Scripture often
comprehends the ten tribes under this name of Ephraim: and yet
notwithstanding Ephraim was the younger of the two sons of Joseph. When as Jacob
blessed him and his brother; they were both of them then children. What did
Jacob see in the younger that he should prefer him before the elder? nay at
that time when he did it, his eyes were even dimmed by reason of age: and
whereas he put his right hand upon the head of Ephraim, surely it was not by
chance or at adventure: for he crossed his arms, so as he put his right hand
upon the left side. Moreover, he assigns two portions unto him, as if he had
bin Lord already of that land from whence famine had driven Jacob. There was
nothing here therefore which was agreeable to reason; but faith, The Jews
despise faith, and yet it was the chiefest virtue their ancestors had.
who only was the gouernesse in this action. If the Jews therefore would be
any thing indeed, let them boast of nothing but of faith.

And worshipped toward the end of his staff.] This is one of the places by
which we may conjecture that the Hebrews in old time had not the use of pricks
or points. For the Greeks could not so far deceive themselves, that they
should turn Rodd, for Bed, if there had been at that time such a manner of
writing as there is now at this day. There is no doubt but Moses speaks of the
bolster of the bed when he says, Al Rosch Hamitthah. But the Greek
translators have turned it, The end of his staff, as if it had been there
Matthaeh. The Apostle is not nice to apply that unto his purpose which was
commonly received. True it is that he wrote to the Jews: but it was to them
which were dispersed in diverse regions, and had changed their mother tongue
into the Greek. Now we know that the Apostles were not so precise in this
respect, but did willingly apply themselves to the weak who had yet need of
milk. Neither is there any danger in it, provided that the readers be always
brought back to the pure and native reading which the Scripture uses. Now for
the thing it self, there is no great difference. For Jacobs worshipping was a
sign of giving of thanks: wherefore he was led by faith to submit himself
unto his son.

Joseph. By faith Joseph when he died, etc.] thereby drawn unto faith. But now
let us see what the things are which he praises in the faith of Moses. First
of all he says, Pharohs daughter. He makes mention of his age, because if he
had done it being a child, it might have been imputed either to lightness,
or ignorance. For in regard there is no reason nor counsel in children, they
expose themselves to their own hurt altogether at randon: And young men also
are often carried hither and thither by an inconsiderate heat of blood. To the
end therefore we might know that Moses did nothing unwisely, or what he had not
forethought himself of long before, the Apostle tells us that he was now at
man's state: the which we may also clearly perceive by the history.

Now it is said, that he refused the adoption of Pharaohs daughter: Abraham was
blessed: of the which blessing the only bare promise of God bare witness. The
commendation of Moses faith.
For he saw no testimony thereof before his eyes, neither yet any thing near
unto it. Whence it appears, that he beheld that by faith, which was far
removed from his sight.

Esteeming the rebuke of Christ, pleasures of sin, all the allurements of the
world which do turn us away from God, and from that vocation to which he has
called us. For those earthly commodities that respect this life, which yet with
a good conscience, and by the permission of God we may enjoy; are not
comprehended in this number: wherefore let us always remember to discern what
God permits us as lawful. Notwithstanding there are many things which of
themselves are lawful; the use whereof is forbidden us in regard of
circumstance of time, place; or for some other respects. And therefore we must
always consider this in all the commodities of this present life, to wit, that
they serve us as helps, and furtherances to follow God, and not as lets and
hindrances.

He calls the delights of sin temporary, because they do incontinently
vanish away with the life. And against them he sets the rebuke of Christ, which
all the faithful ought willingly to receive into their bosoms. For whom God
has chosen, Romans 8.29.
them has he also predestinate to be made like unto the image of his son.
Not that he exercises them all alike with the same reproaches, or with the same
kind of cross; but because all ought to be so disposed, that they refuse not
to be companions with Christ in bearing of the cross. Let every one of us then
consider with himself whereunto he is called by this communion; to the end he
may cut off all impediments and difficulties. For we must not lightly pass it
over, that he calls all the disgraces which the faithful have endured from the
beginning of the world, by the title of the rebukes of Christ. Because even as
they were members of one self same body with us, so also were they in nothing
separated from us. True it is, that all anguishes encombrances, as they are the
rewards of sin; so are they also fruits of that malediction which was
imposed upon the first man: but all the wrongs which we endure of the wicked
for the name of Christ, are reputed of him as his own: and for this cause S.
Peter rejoices that he in his flesh did fulfill that which was wanting of the
afflictions of Christ. Col. 1.24. And if we consider of this as we ought, it
shall not be so grievous nor painful unto us, to suffer and endure for Christ.

Where he says, that he chose rather to suffer afflictions with the people of
god, by that member he yet better signifies unto us (...) but he was far off
from seeing God such as he was indeed. The Apostle therefore means that Moses
was no less imboldened, than if being ravished up into heaven he had set God
only before his eyes: or as having nothing to do with men, neither being
subject unto the perils of this present life, he went on manfully as if he had
not been to fight with Pharaoh. Yet notwithstanding, it is very certain, that
he was sometimes covered ou^r with so many difficulties, as they made him
think in his mind that God was far off from him: or at the least, that the
obstinacy of the king furnished with so many helps to resist, Moses faith was
often mingled with the infirmities of the flesh.
should overcome him in the end. To be short, God did show himself in such
wise to Moses sight, as yet in the mean while he left place for faith: but
Moses being environed on every side with all those fears which pressed upon
him at his heels, yet turned his mind, and all his senses to God. True it is,
that this vision whereof we have spoken did greatly aid him to this business:
but yet he saw more in God, than the sight of this visible sign could help
him unto. For he apprehended his power, which was sufficient to swallow up al
fears and dangers. For resting himself upon the promise, he held it for
certain that the people were already Lords of the promised land, The nature of
faith described.
howsoever they were now oppressed under the tyranny of the Egyptians. From
hence we gather, first,

28 Through faith he ordained the Passover, Exodus 12.22.
and the effusion of blood, least he that destroyed the first borne, should
touch them.

29 By faith they passed through the red sea as by dry land, Exodus 14.22.
which when the Egyptians assaied to do, they were swallowed up.

30 By faith the walls of Jericho fell down after they were compassed about
seven days. Josh. 6.20. Josh. 6.23. and 2.1.


31 By faith the harlot Rahab perished not with them which obeyed not, when she
had received the spies peaceably.

BY faith he ordained, etc.] Moses should oppose a few drops of blood as a
remedy against the vengeance of God: but he contenting himself with the only
word of God, doubted not but the people should be delivered from the plague
which was near at hand to ceaze upon the Egyptians. It is not without cause
therefore you see that the Apostle commends his faith in this behalf. Those
who expound that the Passover was celebrated by faith, because Moses looked
unto Christ; do say very true: but the Apostle makes mention simply of faith
here, because it rested in the word of God alone, when as yet the fruit
appeared not. Away with curious speculations therefore, for we have nothing to
do with them in this place. Where he says, that Moses only ordained the
Passover, the reason is; because God ordained it by his hand.

By faith they passed through the red sea, etc.] we might know that the spies
came secretly into the city of Jericho, and that in the same they were hid in
the house of an harlot. Although it is certain that this is referred to her
life past: because her faith gives testimony of her repentance.

32 And what shall I more say? Judge. 6.11. and ^.6 and 13.24 and 11.1. and 12.7.
for the time would be too short for me to tell of Gedeon, of Barac, and of
Sampson, and of Iephte, also of David, and Samuel, and of the Prophets:

33 Which through faith subdued kingdoms, wrought righteousness, obtained the
promises, stopped the mouths of lions,

34 Quenched the violence of fire, escaped the edge of the sword, of weak were
made strong, waxed valiant in battle, turned to flight the armies of the
aliants:

35 The women received their dead raised to life: other also were racked and
would not be delivered, that they might receive a better resurrection.

ANd what shall I say more?] Ioshuah and David, during the which God raised up
Judges to govern his people: which were these four whereof he makes mention,
to wit, Gedeon, Barac, Sampson, and Iephte. Gedeon.
As concerning Gedeon; was it not a thing ridiculous in the eyes of flesh and
blood, that he should go to assail an infinite army of enemies, with three
hundred men only? and what was the breaking of the pitchers in their hands?
Surely a very fond thing, fit in all reason to serve to fray little children
only. In like manner the forces that Barac had, Barac.
were far inferior to the strength of his enemies: and besides, he was only
governed by the counsel of a silly weak woman. Sampson.
Sampson being but a country man, and exercised in no other weapons than with
tillage and husbandry; what was such a one able to do, think you, against so
proud conquerours, that he should bring all the people into subjection unto
him by his power? And as for Iephte, Iephte.
who would not even at the first have condemned his enterprise of rashness,
seeing he promised to maintain a people, where their state was in a manner
remediless? But because all these personages followed the calling, and leading
of God, and rested themselves upon his promise, executing the charge that was
enjoined them, they all do receive their due commendation by the testimony of
the holy Ghost. So then, whatsoever they did which deserved praise,
Imperfections are in the best.
that the Apostle attributes to faith: although there was not one of them whose
faith wauered not. Gedeon was too too backward to take arms; and durst not
commit himself unto God, but with great difficulties. Barac was so timorous
and fearful even from the beginning, that he was enforced to do his duty by
Debora, and that not without some disgrace unto him. Sampson, overcome by the
flatteries of his concubine, did indiscreetly betray both his own and the
peoples safety. Iephte being too rash in vowing his foolish vow, and being too
obstinate in the performance of it, dishonored and disgraced his excellent
victory which he obtained by the cruel death of his daughter.

Thus we shall always find something in the Saints worthy of reprehension:
The faith of the Saints acceptable unto God, albeit it was mingled with many
imperfections.
and yet notwithstanding the imperfections of their faith, it does not
therefore cease for all that to be approved of God. Wherefore we are not to be
discouraged by reason of the vices wherewithal we are encumbered, neither yet
thereby to become secure and careless, provided that we by faith do hold on
our course in following our vocation. And of David. David.
Under David's name he comprehends all the faithful Kings; with whom also he
ioynes Samuel and the Prophets. Samuel.
In which words his meaning is to show that the kingdom of Judah was
established by faith, and by the same faith endured unto the end. The many
victories which David had over his enemies, were all (...) unable to overcome
adversities, unless faith do sustain and uphold us. And hereof we gather,
that all those that have a true confidence in God, are furnished with such a
power, as is sufficient for them to resist, and stand steadfast by what means
soever Satan shall assail them: and especially that we shall never want
patience to endure afflictions, Those that are endued with a saving faith,
shall never be destituted of patience.
if so be we have faith: as also on the contrary it is a sure mark that we
are overcome of infidelity, when we faint and quail in the time of
persecutions, and of the cross. For the nature of faith is the same at this
day, that it was long ago in the holy fathers, of whom the Apostle makes
mention in this place. Wherefore if we follow the example of their faith, we
shall not fall so fowlie as we do by our slothfulness. As touching the word
racked, I have therein followed the translation of Erasmus: although others do
expound it, Disme^bred: but in mine opinion the sense is more simple: to wit,
that they were racked, as one would stretch a skin upon a drum.

36 And others have been tried by mockings, and scourgings, yea moreover by
bonds, and imprisonment.

37 They were stoned, they were hewn " or, savved.
asunder, they were tempted, they were slain with the sword, they wandered up
and down in sheep skins, and in goats skins, being destitute,
afflicted, and tormented.

38 Whom the world was not worthy of: they wandered in wildernesses, and
mountains, and dens, and caves of the earth.

39 And these all through faith obtained good report, and received not the
promise,

40 God providing a better thing for us, that they without us should not be
made perfect.

Whereas he says they were tempted, cut asunder, and Tempted, that some took
occasion thereby, being not well exercised in ye language, to add the second
in the margin: and so by succession of time, it has since crept into ye text:
as also Erasmus deemeth. By the skins of sheep, and goats, I think he rather
means the base and course garments of the faithful, wherewith they were
clad, when they fled into the deserts, than the tents which were made of
skins. Now although some say that Jeremiah was stoned, Isaiah sawed asunder,
and that the holy history tells how Elias, and Elizeus, and other Prophets
wandered into mountains and caves: yet notwithstanding I doubt not, but he
touches those cruel and horrible persecutions, which Antiochus inflicted upon
the people of God, and those which befell them soon after.

And would not be delivered.] He speaks very properly. Death is to be chosen
rather then life, if we cannot enjoy it but with the forsaking of God.
if so be that a true love of the resurrection to come, do possess our
hearts, it will easily bring us to the contemning of death. And to say truth,
wherefore should we otherwise live, unless we live to God? and whenever it
shall not be permitted us to live unto him; we ought to suffer death willingly,
or at the least without grief of mind.

Fur^^ermore by this sentence the Apostle confirms that which he said, to wit,
that the Saints overcame all sorts of torments by faith. For if their hearts
had not bin sustained by the hope of the blessed resurrection, they should by
and by have fallen and quailed. Moreover, we ought to gather a very profitable
exhortation from hence, whereby we may fortify our faith against the time of
adversity. For we ought not to refuse that the Lord should make us companions
(...) testimony of Gods kindness toward us, that howsoever he has showed
himself liberal to his children from the beginning of the world, yet he did
so measure out and limit his grace, that he provided for the salvation of the
whole body. What can any amongst us desire more, when we may say every one in
particular; God has had as much care of me now, as he had in bestowing of his
benefits upon Abraham, Moses, David; yea upon all the Patriarks, Prophets, and
faithful Kings: even of me, I say, to the end I might be united with them into
the body of Christ? Let us know then that we are more than unthankful
toward God, if he find less faith in us under the kingdom of Christ, than the
Fathers showed themselves to have under the law, and that by so many singular
examples of patience. Where he says, they received not the promise; it ought
to be understood of the shutting up and last conclusion of the promises which
are published to us in Christ. Of which we have said somewhat before.

CHAP. XII.
1 Wherefore let us also, seeing we are compassed with so great a cloud of
witnesses, cast away every thing that presses down, and the sin that
hangs so fast on: let us run with patience the race that is set before us,

2 Looking unto Jesus the author and finisher of our faith, who for the joy
that was set before him, endured the cross and despised the shame, and is set
at the right hand of the throne of God.

3 Wherefore consider him that endured such speaking against of sinners, least
you should be wearied and faint in your minds.

THis is the conclusion and shutting up of the former Chapter, end that every
one might dispose himself to follow their steps. Now he calls a great
multitude, a cloud; by a borrowed speech: for a multitude is the opposite to
few. Truly although they had been but a small number; yet ought we to be
stirred up by their example, much more when there is so great a cloud of them.
Herewithall he says, that we are compassed about with this thicknes, or
multitude, so that whithersoeuer we turn our eyes, we still meet with many
examples of says. As touching this word witnesses, I take it not so generally
as if he called them Martyrs of God; but I rather refer it to the present
matter: as if he should have said, that faith is sufficiently approved by
their witness; so as there needs no more doubtings thereof now. For the virtues
of the Saints, are as so many witnesses to confirm our faith, to the end we
having them for our leaders and companions, might go unto God the more
cheerfully, and courageously.

Let us cast away every thing that presses down.] Because he uses a
similitude taken from running in a race, he would also that we should
discharge our selves of all impediments. For nothing is more contrary unto him
that would make haste, than to be laden and pressed down with burdens. Now
there are diverse burdens which do hinder us, Burdens slacking our spiritual
race.
and slaken our spiritual course: as first the love of this life: the
pleasures of this world: the lusts of the flesh: running, is much used in the
Scripture: but he speaks not here of every kind of race, but of such a manner
of pastime and exercise where many strove who should run best: in which one
puts forth his strength more than if he should go, or run alone by
himself. The sum then is, that we are entered into the lists, yea into an
honorable and much frequented race: where there are also on every side
standers by present in great numbers; the Son of God being the chiefest
there, who inuites and exhorts us to win the prise: it were therefore great
shame for us to faint, or become slack in the middle of our course. Now,
howsoever the holy personages of whom he makes mention, are not only
witnesses, but companions also of the same race; who do as it were point us
out the way: yet nevertheless he chose rather to call them witnesses, than
runners in the race; thereby showing us that they be not such runners as do
envy us, or which would hinder us to carry away the prize: but that they
stand there rather as approuers of our diligence, who are glad of our
victories, and do greatly rejoice therein. And Christ also not only sets the
garland before us, but also therwithal reaches out his hand to furnish us with
strength and valor. In a word, it is he which prepares and fits us to begin
the race, and by his power carries us home to the mark.

And sin which hangs so fast on.] This is the heauiest burden wherewithal
we are hindered. Now he says that we are ensnared, to the end we might know
that no man is fit to run this course, unless he discharge himself of
these snares. He speaks not of outward or actual sins, as they call them,
but even of the very fountain; that is to say, of concupiscence, which so
tyrannizeth over every part of man, that he feels himself hampred on every
side with these snares. With patience. By this word we are always admonished
what the principal thing is which the Apostle would have us to consider in
faith: to wit, that in spirit we seek the kingdom of God, which is invisible to
the flesh, and surmou^ts all our senses. For those that employ their time about
such meditations, do easily despise all earthly things. And thus he could no
way better turn the eyes of the Jews from doting upon their ceremonies, than
to bring them to the true exercises of faith, by which they might learn that
the kingdom of Christ was spiritual; far excelling the beggarly rudiments
of this world.

Who for the joy, etc.] for the joy, it is as much as if he should have said.
In stead of the joy: and the word joy, comprehends under it all manner of
commodities. Now he says they were set before him, because he had them in his
hand, so as if it had pleased him, he might have used the^. But if any man
think this word for, signifies the final cause; I do not much gainsay him:
and so the sense will be, that Christ refused not the death of the cross,
because he saw the issue would be blessed and happy. Yet notwithstanding for
mine own part I incline to the first sense. Now he commends the patience of
Christ for two causes: first, he despised the shame and ignominy of it. And
afterward he recites the glorious end of this his death, because the faithful
might know that all the evils which they endure, do also turn unto their
glory and salvation, if so be they follow Christ. To the very same purpose S.
James says, You have heard of the patience of Job, and have known what end
the Lord made with him, chap. 5.11. The Apostle signifies then that all our
miseries shall have no worse success, than Christ his miseries had: according
to that which S. Paul says, If we suffer with him, we shall also reign with
him, 2. Tim. 2.12.

Wherefore consider him, etc.] He amplifies his exhortation; second he yields
a reason; Solomon begins his speech thus, My son, the Apostle admonishes us
by this so sweet and gracious a name of fonne, that we ought in such wise to
be drawn and allured, that this exhortation should even enter into the depth
of our hearts. Moreover, thus stands Salomons argument: If the scourges of God
do bear witness of the love he bears us, were it not an ungracious part in us
to be vexed and grieved thereat, or to hate them? For we must needs say that
those are more than unthankful, that will not let the Lord alone when he
chastises them for their good; but much more if they reject and cast off this
sign of his fatherly kindness toward them.

For the Lord corrects him whom he loves.] God has no other end in
afflicting the elect, but thereby to provide for their salvation.
but thereby to provide for their salvation: which undoubtedly is a sign of
his fatherly good will. Moreover, because the reprobates know not that they are
governed by the hand of God, they therefore think most an end that they are
afflicted by chance. As if a rebellious child, forsaking his fathers house,
should get himself a great way off, and there become a vagabond, and should
there feel the smart of hunger and cold, or other pouerties: this indeed
were a worthy punishment which he well deserved for his folly, that so he
might learn to his costs what it is to disobey a good father: and yet
notwithstanding he would not for all this acknowledge that this were a fatherly
correction. So the unbelievers, although they are, as you would say, given
over, and banished from God, and from his house, yet they perceive not that it
is the hand of God that touches them. Let us remember then that we cannot
otherwise feel the love of God toward us in the midst of his rods and
chastisements, unless we be well persuaded, that they are so many fatherly
corrections and scourges, by which God chastises us for our sins. But there
can nothing of all this come into the minds of the reprobates, The reason why
the ^ked receive benefit by ^flictions.
because they are of fugitive spirits: that is to say, they care for nothing,
but that they may have always their swindge, and might never be drawn into
Gods presence, to appear before him: add yet hereunto that judgment must
begin at the house of God, 1. Pet. 4.17. Wherefore, howsoever God do
indifferently punish as well the strangers as his own household; yet
nevertheless, he so opens his arms wide unto these latter, that in the
mean while he shows by evident tokens that he has a particular care over
them. But the true solution indeed is this, that whosoever he be that knows,
and is persuaded that he is cha^^sed of him, ought by and by to ascend up into
this imagination, Surely this comes to pass because I am loved of God.
Afflictions cannot hurt us, because God sta^ds betvveene us and them.
For whilst the faithful do feel God to be between them and the weight of
the evils which they endure in the punishments and chastisements which he
inflicteth upon them here, they have therein a certain pledge and seal of his
love. For if he loved them not, he would not be thus careful for their
salvation.

And therefore the Apostle concludes, that God offers himself as a father to
all those that endure correction. For they that kick and wince, as restie iades
are wont to do; or that take the bridle between their teeth, and obstinately
resist; are not of this number. How we may know when afflictions are tokens
of Gods love toward us.
Wherefore this is ye in a word which he teaches, that corrections do then
prove tokens of Gods fatherly love toward us, when we in all obedience do
meekly submit our selves unto them.

For what child is it whom the father chastises not? He takes an argument, the
creation of souls of any help of man; and on the other side, does
miraculously reform and renew them by the secret virtue of his spirit: for
this cause he is specially called the father of Spirits.

When he says, and we gave them reverence, he touches the affection which is
naturally imprinted in us: to wit, that we give our fathers reverence even then
when they deal roughly and severely with us.

When he says, Shall we not much more be in subjection to the Father of
Spirits? he signifies, it is good reason that we should suffer God to enjoy
that rule and power of government which he ought to exercise over us, as also
that right of a father, to which we ought to subject our selves. When he says,
Nothing more hurtful, than disobedience to God.
that we might live, he touches the cause or the end. Now we are admonished
by this clause, that there is nothing more pernicious or hurtful unto us, than
when we refuse to be governed under the obedience of God.

For they verily for a few days, etc.] This is the second amplification, as I
have said: to wit, that chastisements are appointed and ordained to tame and
mortify the flesh, that we might be renewed according to the image of the
heavenly life. Whence it appears, that the fruit of them are perpetual; and
that we are not to look so much for the same at the hands of men; because
their discipline and correction is but a part of the political order, which
properly belongs to this life present. Now from hence it follows, that the
chastisement or corrections of God do bring much more profit and benefit with
them: to wit, even so much more as the spiritual holiness of God is more
excellent than bodily commodities. If it be objected, that it is the duty of
fathers to instruct their children in the worship and fear of God; and
therefore it may seem their corrections ought not to be restrained to so
little a while: I answer, this is very true: but the Apostle speaks here of
that household government which we are accustomed to call outward policy. For
although it belongs to the Magistrates office to maintain religion, yet
notwithstanding we may say that their office is contained within the limits of
this life present: because otherwise the civil and earthly government, could
not be distinguished from the spiritual kingdom of Christ.

Moreover, whereas he says, that Gods corrections are profitable to obtain
sanctification: this ought not so to be taken, as if they sanctified us
properly; but that they are as helps and means to prepare us, because the
Lord thereby exercises us for the taming and subduing of our flesh.

Now no chastisement for the present, etc.] He adds this, quiet, because we
tremble whilst adversity is upon us; and are in unquietness. For we are tempted
with impatience, which is always full of clamorous and foolish rumblings: but
after the storm is over, we discern by the spirit of discretion what profit
and commodity that has brought us, which before seemed bitter and tedious
unto us.

12 Wherefore lift up your hands which hang down, and your weak knees,

13 And make straight steps unto your feet, least that which is halting, be
turned out of the way, but let it rather be healed.

14 Follow peace with all men, and holiness, Romans 12.18.
without which no man shall see the Lord.

15 Take heed, that no man fall away from the grace of God: let no root of
bitterness spring up and trouble you, least thereby many be defiled. (...) nor
to the left. In sum, he gives us this rule of well doing, to wit, that we
order our steps according to the will of God: to the end that neither fear,
nor the intisements of this world; no nor any impediment whatsoever do turn
us out of the right way.

And therefore he adds, least that which is halting be turned out of the way,
that is to say, least by halting you be cast behind far from the way. Now
he calls it an halting, when men's minds do vary: being now of that
opinion, and then of that. As also when they do not wholly and unfeignedly
submit themselves to God. So speaks Elias to those double hearted ones, who
mingled the service of God with their superstitions; How long (says he) will
you halt between two opinions? 1. King. 18.21. Now this is a very fit manner
of speaking and wants not his grace: for it is far worse to err than to
halt. Those which begin to halt do not turn out of the way at the first chop,
but they recoyle back by little and little more and more, till being carried
away into error, they find themselves fast snared in the midst of Satan's
labyrinth. We must take heed of halting in Gods matters betimes.
The Apostle admonisneth us then that we labor to take heed of halting
betimes, because if we once fall to dissemble, and bethink us not of a
remedy, we shall at the last with the time turn far off from God. We may
also turn it in this manner, Least halting corrupt, or estrange it self: but
the sense will remain always one. For the Apostle signifies that those which
keep not the right way, but suffer themselves by carelesnes to err hither or
thither any way whatsoever; do in process of time, as much as in them is,
wholly estrange themselves from God.

Let us follow peace, etc.] The nature of man is so corrupted, that it seems
every man flees peace. For every one is given to himself: every one would be
soothed in his course, and none vouchsafes to apply himself to the weakness of
another. If we take not exceeding pains in pursuing of peace, we shall never
keep it.
Wherefore unless we take exceeding great pains to follow peace, we shall
never keep it. For there is no day but many things fall out, which will give
us sufficient occasion of dissentions and braules. Therefore it is that the
Apostle commands us to follow peace: as if he should say, Ye think it
sufficient only to keep and to love it for the commodity it brings you: but
you ought to enforce your selves to keep it in perfection amongst your selves
with all your might. Which yet is impossible, unless we forget many injuries,
and pardon one another in many things.

Notwithstanding, because a godly man cannot obtain peace with the wicked upon
any condition, but in flattring them in their bad courses: therefore the
Apostle adds immediately after, that we must join peace with holiness: as if
he recommended peace unto us under this exception, That we take heed the
friendship of the wicked do not pollute nor defile us. For this word
holiness, is properly referred to God. We must strive to keep peace with
men: yet so as we lose not holiness, nor hurt our consciences.
Wherefore though the whole world should be on a flame with wars and
contentions, yet must not we leave holiness, which is the band of our
coninunction we have with God. To be short, let us keep peace with men, yet
so as we hurt not our conscience. He says, that without holiness none can see
the Lord: because we shall never behold God with other eyes, than with those
which shall be reformed according to his image.

Take heed that no man fall away; or, look carefully to it. grace, he
comprehends our whole vocation. But if any will from hence infer that the
grace of God has no efficacy, unless we work with him by our own proper
moving; it shall be but a frivolous argument. We know very well how great the
sluggishnes of our flesh is: has it not great need then to be continually
pricked an end? But when the Lord prouokes and stirs us up by admonitions and
warnings, he (...) which, if we will compare all the riches, all the
commodities, all the honors, and delights of this world, be it whatsoever men
are wont to esteem requisite for a happy and prosperous life: all these
things in regard of the other, are scarcely worth a poor mess of broth. Now
the reason why we think so highly of those things which are in effect as
nothing, The cause why the things of this world are in such high account with
us.
is because some wicked lust has dazzled our eyes: yea rather, has put them
clean out. Wherefore if so be we mean to have any place in the sanctuary of
God, let us learn to contemn and despise such suppings by which Satan is wont
to pamper the wicked, and to hold them in his nets.

For ye know how afterward, Jacob his brother. They also who being taken in
Satan's nets in the pleasures of this world, estranging themselves from God,
selling their salvation, to fill their bellies with earthly things, which are
but as the suppings of the kitchen, think all this while that they loose
nothing: but rather, as if they were then become marvelous happy, please and
flatter themselves. At the last god opens their eyes by some admonition to see
their own wretchedness, and then they are touched to the quick with the
feeling of their loss, whereof they made no account before. Whilst Esau was
hungry, he cares for nothing, but how he may fill his belly: when he was
full, he mockes: and thinks his brother a fool, who had willingly parted with
his pottage. Even such for all the world is the blockishnesse of the
unfaithful, whilst they are inflamed with their corrupt desires, or when they
plunge themselves above measure in their joys. Whereas he says, he was
reproved, it is as much as if he had said, he was rejected or repulsed.

For he found no place to repentance, etc.] That is to say, his late repentance
did profit him nothing; or, that he got nothing by it; although he sought that
blessing with tears; which through his own default he had lost. Now in as much
as he does here denounce such a danger to hang over the heads of all the
contemners of Gods grace: Esau no good. I answer, repentance is not here taken
for a true and sound conversion unto God, but only for that fear wherewith
God wounds the wicked after they have along time sported themselves in their
malice. Now we are not to marvel if it be said that this fear is
unprofitable; because they come not to amendment of life by it, neither do
they come to the hatred of their sins, but are only tormented with the
punishments they endure. And as much may be said of his tears. As often as the
sinner groaneth, the Lord is ready to pardon; and a man shall never seek
mercy at Gods hands in vain, because the (...) the burning fire; the
whirelewinde, and of the tempest, with such other things. For these miracles
and signs which God showed to give authority to his law, and to cause it to be
receued with reverence; if we con^^ser the^ in themselves they are indeed
magnificent and heavenly: but when we come to the kingdom of Christ, the
things which God sets before us therein surpasses all heavens. And thus it
comes to pass, that all the dignity of the law begins to wax in a manner
earthly. For in this manner Mount Sinai might be touched with hands: but the
mountain of Sion cannot be apprehended but by the spirit. All those things
which are recited in the 19. of Exodus, were visible figures: but those which
we have in the kingdom of Christ, are hidden from the sense of the flesh. If
any shall object,

So that they which heard it, etc.] This is the second member, wherein he
shows that the law was far unlike the gospel, because when that came to be
published, all was full of fear and diverse astonishments. For whatsoever we
read of these things in the 19. of Exodus, tended to cause the people to know
that God ascended up into his judgment seat, to show himself a severe judge.
If it happened that an innocent beast did approach too near, he commanded it
should be thrust through with a dart: satisfaction in this matter, let him have
recourse to the Comment upon the third chapter of the 2. Cor.

Now in that he says, the people required it might be spoken no more unto
the^: it ought not so to be taken as if the people had been unwilling to hear
the words of God: but they instantly entreated that they might not be
constrained to hear God speak any more in his own person. For the person of
Moses coming between did somewhat assuage the astonishment. Notwithstanding
there is yet a point which troubles the expositors: that is, that the Apostle
attributes these words to Moses, I fear and quake, Moses spoke. But it will be
no hard matter to give a solution to this, if we consider that Moses spoke this
in the name of the people, as if he had been their interpreter to God. It was a
common complaint then of all the people; but Moses is brought in speaking of
it; who was, as you would say, the common mouth of them all.

But ye are come to the mount Sion, etc.] heavenly Jerusalem (which he calls
heavenly of purpose) to the end the Jews should not rest in that earthly
Jerusalem which flourished, and was in great estimation under the Law. For in
as much as they were bent with an obstinate affection to remain still under
the yoke and bondage of the Law; they made it of mount Sion, to become mount
Sinai, as S. Paul says, Gal. 4. By the heavenly Jerusalem then he means that
which should be built throughout the world: as in the Prophet Zachariah, the
Angel stretches the line of it from East to West.

And to the company of innumerable Angels.] further he here shows what he
meant in the former comparison: to wit, that the contemners of the Gospel
shall be sharply punished, seeing the ancient people went not unpunished which
despised the law: as also he follows his other argument which he took from the
less to the greater, when he says that God; or Moses spoke then on earth: and
that now the same God; or Christ speaks now from heaven. Although I had rather
refer both the one and the other to God. Now he says that God spoke on
earth, because he spoke more low and after a manner less authentical. Let us
always remember that the outward administration of the Law is here handled:
the which, if we compare with the Gospel, shall be found such as smells
something of the earth; because it does not raise up the minds of men above the
heavens, unto a perfect wisdom. For howsoever the law contains the same
doctrine, yet for as much as it was a schoolmaster only; perfection is always
taken from it.

Whose voice then shook the earth, etc.] Seeing God did then shake the earth
when he published the Law, he proves that God speaks now much more divinely,
and gloriously: because the earth is not only shaken, but the heaven also. For
his proof he alleges the place of Haggai, the which notwithstanding he
recites not word for word: but because the Prophet foretells that heaven and
earth shall be shaken, the Apostle takes these words up, to show that the voice
of the Gospel not only thundreth in earth, but it also pearceth above the
heavens. No doubt but Agge there speaks of the kingdom of Christ. For it by
and by follows in the text, I will move all nations, and the desire of all
people shall come; and I will fill this house with my glory. Now it is out of
question that all people were not gathered into the same body, till they were
gathered under the leading of Christ: neither is there any other desire
wherewith we can rest satisfied, but in the same Jesus Christ. Again,
Salomons Temple did not surmount in glory, till the greatness thereof was
spread throughout the whole world. We need not doubt therefore but that the
Prophet points out the time of Christ. So then if from the beginning of Christ
his kingdom it was necessary that not only the lower parts of the earth
should be shaken, but that his power should come even to heaven it self: truly
the Apostle rightly gathers that the doctrine of the Gospel is more excellent,
and ought to be heard with the greater evidence of all creatures.

And this word, yet once more, etc.] remoues us, is to the end he might
confirm us truly and for ever in himself. Notwithstanding I approve rather
of the reading of the old Latin translator, which is thus; Taking the kingdom,
we have grace. If we read it by an affirmation, the sense will run very
well: to wit, that when we receive the Gospel, the spirit of Christ is given
us, to the end we may serve God with reverence and fear.

If we read it by way of exhortation, to wit, Let us have, it will be a more
obscure and constrained manner of speech. In a word, I take it the Apostle
meant to say, that if so be we enter into ye kingdom of Christ by faith, we
shall obtain assured grace, which will cause us to serve God with fruit: for
even as the kingdom of Christ is far higher than the world, so also is the
gift of regeneration. When he faith, By which we may serve God, so as we may
please him, with reverence and fear, although he requires a readiness and
delight in the obedience which we give him; yet he therewithal signifies,
that God approoues of no service which is (...) their own abode, for the name
of Christ. And that he might the better provoke those to whom he writes to the
performance of this duty, he adds, that some have received Angels into their
houses unawares, thinking they had been but men. I doubt not but this is to be
understood of Abraham, and Lot. For they being accustomed to entertain
strangers, sometimes lodged Angels unawares, when yet they thought of no such
matter: and thus their houses were greatly honored. And questionless the Lord
also showed evident signs how acceptable hospitality is unto him, when he so
largely recompensed both Abraham and Lot. When we inuit the poor to our
houses: in them we give entertainment to Christ.


Remember those that are in bonds, etc.] There is nothing which moves us more
to mercy and compassion, than when we put upon our selves the person of those
that are afflicted. And therefore he says, that we ought to be mindful of
the prisoners, even as if we were in their place. That which immediately
follows in the other member is diversely expounded, to wit, as you your selves
also, being of the body. Some take it generally, thus; you also are subject
to the same adversities and inconveniences, which are incident to all mankind.
And others restrain it thus; as if you were in their person. I like neither
the one nor the other. For I refer it to the whole body of the Church: and
so, the sense will be, seeing you are members of the same body, you ought to
be moved with the afflictions of one and other, to the end there may be no
separation between you.

Marriage is honorable, etc.] Some think this to be an exhortation to those
that are married, to the end they might live chastely, and in such honesty in
marriage as thereunto appertains: also, that the husband should dwell with
his wife in all chastity, and modesty, that their bed be not profaned by
lascivious dishonestie. And so this word, let it be, should be supplied.
Notwithstanding, it is not amiss if we should say, Marriage is honorable among
al. For when we hear that marriage is honorable, ought it not by and by to
come into our minds: Surely, we ought to live in the same honorably, and
reverently? Others take it by way of yielding or granting, thus: Although
marriage be honorable, yet it is not lawful to commit fornication. But every
one may peceiue that this sense is too cold. For mine own part, I rather
think that the Apostle here opposes marriage to whoredom, as the remedy for
the disease: and the course of the text does evidently show that his meaning
is so. For before he threatens whoremongers with the judgments of God, he
first shows them what the true mean is to avoid this vengeance: that is, if
we live honestly in marriage. Let this then be one member, That whoredoms shall
not escape unpunished, because it is Gods office to show his vengeance upon
them. And seeing he has been pleased to bless the society of man and wife,
which himself has ordained; it follows then that all other societies or
fellowshipps, out of marriage, are accursed and condemned of him. Wherefore he
not only threatens adulterers with punishment, but all manner of fornicators
also. For all of them do flinch back from the holy institution of God: yea
they corrupt, and overthrow it; abusing themselves indifferently with all
companies, whilst there is but one lawful conjunction only which is ratified
and confirmed in the name and by the authority of God. Now because it is
impossible to repress the ouerflowing of whordomes, without the remedy of
marriage, for this cause he commends it unto us, calling it honorable.

That which he adds afterward of the bed undefiled; I willingly refer it to
this, namely, that married persons might know that all things are not permitted
unto them; but that they ought rather to use the lawful bed with all
moderation, to the end they might abstain from whatsoever was contrary to
the shamefastness and honesty of (...)

REmember them, etc.] The things which follow do not appertain so much to
manners, as to doctrine. In the first place he sets the example of those
before the Jews of whom they had been taught: and peradventure he speaks
particularly of those which had sealed the doctrine which they had taught with
their own blood. For he notes out something worthy of remembrance, when he
says, Consider what has been the end of their conversation. And yet this is
no impediment why we may not also understand it generally of those which have
continued in the true faith unto the end: who also have given faithful
testimony to the wholesome doctrine, both in their death, as also in the whole
course of their life. Now this is a matter of no small consequence, when he
sets their Teachers before them to follow. For we ought to esteem them as
fathers which have begotten us in Christ. Had they seen their Leaders constant
and stable then, partly in the midst of cruel persecutions, and partly in
the midst of diverse fights? So much the rather ought they in all reason to be
the more willing to follow their steps.

Jesus Christ yesterday, etc.] The only means which causes us to persevere
in the true faith is, if we keep the foundation, not recoyling back from it
so much as an hairs breadth. All knowledge is but mere vanity that is
separate from the knowledge of Christ.
For his knowledge is but mere vanity that knows not Christ, yea although he
should therewith comprehend both heaven and earth. For all the treasures of
wisdom and knowledge are hid in him, Coloss. 3.3. Here therefore we have an
excellent place, out of which we learn that there is none other rule of true
knowledge, but to rest all our senses in Christ alone. Moreover, because the
Apostle had to deal with the Jews, he shows that Christ has always held
the same principality which he now holds at this day: and that he shall be
always like unto himself even to the end of the world. He was yesterday
(says he) and to day, he is also the same for ever. By these words he
signifies, that the same Christ which has been now manifested in the world,
has reigned from the beginning of the world: and that it is not lawful to go
any further, being once come to him. Yesterday then comprehends all the time of
the old Testament: and to the end they should not look for some sudden change
afterward, because the publishing of the Gospel was yet but newly begun, he
says that Christ was so revealed newly unto them, that the same knowledge of
him should not fade, but endure for ever. By this it appears that the Apostle
disputes not about the eternal essence of Christ, but of his knowledge, which
had place among the faithful in all times, and who has bin the perpetual
foundation of the Church. It is very certain that Christ was, before he
manifested his power: but the question is now, what it is which the Apostle
here entreates of. And therefore I say, that in this speech he aims at the
quality (as you would say) and not at the essence. For here is no disputing
whether Christ be eternal with his Father or no, but what his knowledge has
been amongst men. Furthermore, the manifestation of Christ under the Law was
otherwise, in regard of the outward manner and means, than at this day: yet
that hinders not, but the Apostle very fitly, and properly says, that it is
always one selfsame Christ to whom the faithful looked and aimed at.

Be not carried about, etc. The cause of superstitions, errors, and corruptions
in religion.
For out of question the cause of the diversity of opinions; of all sorts of
superstitions; of all monstrous errors; in a word, of all corruptions of true
religion, arises from hence, that men do not rest themselves wholly in Christ
alone. For that which Saint Paul teaches is not in vain, to wit, that Christ
is made unto us of God wisdom, 1. Cor. 1.30. The sum then of the place is,
that we must rest in Christ alone, if we will embrace the grounded truth of
God. From whence we gather that all those who are ignorant of Christ, are laid
open to all the bewitchings of Satan: because that out of him there is no
stabilitie of faith, but contrariwise innumerable tossings and turnings. The
Papists then showed themselves marvelous (...) ceremony of the Law to the
present estate of the Church. There was a special kind of solemn sacrifice,
whereof mention is made in the 16. chapter of Leuiticus, whereof the Priests
and Levites had no part. He now shows here by a fit allusion, that this is
accomplished in Christ, because he was offered upon this condition, that those
who served in the Tabernacle should not eat of it. Now by those who served in
the Tabernacle, he means all them who addict themselves to ceremonies. Thus he
teaches that if we will communicate with Christ, we must renounce the
Tabernacle. For even as this word Altar, comprehends the offering and the thing
sacrificed; so also this word Tabernacle comprehends under it all the external
figures which were conjoined with the Tabernacle. The sense of the place then
is this, that we are not to marvel if the ancient ceremonies of the Law do
now cease. For this was figured in the sacrifice which the Levites carried out
of the host to be burned there, Leuit. 16.27. to wit, because that even as the
Ministers of the Tabernacle did eat nothing at all of it: so also if we serve
in the Tabernacle, that is to say, if we yet retain the ceremonies thereof, we
shall not participate of this sacrifice which Christ has once offered, nor of
the satisfaction which he has once accomplished by his blood. For he carried
his blood into the heavenly Sanctuary: to the end he might do away the sins
of the world.

Let us go forth to him, etc.] To the end the Allegory which he brought
before, or the similitude taken upon a deriuation of the ancient ceremony of
the law, might not seem to be far fetched, he adds a good, and a necessary
exercise which is required of all Christians. And this order and manner of
teaching S. Paul also is wont to keep: to wit, he shows the faithful wherein
God would have them exercised, when he endeavors to turn them from those
ceremonies, which are now become frivolous. As if he should say, This is it
that God requires of you, and not that wherein you travail for nothing. The
very same course does the Apostle now take. For when he calls us to follow
Christ, having left the Tabernacle: what does he else but admonish us that
there is another manner of matter required at our hands, than to say that we
serve God in the shadow, that is to say, at our ease, and without pain, under
the glittering magnificence of the Temple: because we must march further, and
must follow our vocation through flights, banishments, injuries, afflictions,
slanders, reproaches, and through all manner of incombrances? The Apostle then
sets this condition of fighting, in which we must labor and sweat unto blood,
as opposite against those exercises which consisted in shadows, in the
meditation whereof, these masters of ceremonies only boasted.

For here have we no continuing, etc.] going forth whereof he made mention yet
further: to wit, that we think with our selves that we are as strangers, and
wanderers in this world, and that our only place of rest waits for us in
heaven. Thus then, as often as we are either driven out of any place, or that
any change befalles us, let us meditate of that which the Apostle here
teaches: to wit, A meditation for the exiled.
that we have no certain abiding upon the earth, because heaven is our home,
and inheritance. And the more we are exercised, the more let us always prepare
our selves even to the last going forth. For those who live too much at their
ease, Job. 29.18. Psalm. 30.6.7.
and in rest, do for the most part dream of a neast here. And therefore
seeing we are inclined to such carelessness and security, it is profitable for
us to be tossed and led often hither and thither, to the end we may learn to
direct our eyes to heaven, which otherwise are too much inclined to the earth.

Let us therefore by him, etc.] he had only commanded till the abolishment of
the law.

Besides there is also an exhortation joined with this doctrine, which ought
marueilously to provoke us to exercise the duties of love to our neighbors.
For it is no small honor when he accounts the good which we do to men for
sacrifices offered to himself: and that he so greatly deckes and adornes the
good turns and services that we have done (which yet are scarce worth the
naming) as to pronounce them to be sacred and holy things. Wherefore, when we
suffer love to grow cold amongst us, we not only thereby defraud men of their
right, but also even God himself: who by a solemn title has consecrated all
the good which he commands us to do unto men, to himself. The word
communication extendes it self further than beneficence, which is the showing
of mercy. For it comprehends all the pleasures and services which men do one
to another. And this is the true badge of love, The true badge of love.
to wit, when those who are knit together by the band of Gods spirit, do
communicate of their good things one to another.

Obey your leaders.] watch for your souls, it properly appertains to the
spiritual government. watch for your souls: which only appertains unto those
who do faithfully execute their office; who are Pastors indeed, according as
their name signifies. The Papists then are twice sottish, to go about to
confirm the tyranny of their Idol the Pope from this place. The h. ghost
co^ma^ds that we receive the doctrine of the faithful Christian Bishops and
Pastors with all obedience; and to obey their good and holy counsels. And it is
his will also that we reverence, and honor them. But what favor or allowance
does this give to these which are but Bishops only in show? And yet
notwithstanding all those which are called Bishops under the Papacy are not
only such, but are also cruel butchers of men's souls, and enraged Woolfes.

But leaving to tell what they are, I will only say this for the present; We
must learn to discern true Pastors from false
that when commandment is given us to submit our selves to our Pastors, we
ought diligently and prudently to discern who they be that are the true and
faithful leaders. For if we bear this honor, and reverence, indifferently to
all those that are in this office, honor, because they watch for our souls.
Wherefore if the Pope and all his followers will indeed help themselves with
this testimony of holy scripture, it is necessarily required of them above all
things, that they prove themselves to be of the number of them which watch for
our salvation. If they make this plain and evident unto us, there will the^ be
no let or impediment which should hinder the faithful to give honor, and
reverence unto them.

They watch for your souls.] He signifies that by how much the greater their
charge is, by so much the more are they worthy of honor. For the more any
shall take pains for us, and employ himself with greater danger and
difficulties for our good; so much the more also should we acknowledge our
selves bound unto such a one. But such is the charge of the Bishops, that it
carries with it, and in it marvelous encombrances; besides the extreme
danger to which it lies open. If we will then acknowledge the good which they
do us, shall we be unwilling to yield them that duty which belongs unto them?
But especially, were it (...) duty for them, which he required them to do for
him. Now he desires of God to confirm them in every good work; A definition
of good works.
Besides, he here sets down consequently the definition of good works, when
he appoints the will of God for the rule of them. For by this means he
signifies that we ought to hold none other for good works, than those which
are to be referred to the will of God: as also S. Paul shows, Romans 12.2. and
in many other places. Let us remember then that this is the perfection of a
good and holy life, when the same is squared to his obedience.

The member which by and follows, serves for an interpretation, Doing (says
he) in you, that which is pleasing in his sight. He had spoken of the will of
God which is revealed in the law: now he shows that it is in vain to bring
ought unto God which he has not commanded: because he esteems more of his
own ordinances, than of all good intents and inventions of the world. Where he
says, by Jesus Christ, it may be expounded two ways, that is to wit, Doing
by Jesus Christ, or, that which is acceptable by Jesus Christ. Both senses
agree very well. For we know that the spirit of regeneration and all other
graces are conferred unto us by the means of Jesus Christ. Moreover it is
certain, that seeing the best things which come from us are not fully perfect;
therefore nothing we do can be acceptable unto God without the pardon of
sin, the which we obtain by Christ. Thus it comes to pass that our works
do give a good and sweet savor before God, Our works give a sweet savor
before God, when they are filled with the odours of Christ's grace.
when they are filled with the odor of the grace of Christ: whereas otherwise
they stink and are abominable. I like well then that this be extended to both
members. As touching the conclusion of his prayer, To whom be glory, for ever
and ever, I am content to refer it unto Jesus Christ. Now in as much as he
attributes that here unto Christ which belongs to God only, he hereby gives a
clear testimony of Christ his Divinity. Although if any be pleased to
interpret it of the Father, I will not contend. Yet I rather take the other,
because it is less constrained.

Who has brought again from the dead.] The 20. verse is expounded here.
For he signifies that God is then rightly called upon of us, to bring us to
perfection: when we know his power in the resurrection of Christ, and when we
acknowledge Christ for our shepherd. In a word, he would have us to fix our
eyes upon Christ, to the end we might conceive good hope of Gods help and
assistance. The end of Christ's resurrection.
For Christ is therefore risen again from the dead, to the end that by this
very power of God we might be renewed unto eternal life: and he is the great
shepherd of all: to the end he may defend and keep the sheep which God has
committed unto him.

Whereas others translate, By his blood: there is properly in the text of the
Apostle, In his blood: but because the letter beth, which in Hebrew signifies,
in, is also taken for with: I think it better to take it here in the latter
sense. For it seems to me, that the Apostles meaning is, that Christ is so
risen again from the dead, that yet notwithstanding his death is not
abolished, but holds his perpetual vigor. As if he had said, God has raised
up his Son, but in such wise, that the blood which he once shed in his death to
confirm the eternal covenant, cease not still to have his efficacy, even
now after his resurrection, yea and brings forth his fruit, as if it always
flowed out.

I beseech you also brethren, etc.] For in my judgment, his meaning is to say,
that he has written to them in few words, or briefly; to the end it might
not seem he would any way diminish the ordinary manner of teaching in the
Church: notwithstanding he speaks principally of exhortations wherein
himself had been more breife. Let us learn then that the Scripture is not
given us to the end the lively voice of the Pastors should cease amongst us,
or that it should be irksome unto us, although even the words of exhortation
do often sound in our ears, and shall be often reiterated. For the Spirit of
God has so tempered and compassed the writings which he showed to the
Prophets and Apostles, that he meant not to derogate any thing at all from the
order which himself has instituted.

Now his order is this; that daiely exhortations should be heard in the Church,
from the mouths of the Pastors. Peradventure also he does of purpose recommend
the word of exhortation unto them: because that men as they are naturally
covetous to learn, so they had rather always be taught some new thing, than
to be admonished of known things, and such as have been often heard. Add
also, that in as much as they are given to flatter themselves, and to let loose
the raines to their carelessness; they will hardly suffer themselves without
grief and unwillingness to be sharply touched, and chastised.

Know that our brother Timotheus, etc.] Because the termination of the Greek
word is ambiguous, we may translate you know, or, know ye; and this latter
reading I take to be the better; although I reject not the first. For it is
very likely that he gives the Jews to understand, being beyond the sea; of
that which yet they knew not. Moreover, if so be this Timotheus be that notable
companion of S. Paul (which I willingly receive) it is very likely that either
S. Luke, or Clement is the author of this Epistle. S. Paul surely was wont
rather to call him his son. Besides, that which he immediately adds, agrees
not to the person of S. Paul. For it appears that he which wrote this Epistle
was at liberty, and not imprisoned; and besides, that he was rather somewhere
else than at Rome: yea and it is very likely, that he had been in many of the
cities of this country, and was ready to pass the sea. Now all these things
might come to pass either to S. Luke, or to Clement after S. Paul's death.

Salute all them, etc.] Leaders, by way of giving honor unto them, to the end
he might grow into acquaintance with them, and might the more mildly enduce
them with good consent to entertain the doctrine. When he ads, And to all the
Saints: Either he means the faithful which were of the Gentiles, to the end
that both Jews and Gentiles might learn to nourish and entertain a godly
union together: or he aims at this, to wit, that they which should receive
this Epistle first, should communicate the same unto others.

Because the 25. verse has been expounded in the end of the other Epistles,
therefore it is omitted here. Notwithstanding, for their sakes, who it may be,
want his other commentaries, I have thought good briefly to supply that lack
out of his commentary upon the Epistle to the Romans, Chap. 16. ver. 20.

Grace be with you all.] This is a prayer,

Immortal glory, be to our God, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, Amen.

FINIS.
A TABLE DIRECTING THE READER TO some principal matters contained in this
Commentary upon the Hebrews: the first number points to the Chapter: the
second to the verse of the Chapter.
A
Abacuck. A Text of Abacuck expounded. chap. 10. verse. 37.
Abraham. Faith was Abraham's chiefest virtue. 11.17. The trial of Abraham's
faith. 11.19.
Afflictions. Afflictions exempt us not out of the number of Gods children.
5.7. Afflictions sovereign medicines to cure our corruptions. 12.4. The end
God has in afflicting us. 12.6. Why the wicked receive no benefit by
afflictions. 12.6. Afflictions cannot hurt us, and why. 12.6. How we may know
when afflictions are tokens of Gods love to us. 12.6.
Angels. Those that will have the protection of Angels, must look that
themselves be members of Christ. 1.14. Angels no lawful mediators. 7.26.
Apostasy. Great difference between falling into some particular sin; and a
final Apostasy. 6.4. See chap. 10.26.
B
Beginning. It is not enough to make good beginnings only. 34. See chap. 6.1.
Blood. The blood of beasts purified Sacramentally; Christ's blood really. 9.13.
Nothing we do acceptable before God, till we be purged by the blood of
Christ. 9.14. God cannot be sought nor served of us, till faith apprehend
Christ's blood. 9.19. Faith must see the promises written in our hearts with the
blood of Christ. 9.20. The frivolous distinction of the Papists between a
bloody and unbloody sacrifice. 9.26.
Body. Christ's body is the temple in which his father dwells. 9.11.
Brethren. Christ does us no small honor in calling us his brethren. 2.11. A
commendable thing for the Saints to call one another by the name of brother.
13.2

C
Catechism. The points of Catechism used in the Primitive Church. 6.1.
Call. He will never call upon God in truth, that has not a taste of his
goodness. 11.6.
Calling. The calling of the faithful only secured under Christ's wings. 3.1.
Christ would not run before he had received a calling. 5.4.
Canaan. Why the Jews desired so much to enter into the land of Canaan. 4.8.
Cause. No other cause of our salvation but Gods free mercy. 6.10. The cause
of errors and superstitions in the church. 13.9.
Christ. All our right to the creatures consists in Christ. 2.5. Christ must
not be the less esteemed because he willingly abased himself. 2.10. Christ
would not run before he was sent. 5.4. Christ strove with the curse of God,
and with hell it self, and overcame them. 5.7. Christ with all that he has is
ours. 7.25. Christ alone is sufficient to fulfill whatsoever God requires.
10.10. He shall never find God, to whom the man Christ is not the way. 10.19.
Faith must content it self in Christ alone. 11.6. Christ allows no soldiers
in his battles that love their ease. 12.4. The cry of Christ's blood always
heard. 12.24.
Church. Church government must be squared according to Gods commandment. 5.4.
Gods care is always alike to his Church. 11.35.
Civil. To teach civil righteousness without faith: is a profane philosophy.
6.11.
Coming of Christ. The nearer Christ's coming approaches, the more should we
endeavor to bring home the straied sheep. 10.25.
Conscience. Peace of conscience can never be highly esteemed of till we know
the disquietnes thereof. 7.2.
Conversion. The converted ought to procure the conversion of others. 10.24.
Covetousness. Distrust, the root of covetousness. 13.5.
Creatures. None of the creatures appertain unto us, till we appertain unto
God. 2.5. All the right we have to the creatures is in Christ. 2.5. Curious
questions are to be avoided. 11.5.
Cross. See 5.8. Christ was consecrated into his office of Priesthood by the
cross. 5.8. He that flies the cross renounceth his childs part. 12.7. See
12.12.

D
Death. Death must needs be terrible to as many as look upon it out of
Christ. 2.15. He has profited but little that has not learned to despise
death. 2.15. Two things to be considered in Christ's death. 8.4. Death is to be
chosen above life if it cannot be kept without forsaking of god. 11.35.
Devil. The Devils power weakened and limited. 2.14.
Disobedience. Nothing so hurtful as disobedience. 12.9.
Distrust. Distrust must not be nourished. 11.11.
Doubt. It is a sin to doubt of that which God has promised. 6.11.
E
Elect. It is profitable the elect should sometimes be sharply reproved. 6.9.
End. What end we ought to have in all our thoughts and deliberations.
Ever. How far this word Ever is to be extended. 7.17.
Exile. A comfort for the exiled. 11.38. A mediatation for the exiled. 13.14.
F
Falls. Falls general and particular. 6.4.
Faith. Faith gives the word entrance in respect of us. 5.2. Two effects of
faith. 3.6. Faith and charity must go together. 6.11. Great difference
between faith and a general apprehension. 6.11. Faith must pass beyond all
external shadows to rest it self upon Christ alone. 6.19. Faith the
foundation of an holy life. 10.35. No life without faith. 10.38. The necessity
of faith. 10.38. Faith was the only band whereby the Patriarchs were knit unto
God. 11.2. Faith must content it self with Christ alone. 11.6. The nature of
faith. 11.7. The object of faith. 11.7. How faith is said to be the cause of
fear. 11.7. Why the Gospel is called the word of faith. 11.7. Faith the
mother of obedience. 11.7. Faith the root and cause of righteousness. 11.7. A
principle of faith. 11.8. Two trials of faith. 11.8. Faith commended, though it
were mingled with distrust. 11.11. That is the true faith which rests it self
upon the promises. 11.11. When faith respects the promise, and when it respects
the recompense of reward. 11.26.
Fathers. How far the example of our fathers is to be followed. 3.8. See
chap. 11.13.
Fear. Fear ought not to take away the assurance of faith. 4.1. How faith is
said to be the cause of fear. 11.7. Fear is too ingenious in seeking
starting holes. 12.13.
Felicity. We must go out of our selves to attain true felicity. 4.10.
Fight. A double fight of the faithful. 12.4.
Free Will. We will freely: but it is to do evil.
G
Glory. What it is to give glory to God. 6.15. To serve to Gods glory is the
only end of our life. 11.6.
God. God is never angry without cause. 3.17. God is the father of the soul
as well as of the body. 12.9. God cares for us even whilst he afflicts us.
12.12.
Good. Man his sovereign good. 4.10.
Gospel. He that reiects the Gospel reiects the salvation of God. 2.3.
Christ the author of the Gospel. 2.12. Why the Gospel is called the word of
faith. 11.7.

H
Haste. We never think God makes haste enough: when we wait for his
deliverance.
Halting. We must take heed of halting in Gods matters betime. 12.13.
Hearing. Hearing profits not, unless faith be joined with it. 4.2.
Hearts. None can soften our hard hearts but God. 3.8.
Hillarie. A saying of Hillarie. 11.38. Hisichius. 8.5.
Hisop. The virtue of Hisop. 9.21.
Holy Ghost. Four effects which the Holy Ghost works in us. 10.29. See chap.
8.10.
Hope. Hope the constancy of faith. 3.6. Hope finds no footing on earth.
6.19. Hope springs out of faith. 10.23.
Hospitality. Hospitality grown out of use. 13.2.
Humility. God allows no service unless it be joined with humility. 12.28.
I
Illumination. It is the work of the Holy Ghost to illuminate our
understandings. 8.10.
Imperfections. Imperfections remain in the best. 11.32.
Infidelity. No darkness like infidelity. 4.12. Infidelity only hinders
obedience. 11.7.

K
Kingdom. Christ's kingdom shall never be vanquished though it be daily
assaulted. 1.13.
Knowledge. All knowledge that is separate from the knowledge of Christ is but
mere vanity. 13.8. He is a man of knowledge that knows how much he wants.
5.12.
L
Last day. See 10.25.
Law. In what sense the word law is to be taken. 7.12. Their consciences can
never be at quiet that rest only in the doctrine of the law. 9.15. They profit
il by the law that are not drawn thereby to faith. 11.24. Laying on of hands.
chap. 6.2.
Love. He that will exercise himself in the duties of love must prepare
himself to a life full of labor. 6.10. Love extends her liberality to all,
etc. 6.10. It is an hard matter to preserve love. 10.24. Nothing sooner lost
than love. 13.1. The true badge of love. 13.16.

M
Marriage. Marriage lawful for all sorts. 13.4.
Mass. Four points proouing the Mass to be full of sacrilege. 10.18.
Meats. Observation of meats belongs nothing to the substance of our
salvation. 13.9.
Mediator. No Saint or Angel a fit Mediator and why. 8.3.
Merit. Reward is not given unto works upon any merit. 6.10. Merit of works.
11.6.
Moses. The commendation of Moses faith. 11.25. Moses faith often mingled with
the imperfections of the flesh. 11.27.
N
Nature of faith. 11.27.
Neglect. After a long neglect of holy duties follows an alienation of
affections. 6.4.
Noah. In what sense Noah is said to condemn the world. 11.7.
Nouatus. The error of Nouatus confuted. chap. 6.4.10.26.
O
Obedience. Our obedience chiefly appears in the denial of our selves. 5.8.
Objection. An objection of the Papists answered, wherein they say they offer
not another sacrifice, etc. 10.2.
Offer. None fit to offer Christ but himself. 10.18.
Offices. Two offices of Christ. 3.1.
Opportunity. It is dangerous to neglect opportunity. 3.13.
Oath. It is lawful to take an oath. 6.16.
P
Pastor. The care of a good Pastor. 4.1. We must learn to discern true
Pastors from false. 13.17.
Pardon. Who they be that are excluded from hope of pardon. 6.4. Patriarchs.
chap. 11.13.
Patience. The necessity of patience. 10.36.
Peace. We have peace both in life and in death, etc. 2.15. In what sense the
Hebrews usually take this word Peace. 7.2. We must strive to keep peace with
men, etc. 12.14 We shall never keep peace except we take pains to pursue it.
12.14.
Person. A man's person must be excepted, etc. 11.4.
Perseverance. Perseverance in well doing is a virtue thin sown. 6.10.
Petitions. God often grants our petitions when he seems to deny them. 5.7.
Plerophoria. 6.11.
Poor. When we inuit the poor to our houses, in them we give entertainment
to Christ. 13.2.
Prayer. Christ's prayer heard though he suffered death. 5.7. Prayer ought to
be fervent. 5.7. How to pray with fruit. 8.3.
Prayers. All prayers that depend not on Christ's intercession are rejected.
7.26.
Preaching. Preaching must not be contemned, and why. 4.12. see 4.2. Preaching
has a double use.
Pride. The end of threatenings is to beat down the pride of the flesh, etc.
6.5.
Promise. No faith without a promise. 4.2. Gods promise, the only object of
faith. 10.23.
Promises. That is the true says which hears God speak and rests upon the
promises. 11.11. The promises profit us nothing, etc. 9.20.

R
Reconciliation. No other mean to procure Reconciliation but the blood of
Christ. 9.22.
Religion. There is no religion but where the truth bears the sway. 11.6. No
religion without sanctification. 12.16.
Repentance. Fearful events of late repentance. 12.17.
Reprobates. The hearts of the Reprobates compared to the Anuill. 4.12.
Resurrection. The end of Christ's resurrection. 13.20.
Reward. Reward impugnes not the free imputation of righteousness. 10.35. When
faith is said to respect reward. 11.26.
Rod. The rod had need to be always tied to our backs. 12.7.
S
Sacrament. The blood of beasts purged sacramentally. 9.13. The word and
Sacrament must go together. 9.20. The Exposition of the word, the life and
soul of the sacrament. 9.20.
Sacrifice. Christ's sacrifice absolutely perfect. 7.27. See 9.14. Christ's
sacrifice absolutely perfect from the beginning. 9.26. Thankfulness Gods
chiefest sacrifice. 13.15. No sacrifice acceptable unto God but in Christ.
13.15. See chap. 11.4. Three kinds of sacrifices. 13.16.
Salvation. The Jews and Gentiles have but one means of salvation, as
touching the substance. 10.1.
Sanctuary. The Sanctuary earthly, and how. 9.1.
Scripture. What mark we must aim at, if we mean to profit in the
Scriptures. 13.9.
Seek. The means how to seek God. 11.6.
Shadows. We have no such need of shadows now as the Jews had. 4.8.
Schism. The chief cause of all Schisms. 10.25.
Similitude. A similitude setting forth the difference between the law and the
Gospel. 10.1.
Sin. How sin is said to be destroyed. 9.26.
Sorrow. The taste of heavenly riches takes away the sorrow for loss of the
earthly. 10.34.
Souls. God is the father as well of the soul as the body. 12.9. The souls
of the faithful live with God after they be departed hence. 12.23.
Strangers. No inheritance for us in heaven, unless we count our selves
strangers on earth. 11.16.
T
Temptations. What we are to do in spiritual temptations. 5.7.
Tempt. How God is said to tempt. 11.17.
Throne. The throne of God is hanged all over with grace. 4.16.
Tithes. Causes why tithes were paid Leui. 7.4.
Truth. Many seem friends to the truth, but few will suffer for it. 12.12.
V
Veil. No veil hinders our access to God now, if we believe in Christ. 7.25.
Unclean. The remedy that takes away our uncleanness is in our flesh. 2.11.
Unity. A means to preserve unity. 10.24.
W
Witnesses. None ought to be condemned without witnesses. 10.28.
Women. Women have interest in eternal life as well as men. 11.
Word. The word preached the power of God, etc. 4.2. Gods word is not heard in
it self. 5.11. The word must go with the sacrament. 9.20. The word the life
of the sacrament. 9.20. No rule of faith but Gods word. 11.4.
Worlds. Two worlds. 2.6. The cause why the things of this world are in such
high account with us. 12.16.
Works. A definition of good works. 13.21. Our works become sweet in Gods
sight, when they are filled with the odours of Christ. 12.21. No works in
account with God, but those that proceed from a righteous man. 11.4.
Worship. We must not go an hairs breadth from Gods commandment in things
pertaining to his worship. 8.5. Zeal. An indiscreet zeal is no less
hurtful, than a fainting slothfulnes.
ERRATA.
Page 78. lin 9. read fleshly. p 84. l. 12. r. confession. p. 133. l. 35. r.
shoulders p. 135. l. 4. r. thus. p. 172. l 22. r. that the grace. p. 195. l.
13. r. true Sanctuary. p. 207. l. 16. r. this word book. p. 236. l. 10 put
out for. p. 239. l. 8. r. subsistence p. 257. l. 8. put out, the p. 263. l. 36.
r. recited p 271. l. 31. r. Saint Paul. p. 291. l. 11. put out, no. p. 320. for
Col. 3. r. Col. 2.


