Diverse Sermons of Master John Calvin, concerning the Divinity, Humanity, and
Nativity of our Lord Jesus Christ:

As also touching his Passion, Death, Resurrection, Ascension: together with
the coming down of the holy Ghost upon his Apostles: and the first Sermon of
S. Peter.

The order of which you shall find in the Page ensuing.

At London printed for George Bishop. 1581.

The order and number of the Sermons contained in this Book.
The first Sermon of the Divinity of Christ, taken out of the first Chapter
of Saint John's Gospel.

One Sermon of the Nativity of Christ taken out of the second Chapter of Saint
Luke.

Nine Sermons of his Passion, death, burial, and resurrection, taken out of
the xxvj. of Saint Matthew.

Seven Sermons of the mystery of his death and passion, taken out of the Lij.
and Liij. Chapters of Isaiah.

Four Sermons of his Ascension, and of the commandment which he gave unto
his Apostles, taken out of the first of the Acts.

Four Sermons of the descending of the holy Ghost at Whitsuntide, and of Peter
his first Sermon, taken out of the second of the Acts.

One Sermon of the latter coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, taken out of the
first Chapter of the second Epistle to the Thessalonians.

To the right honorable Edward de Veere, Earl of Oxonford, Vicunt Bulbacke,
Lord of Escales, and Badlesmere, and Lord great Chamberlain of England. The
Lord God grant increase a lively and true faith, and continuance in the zeal
of the blessed religion of our alone Savior Jesus Christ for ever.
IT is impossible (right honorable) for a man to turn himself any kind of
way here in this world, either in calling to mind generally, the heavens and
earth, either yet particulerly, the glorious garnishing, light, brightness, and
mouings of the one, and the great plenty of all sorts of beasts, fowls, and
fruits of the other, together with the infinite diversity of flowers,
wherewith God, by his heavenly wisdom and goodness, every year afreshe,
meruellously clotheth, and repareth them, as it were with rich, and beautiful
attyres and colors: But that he, as often (I say) as he beholds these so
wonderful works of his majesty, must even so often needs confess that there
is set before his eyes, a most large matter and argument for him, to glorify
thee altogether good, and only omnipote^t God, who has not created all things
for the use of man only, but also even for his delight and pleasure. For he is
so good and glorious a Father to all his children, as that his very meaning is)
so we take them modestly and thankfully) to have us freely use his benefits
for our necessity, yea, and receive them with pleasure, and delight, without
scruple of conscience* For else, to what purpose should we have created such a
number of sorts of fruits, differing in substance, strength and nurriture,
and of so sundry shapes, in greatness thicknes, and color, in smell, taste, and
savor, except it had bin both to stre^ghte^ and delight us? For does wine only
strengthen our bodies? does it not likewise, as David reckons it amongst the
benefits of the Almighty, glad the heart of man. And therefore, what is he
that can be so blockish, as not to think as much generally, of all the rest
of the benefits of God, which he daily bestows upon us, for the sustening of
our bodies. Yet notwithstanding, this were not enough for us, hereupon to
acknowledge, as our duty is, the fatherly care which he has over our present
life, in administering to us whatsoever is needful for the same: except we
eftsoons learned also hereby, that he alone, who principally is the father
of our souls, (for, it is he that has created and regenerated them) gives
the food of everlasting life unto them, by the bread of his holy word: to the
end we might be drawn as it were by degrees, by our bodily food to attain unto
spiritual life: and thereby eternally live in bliss, which never shall have
end. And in deed, the eternal God brought the children of Israel heereunto, by
that Manna wherewith he fed them in the wilderness. Whereupon, it will come to
pass, that if we do, as many of the^ did, who made none other reckoning but
of stuffinge their paunches, and thereby looked into none other matter: that
we also shall die, even as they did. For as it is impossible for us to live
here in this world, without the use of bread and other food, which God the
Creator has ordained, as means whereby he adjoining thereto his heavenly power,
would sustain us in this corporal life: Even so likewise is it as impossible
for us to be partakers of everlasting life, except we be fed with this food of
the soul: wherewith being appointed by God, to the same end, the holy Ghost
serves as it were for an instrument, to cause us possess, through a lively
and true faith Christ Jesus, who is alone given to us for life, and without
whom, we continually abide in death. Wherefore, seeing the soul is more
excellent then the body, the heavenly bread more precious then corruptible
bread, and everlasting life, far more worth, then the transitory life for a
day, it is most certain, that heavenly benefits are without al comparison, a
great deal more excellent then corporal, and to be preferred before them. Now,
if we would at the least consider, as in deed we ought, what a benefit
were it, to have the true fear and knowledge of God, in steed of being
altogether ignorant thereof, and contemning the same: to trust surely in him
alone, in stead of trusting too too much unto our selves: vnfeinedlye to love
our neighbors, in stead of envying and hating of them, before we are
regenerate: and to have a pure and sound heart belonging to everlasting life,
in stead of all iniquity, wherein we bathe and feed our selves as fish in
the water? To be short, if we think it no small matter, that all
supernatural gifts: altogether abolished in man through sin, be restored to
us, through Christ Jesus alone: and that, reason, understanding, judgment,
will, and other such natural gifts, which man had of his Creator, howbeit,
corrupted by the same fall, be likewise, through the same Savior renewed in us:
and to speak in one word, if the image of God, which was defaced by man his
disobedience, be repaired in us by our Redeemer, who alone has reconciled us
to God his Father, cleansing us from our sins, making us his brethren, and
enheritors of the kingdom of heaven, freed from the tyranny of sin, and of
the Devil, empouerishing himself to make us Princes, and companions with
Angels, and by his death recovering us life: If these inestimable benefits (I
say) be not lightly considered of us, we should esteem of them, as it is good
reason, above all other things, yea, we should leave and forsake all other
things, to seek and enjoy them, and never be wearied with any pain, neither
yet faint hearted, seeing it is the bread of the word of God that we must all,
seek after. And this bread, amongst other virtues, has this, that is, it
makes him who is daily fed therewith, more and more increase in the unity of
faith, until such time as he comes to the fullness of a perfect man. And
without faith there is no salvation, and faith (as the Apostle witnesses)
comes by hearing, and hearing comes by preaching of the word, so that
without hearing of the word preached, there can be no faith, and consequently,
no salvation. This bread also of the word has so pleasant a taste, as that if
the sweetness of honey it self, be compared with it, it shall be as bitter as
Gal. Surely, the godliest and best fruits of the earth, in respect of this
which restores the soul, rejoices the heart, strengthens the weak, and
comfort the afflicted, are all but rotten, and no whit pleasant or
delightful. To be short, over and besides, that we are with so great pleasure
thereby in such sort strengthened, as no tongue is able to express, we are
moreover so enriched therewith, as that all the treasures in this world, in
regard of it, can be but filthy and stinking. And therefore, every one is to
consider and understand, that the whole felicity of man, rests in this
spiritual food. Here is likewise to be joined withal, that our labor in
traveling for the same, shall not be lost: For, God the Creator, sends us not
at this day (thanks be given to him for it for ever) scarcity of this Manna
and heavenly doctrine: But most abundantly gives and pours it abroad without
money, all the world over, to all such as hunger after it: But unto such as are
full gorged and lothed therewith, so that they reject it, and cast it up
again, by reason of their unthankfulness, it turns to them in stead of good
nutriment, into deadly poison. And contrariwise the more a man desires it, the
more it nourishes, and does him good. Wherefore our good God, and loving
Father, knowing what need we have to be strengthened with this spiritual
food, not for a day only, but even so long as we shall creep here upon the
earth, and must have it put into our mouths like young children, has
appointed Pastors, and Teachers in his Church, soundly and truly to break unto
al his faithful ones, this bread of his word, Even as a father who giving bread
to his children, cutteth every one such a morsel, as he sees to be most
necessary for him. And therefore in this behalf (my good Lord) the Church of
England, has greatly to thank the lord our God, in that he has furnished
it, with such a number of godly, faithful, and sound Ministers, as distribute
unto his people the word of truth: For they in stead of confusedly heaping
and hudling one thing in an others neck, do very familiarly and plainly
handle and dispose the matter by piece meal, and after an excellent good
order: and in stead of cutting, tearing in sunder, wreasting it into a wrong
sense, and resting in the Bark without making a through entrance, do soundly,
perfectly, truly, very reverently, and without falsifiyng, deliver it unto
us, and feed our souls with the marow thereof.

Wherefore (right honorable) seeing this food of the soul which is the word
of God, is so precious a thing, as that all the kingdoms of the world are not
valuable unto it, I have taken boldness to beseech your honor to be the Patron
and defender of this my poor travel in the translation of these Sermons
following, which I have done for the benefit and good of the meanly lettered
sort of my countrymen, very notably and learnedly handled by M. John Calvin,
whose authority, and sound dealing in such causes, If I should take in hand to
commend, I should seem, (as we say) with a Lantern to give light unto the
bright shining Sun, and therefore will hold my peace. Again, the doctrine set
down by him in them, affourdeth unto all the Readers thereof so great commodity
of it self, as that it needs not the commendation of any other. And I have
the rather dedicated this my rude translation unto your Lordship, partly, for
that I would show some piece of my humble duty unto your honor, as a public
testimony thereof, in respect of being sometimes, as then very young, brought
up in your L. fathers house: but especially and chiefly, because (Sir) you
seek by all means possible, (the Lord be thanked for it, and continue you in
the same mind all your life long to his glory) to use conference with a
certain godly learned man, for the better reforming of your self and your
whole family, to the obedience of the word. Which word as Solomon says, Shall
guide you when you walk, watch for you when you sleep, and talk with you
when you are awake. Prou. 6.22
And in the verse following he says, That the word is a Lantern, and
Instruction, a light, and correction, for instructions, are the way of life
etc. Thus have I my good Lord, boldly presumed of your noble and gracious
curesie, to present these Sermons unto your honor, beseeching you in the
behalf of the Church of God to accept of them. In the mean while, I shall
beseech the Lord our God, the Father of all mercy and consolation, to
strengthen you in that good course, which he of his mere love and singular
goodness, has so lately begun in you, that you may be like unto a
confortable bright shining light in his Church, to show your self a constant
mainteiner of the truth of the glorious Gospel of his dear Son Christ
Jesus our Lord, for the stirring up of many thereto. And because I fear that
I have troubled your Lordship with an ouerlo^g Epistle, I most humbly take my
leave, committing both you, and all your affairs, to the protection of the
Almighties most sacred Majesty. London, the vi. of May. 1581.

Your Lordships most duetifully to be commanded in the Lord Jesus. Tho.
Stocker.

To all the faithful dispersed people of God, in what Countries and Nations
soever, Conrade Badius wishes Grace, and peace from our Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ.
IT is not unknown unto us (Christian Readers) what the proud sect of the
Pharisees was, in whom, although there was nothing else but darkness, and
ignorance, yet boasted and bragged they of them selves, to be the most
notable enterpretors of the law, insomuche, that from thence they took their
name, as if the very marowe, and secret meaning of the scriptures had been
enclosed and fast shut up in their breasts. And yet in the mean while, in
stead of feeding the poor people with true and wholesome doctrine, they
instructed them I know not with what mockeries and vain ceremonies, which they
them selves had invented, clean besides the word of God. And so, after the
like manner do our great Doctors of Sorbone, and all our howling Monks and
Friars deal at this day with us: of which company, the one sort of them,
although they think them selves to be the pillars of the Church, fellows with
the Apostles, and the very shop of the holy Ghost, from whence we must
fetch the full exposition of the scriptures, and the very assured resolution
of all the points of religion, yet tell they us nothing else but vain and
doltish tales, either busy them selves about curious questions, and full of
Sophistry, besides a thousand other subtleties, serving to no edification in
the whole world. The other sort of them, in stead of the word of God, preach
nothing else, but constitutions and ordinances of their own making, for the
establishing of the tyranny of their holy Father the Pope, the very
Antechrist and enemy to the truth: and the third sort, vomit and cast up
arrogant and proud speeches in the Pulpyt against the children of God, and
against all such as Jesus Christ has revealed him self unto, in these latter
days, calling them Lutherans, and seditious persons, falsely devising a
thousand leasings against them, and in stead of feeding their miserable
starued sheep with the true food of the word of God, they are feign to
moysten their souls with those pestilent kinds of poisons, whereas they
should be fed with spiritual and heavenly nurriture.

Wherefore, dearly beloved brethren in our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ,
whenever that God sends unto us any good and faithful teacher, who
sincerely and purely delivers unto his Auditorie the word of the Lord, we
ought to make a meruellous great account of him: for, we shall find very few
such men as will faithfully acquit them selves of their charge and function:
and we ought amongst other things greatly to reverence all those whom God has
endowed with special graces and the gift of enterpreting* Even as at this day
the faithful Pastor and good servant of God John Calvin, has made that
precious tale^t which God bestowed upon him very profitable, whose Sermons
yield unto us a good testimony thereof, which also, (in the judgment of
indifferent men) were not slightly made, nor hastily hudled up, but duly and
truly premeditated and rightly delivered unto the capacity of his flock,
having always in open show, the lively impression of the benefit of the Lord
Jesus in their hearts. Neither are these like unto common places caught in a
net, either yet bosom Sermons, which may serve for any text of scripture, as a
stool for all feet: But are true, sincere, plain, and meet expositions
serving for the text which he had to treat of: neither are they stuffed with
frivolous exhortations: either yet filled with ambitious inuectiues. For, as it
is very needful that the superstitions of Popery should, by the word of
God, be daily enueighed against, to the end they, might be clean rinsed and
scowred out of our hearts, as a strong savor wherewith we have been seasoned
even from our infancy, yet if the place which he handled did not orderly
speak against such abuses, he would not pass the bounds of his Text, and
cry out, upon them: as the Papists, always, and to no purpose, like Mastife
Curres bark and baye against the Gospel, renewed in this latter age of the
world: But his manner was to hold a plain and direct course, tending to
edification, without omitting any thing which might serve and make for the
honor of God, and instruction of his Auditorie. I would, if it pleased God,
there were a great many more his like: For then I know, that the Church of
Christ, should be greatly eased and furthered: But it is out of al doubt, that
our unthankfulness is the cause why God sends not more faithful Pastors at
this present then are: for if there be any that will duetifully discharge
their office, and deliver the word of God freely (as Saint Paul commands)
reproouing sin, and setting them selves against iniquity, for the
maintenance of his honor, by whom they are sent, they are forthwith
furiously dealt with, rayled on, and slaundered. As questionless, the party
before said, who for his uprightness, and great fidelity by him used in the
executing of his charge, has gotten such a mighty number of enemies, as that
they which never see nor heard him, neither yet ever read two words of his
works, have wished his death. Howbeit, God be thanked for it, his good
conscience and the testimony which he had before God, his Angels, and the
faithful which daily heard him, did so assure him that men did him wrong for
wishing of him so great hurt, as that they encouraged him, constantly to pursue
the Lords works. He saw how hardly his master was dealt with, and after
him the Apostles: and therefore it grieved him not to follow their steps,
because he knew that God was of power able to defend and keep his pledge, and
that they which suffered for his sake, should be taken to be worthy of the
kingdom of heaven. Now, because all men could not be of that Church whereby
they might be partakers of the heavenly food which this good shepherd many
years ceased not to administer: and that it was very expedient that they which
were newly come to the charge which he had, might see his manner of teaching,
and so follow it: and likewise, that they which thought he did nothing else
but speak evil and cry out against the Pope, and all his rabble of
shauelinges, thundering against their traditions, without any other handling of
the Scripture, or else that he went about none other thing but to bring the
people unto a carnal liberty, and thereby cast of the obedience and subjection
which they ought to Kings and Princes, to the end therefore that they might
read his Sermons, and thereby see that he has great injury done unto him in
having this blame laid upon him, and cease the ill opinion which they have
conceived of him, many godly honest men determined to prynt a certain of them,
but especially Lawrence of Normandy, whose zeal and godly conversation is
sufficiently well known, and has for many years bestowed all his study and
travel to prynt books for the edifiyng of the Church. In very deed, I must
needs say thus much (as I have in the preface of the Sermons of the ten
Commandments let you before understand) that the Author was not willing
nor yet consenting heretoo: not that he would hinder the benefit and fruit
that hereby might redounde to the Church: but wished that his Sermons might
pass no further then unto his own flock: as well for that they were
specially made for his sheep, unto whose capacity he framed him self the
best he could: and therefore thought that an other order and disposition were
more requisite therein for the publishing them abroad in the view of all the
world: but as for the over looking of them to the end to polish them, over and
besides that his leisure would not serve him, he would never busy himself
about the matter. For if he himself had meant to have put them forth, he
intended to have made new homilies of them, and better penned, and not to have
published any thing suddenly spoken by him. Nevertheless, we seeing the great
benefit which might come by the putting abroad of these Sermons, were not
afeard somewhat to displease and disobey him herein, to the end we might make
you partakers of those excellent riches, which we possess in this little Angle
and corner of the world, so abhorred and detested, howbeit precious in the
sight of the Lord. In deed we were so much the bolder, by reason of the
liberal dealing of our honorable Lords and magistrates, who desiring the
advancement of the Church of God, have privileged us to print them.

Now, when we see that we were to make choice of such a great number of
collections as were of them, we thought it best to set a few of them abrod to
the end that as we see them thankefully received, so also we might go forward
in putting forth of more. This then is the order which we have taken.

In the first place, we have set down a congregation upon the beginning of the
Gospel of S. John, where is largely handeled the divinity of our Lord Jesus
Christ. Now by this word Congregation, I mean a certain assemble, which is
made one day in the week at the Church, where every Minister in order handles
some text of the scripture, more like the manner of a reading then of a
preaching: that being done, if any of the rest unto whom the spirit of God
has revealed any thing tending to the better understanding and laying open of
that which has been spoken, he has free liberty to speak.

After that follows the Sermon, touching the nativity of Jesus Christ. Next
to it we have placed the Sermons of his death and passion, of his resurrection
and ascension, of the coming down of the holy Ghost upon the Apostles, Of the
first Sermon that Peter, made after he had received the holy Ghost. Last of al,
we have set down a Sermon treating of the last coming of Jesus Christ.

After we had thus done, and thinking to have finished this book it pleased
God to grant us to come to the hearing of the most excellent sermons that are
possibly to be hard or spoken, upon the end of the fifty two Chapter of the
Prophet Isaiah, and upon all the fifty three, wherein the mystery of the death
and passion of our Lord Jesus Christ is set forth, and so lively pictured
out that a man would think that the holy Ghost meant to set before our eyes
Jesus Christ condemned in our name, and nailed to the cross for our sins, to
the end that he suffering the punishmente for them which was due to us, and
bearing the wrath and judgment of God for our sakes, has delivered us from
eternal death, which Sermons do so agree with the Sermons going before, which
we have here set down, that we could not choose to join them unto them,
because we would not bereave you of so great a benefit. Moreover, we have
had respect to choose out those Sermons as well as we could, which were upon
such days as the Lords Supper was administered in this Church, as well for
that that there is a far greater and more effectual vehemency in them, as
also for that the point of this Sacrament is therein more clearly showed, for
the which at this day, is the greatest contention and striefe in the world.
And therefore we have determined hereafter too deliver unto you the Sermons,
which this godly learned man has made upon the tenth and the eleventh Chapter
of the Epistle of S. Paul to the Corinthians, wherein is manifestly set forth
the true institution of the Supper and the corruption and abuse which sithence
have come unto it, lively refuted. Wherefore, if we perceive that these
presents like you, we will use all the means possible that God shall grant
us, to make you partakers of the heavenly riches, which he vouchsafes upon his
servants here in this Church. In the mean while we beseech you dearly
beloved to follow that blessed coursse, and not fear the threats and cruelties
of tyrants, who think at this day to do god high service in persecuting Jesus
Christ in his members: and set before you this incorruptible crown and
everlasting prepared for you, if you constantly persevere unto the end in your
holy calling, knowing that the sufferings which you abide in this present life,
are not worthy the glory of the life to come: whereunto we may attain
through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Geneua. 1563.
A Sermon made by M. John Calvin, upon the beginning of the Gospel according
to S. John, in which the divinity of our Lord Jesus Christ is excellently
proved.
1 In the beginning was that word, and that word was with God, and that word
was God.

2 This same was in the beginning with God.

3 All things were made by it: and without it was nothing made of that which
was made.

4 In it was life, and that life was the light of men.

5 And that light shines in the darkness, and the darkness comprehended it
not.


THis word Gospel, The word Gospel what it means,
signifies the declaration that God has showed us, of his love in our Lord
Jesus Christ, when he sent him into the world: which thing we ought well to
mark, because it is very much to know the use of the holy Scripture, even in
respect of the words it uses. It is true that we ought not to stand simply
or only upon the words: and yet for all that we are not able to comprehend
how excellent Gods doctrine is, unless we know the proceeding that it
uses, and also what is the style and speech thereof. And indeed we are so much
the more to mark and weigh this word, because it is a very common received
sentence to distinguish the holy Scripture into the law and the Gospel: and
those that speak thereof in that sort, mean, Division of the Scripture.
that all the promises which are contained in the old Testament, ought to be
referred to this word Gospel. If any man speak, let him speak as the words of
God. 1. Pet. 4.11.
True it is that their meaning is good, but for all that, the holy Scripture
uses not such manner of speech, and we ought to be sober in that respect, and
to yield such a reverence to Gods spirit, as to keep such a manner of
speaking as he him self uses to teach us withal. Behold thus much then
concerning the word Gospel, which is a publishing that God has made unto us
at the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ his son, declaring him self a father
to all the world: as also Saint Paul speaks thereof in his Epistle to the
Ephesians, Ephe. 2.19.
when he says that Jesus Christ came to preach the Gospel unto them that
were nigh, and to those that were far of from God: nigh, to wit, the Jews,
who were already entered into the Covenant with God: and far, to wit, of the
Pagans and Heathen, who are as it were far removed from his Church. Now when
we shall have looked every where, we shall find that this word Gospel is
not taken in any other signification. And behold also wherefore men have given
this name or title to the four histories that are written touching our Lord
Jesus Christ how he came into the world, and was conversant therein: how he
died, rose again, and went up into heaven: men I say, have given the name or
title of the Gospel to this. And why so? because the substance of the Gospel
is comprehended in the person of God his son as I have already said. The
ancient fathers had in deed the promises of salvation: The difference between
the fathers under the law, and as under the Gospel.
they were also very well assured that God would be their father, but yet they
had not (in such plain sort as we have) the gage and pledge of Gods love
toward them, and of their own adoption. For when Jesus Christ came into the
world, then God signed and sealed his fatherly love unto us, and we had the
full testimony of life, and in deed have also the substance thereof in Jesus
Christ, as I have already said. ^. Cor. 1.20.
And this is the cause why S. Paul says, That all Gods promises are in him,
yea and Amen: to wit, because then God ratified and confirmed all that which he
had spoken before, and had promised to men. So then it is not without cause
that these four histories (wherein is declared unto us how the son of God was
sent, that he took man's flesh, also that he lived here upon earth amongst
men) have been so named. Men then have comprehended all this under the word
Gospel, 2. Tim. 2.8.
because therein it is declared and set out unto us, how God has made perfect
and accomplished all that which was requisite for men's salvation, and that we
have had the fulfilling of al, in the person of his son. Indeed S. Paul
speaks of his Gospel, but after what sort? It is not as though he had
written an history of ye Gospel, but because his doctrine was conformable and
agreeable, to all that which is contained therein. So according to that which I
have already said, when the Gospel was preached unto us, S. Paul's Epistles,
not called the gospel, and in what sense
it is a plain manifesting of Jesus Christ to the end that we should know
that in him all things are perfected, and that we have the truth of that,
which had been promised in all times before. And yet for all this, S. Paul's
Epistles, are not called the Gospel. And why so? because that therein we have
not a continual history which declares unto us after what sort God sent his
son, how it pleased him that in putting upon him our nature, he might have
a true brotherhood with us, how he died, rose again, and ascended into heaven.
This I say, is not largely laid out, with a continual order and course of
speech in S. Paul, very certain is it, that the doctrine which is contained
in his Epistles, is conformable and agreeable with ye doctrine of the Gospel:
But for all that, that word Gospel, is specially attributed to these four
histories, for the reason which I have already alleged. Now where we say
that the substance of the Gospel is comprehended in the person of the Son of
God, this is not only to say that Jesus Christ came into the world, but yt we
should know also what his office is, what charge God his father has committed
unto him, and what virtue and power he has, which thing we ought to mark well:
for from thence we may gather the difference of the Gospel according to S.
John, Wherein the 4. Evangelists agree. Hebr. 4.15.
and those which the other three wrote. The four Evangelists agree very well
in this, that they declared unto us, how the son of god appeared in the
world, that he became true and very man, like unto us in all thing, sin
excepted. Afterward they declare unto us, how he died, rose again, and
ascended into heaven. To be short, all that was committed unto him, to draw us
to God his father by, is declared and set forth unto us therein. But there are
two things which are peculiar to S. John: One is, John has two things
peculiar too him self from the other Evangelists.
that he stays and stands upon the doctrine of Jesus Christ, more then the
other Evangelists do: The other, that with a greater liveliness he declares
unto us Jesus Christ's virtue and power. True it is, that the other Evangelists
speak well of the doctrine of Jesus Christ, but that is rather briefly and
shortly, as who have collected some small Summaries and Abridgementes thereof.
John. 6.1.2.
But S. John makes a long and large declaration thereof, as we see in ye sixth
Chapter, where mention is made of that miracle which he wrought in ye
wilderness, when he refreshed and fed so great a multitude. For thereupon S.
John comes to enter into speech, and to show how Jesus Christ is the bread
of eternal life. We see then this doctrine of Jesus Christ, which was declared
at large by S. John, and that with a more great dilating and discoursing
thereon, then is set out by the other Evangelists, yea we see that they quite
and clean omitted that doctrine. So much also may be said of the rest: for
after that he has touched some miracles and histories, John. 12. to 18.
he always comes back to the doctrine, and takes occasion to enter into
the matter, to handle and speak of the power of our Lord Jesus Christ: as
from the xii. Chapter til you come to the history of the Passion he entreats
of nothing, The Gospel according to S. Io. gives light to the other
Evangelists.
but this doctrine. So then now we see what difference there is between the
Gospel according to S. John, and the other three Evangelists, insomuch, that
to speak rightly, the Gospel according to S. John, is, as it were the key, to
give us some entrance and opening to the other. For if we read S. Matthew, S.
Mark, and S. Luke, we shall not so well know wherefore Jesus Christ was sent
into the world, as when we shall have read S. John. Having read S. John, we
shall know afterward to what end it serves us, that Jesus Christ has
wrought, and also that he has taken man's flesh, and that he died and rose
again: We shall know I say, what is the end and substance of all these
things in reading this Gospel. And this is the cause why he stands not so
much upon the history, as we shall see by the order which he will keep
hereafter. It is true, that these things rightly deserve, to be more largely
diducted and laid out: but because there is great matter in the Text which we
have to expound, I do but touch these things as briefly as I can. Wherefore
let us content our selves with that which we have summarily and shortly
touched, concerning the office of Jesus Christ: Wherefore Christ came into the
world.
that is to say, that S. John declares unto us how he was sent of God his
father, to the end he might accomplish and make perfect the salvation of men.
He declares how he took man's flesh, and how he died also, and rose
again, that he is the pledge of Gods love, that he is (as it were) the soul
of our redemption, and that Gods promises are in him ratified and established.
The sum of the Gospel according to S. John.
Moreover we must mark (as I have already said) that S. John touches the
stories more briefly then the other three Evangelists do, but for all that he
stays himself more upon the substance of the matter, that is to say, to
declare unto us what the doctrine of Jesus Christ is: and what charge God the
father has committed unto him: and to be short, what is his virtue, his power,
and goodness toward us. As concerning the signification of the word in it
self, Gospel is as much to say, as a good news or glad tidinges: but this
word ought to be unto us as it were hallowed or sanctified, to the end to
cause us to hate the things of this world, and to the end that we might
know, that all our goodness and our felicity, joy, and glory is in Jesus
Christ alone. Wherefore when we shall pronounce or speak this word Gospel,
which is as much to say, as good news or glad tidinges: Let us learn not to
rejoice beyond measure, in the things of this world which are brittle and
vain: let us not rejoice in delights, in pleasures, nor in any thing
whatsoever it be: Wherein true Christians should chiefly rejoice.
but let us be glad and rejoice in this, that Christ was sent unto us, that God
is offered and given unto us in his person: that Jesus Christ is come to the
end that he might be our reconciliation between God and us, that God
accepts us for his children, to the end we should not perish and be
condemned. Behold how this word ought to be sanctified or hallowed unto us, to
the end to cause us reverently to regard that inestimable goodness, which
has been brought unto us by our Lord Jesus Christ. And it is expressly said,
that this Gospel is according to S. John, to the end we should know, that it
is not from a mortal man, but that S. John, was only the minister or mean
thereof. From whom then shall we say that we hold the Gospel? From S. John,
The Gospel is from Jesus Christ. John. 7.16.
or from Jesus Christ? Certainly from Jesus Christ. And in deed Jesus Christ
uses this manner of speech, as to say, that the doctrine is not his, but that
he preached it in the authority of God his father from whom it proceeded: and
all this is to the end that we should bear so much the more reverence to this
doctrine, and that we should not receive it, as a common thing, but as the pure
truth of God, which was preached and declared by his only son. S. John then
was indeed the mean or instrument that God used, even as a Pen that will
write in a man's hand, but yet for all that we must not receive the Gospel,
which was written by him, as from a mortal man. Let us now come to the Text.
The word (says he) was in the beginning. The purpose of Saint John is to
declare unto us how the son of God did not then begin to be, when he
appeared or showed himself in the world: Christ is very God from all
eternity.
neither yet that then he began only to spread abroad his power in every
place, (for he was already from al time, and before all time, his power abroad
already in him self, and he took it not from any other) but that there was a
power which was in the word of God from the beginning, which at the last was
manifested, and we know it now, seeing Jesus Christ has been sent into the
world. Wherefore S John meant to declare here, that when Jesus Christ came into
the world, he that came was our eternal God, who also has redeemed us. But
yet to ye end that we may the better understand the whole, we must particularly
and by peecemeale mark the things that are here spoken. The word was in the
beginning. There is no doubt, but that he here calls the Son of God The
word. Why Christ is called the word
The reason is, because it is that very wisdom which has always been in
God, and his Counsel, and his power. True it is, that we have not in this
place the things declared and set out, as they are in their own greatness
and excellency, I mean, even as they are here propounded and set forth unto
us by S. John. For albeit that the spirit of God spoke by his mouth, yet so it
is, that he has not yet declared and set forth the matters unto us, in their
greatness and majesty. And herein we derogate nothing from the spirit of
God, The Lord in setting out him self and Christ to us, had respect to our
weakness.
when we say, that he has not fully and in perfection set out the things
which are here signified unto us, for the holy Ghost therein applies him
self unto our infirmity and weakness. And in deed, if we should hear
God, speaking unto us in his majesty, it should be utterly unprofitable for
us, because we could comprehend or conceive nothing thereof.

So then, because we be carnal, he must needs stut and stammer as it were, or
else he would not be understood of us. By this then we see, that we are to
understand, that God is as it were become little, and has abased him self,
that he might declare him self unto us: And that so it is, tell me, how
should it be possible to express what Gods majesty is, If we speak men's
speech and words? Is it not think you a far unequal measure? S. John then
albeit he be the holy Ghosts instrument, speaks not of these matters,
according to their greatness, and yet notwithstanding he speaks in a speech,
which is as it were unknown to us. And therefore we must conclude, that the
secrets which are contained in this place, are not so openly and plainly
declared, as that we are able to understand the same, in such sort as we
understand the matters of the world: but let us content our selves with that
which is here simply declared unto us: for our Lord knew yt which was
sufficient for our good, God has in his word revealed sufficient for his
children,
and he applied himself unto us and our infirmity, in such sort that he has
not forgotten or omitted any thing which was good and profitable for us to
know. So let us learn to keep us fast to this purity and simplicity of his
doctrine, considering how the world in this behalf has been foulely abused
by foolish imaginations, and vain speculations, and by a certain deuilish
boldness: For when the question has been to handle these matters, men have
overwhelmed them selves in as much as they meant (besides the revelation of the
doctrine) to search out with a certain curiosity and boldness, the eternal
essence and being of Almighty God: as a man in the Papacy shall hear
disputations that are made thereof, even as if men disputed of a flock of
Goats, or I know not whereof. They have no more reverence to God, the^ to a
beast: Now we need not seek out a better witness against the doctrine of the
Sophisters of Sorbone to know that the Devil reigns there, Sorbone, is the
name of the place, where the brotherhood of the Sorbonists, do yet remain to
this day in Paris.
and has always reigned there, the^ this. And this I say, that albeit their
doctrine were not false, yet so it is that when men see they have so little
reverence and regard to Gods majesty, we must needs say that it is a deuilish
doctrine, eue^ that I mean, which is at this day practiced, by the Sophisters
and Sorbonists, in all the Popes Colleges. So then, let us (as I have said)
content our selves with that simplicity, which is declared unto us by ye holy
spirit, for he touches and speaks of that which is good and profitable for
our salvation: and as I have already declared he has here brought and
delivered unto us that which was meet and fit for us to know. Iam. 1.17. Romans
11.29.
Let us come now to this true word. When S John calls Jesus Christ, That
word, it is as if he should say: the eternal counsel of God, or the wisdom
that remains in him. Notwithstanding we must mark that God is not like to
men: when we have a Counsel it may alter and change, but it is not so with
God: for that which is in God is unchangeable. Besides the counsel which we
have, Though man be wavering, yet God is constant. James 1.17.
is not our very Essence* or substance: but the counsel which is in God, is
verily and truly God: for God is not as a veil or couerture, where there are
shadowy places, as S. Iam. uses this similitude, we are as a shadow that
flitteth up and down, and we cannot abide firm and constant. But this is not
in God: for that which is in him, is of his essence and eternity. And this is
the cause wherefore S. John declares, that this word is verily and truly God.
But as concerning the word, we must not (as I have already said) imagine a
counsel or a wisdom in God, which should be like to the word of men. True
it is, that we may well take some comparison from our selves, but yet we ought
always to mark, the long distance and great difference, An apt similitude.
that is between us and God: for if the heavens be much higher than the earth,
much more must it needs be, that we should know and confess, that God is
more high than we, yea there is no proportion or resemblance as it were
between God and men. So then when men shall bring or allege unto us some
similitude taken from the creatures, we must always mark this great distance
and difference, There are two parts or powers of a man's soul, to wit,
understanding and will. See his Institut. Lib 1. Cap. 15. Sect. 5.7.
which is between God and us. As a man may very well say, that in the soul
of a man, there is a certain understanding, which is in such sort joined to
the soul, that the soul cannot be without understanding. There is also a
will, not as when we have now one desire, now another, but a certain power
(as a man would say) to will, which thing man has in him self, for man is not
as a stone, or as a pile of wood without sense and reason, but he has
imprinted in him this property, to will this or that. So then we may take and
use such similitudes: but yet notwithstanding we must consider, that speech is
here had of so high things, as of necessity all man's understanding and wit
must be abased and brought low: and we must handle them, and entreat of them
in all humility, applying them to their true meaning, Curiosity and vain
imaginations must be avoided.
and must not be over curious: we then have that fond imagination which has
borne swaye and ruled heretofore in the world: but we must come to Gods
school, to hearken to that which he shall speak unto us, and to fly from all that which men shall set out, Gods voice must only be obeyed.
and shall be found contrary to that, which the holy Ghost has left us. Now
furthermore we must also mark, that some having been thrust forward by the
devil, have perverted the meaning of this doctrine, affirming that this word
was nothing else, A perilous opinion confuted.
but some certain counsel, deliberation and purpose that God had to redeem
mankind in the person of Jesus Christ (who was a certain form, as they call
him, as when a man shall have purposed to do some work, and shall have
conceived the same in his spirit or understanding) leaving not by so saying,
euerlastingnes of essence or being to the son of God. But we see already,
and shall see hereafter more largely, how and in what sort S. John calls
Jesus Christ that word of God, thereby to declare and set out his deity, as
I have already said. And that so it is, behold a plain testimony of God
himself, for he saeith, that this word was in the beginning: so then it must
needs be, that it has been eternal and everlasting. It is true, that some
will reply against it, because Moses says, Genesis 1.^.
that God in the beginning created heaven and earth: and that now S. John
says, that this word was in the beginning, yt it seems hereby, seeing yt so
it is, that the heaven, the earth, and other creatures had a beginning, that we
cannot prove, the eternity or euerlastingnes of Jesus Christ, because it is
said that the word was in the beginning. But the answer is easy: to wit,
that when Moses speaks of the beginning, An objection answered.
we are to remember and mark whereof he speaks: that is of heaven, of earth
and other things, that have indeed a beginning. But now let us weigh and
mark, that which S. John says, In the beginning (says he) was that word. And
where was the beginning? verily in God. And what is Gods beginning, I pray you?
Certainly he had none: for otherwise it must needs be, that God should be
framed and made. So that when mention is made of the beginning of God, we must
conclude, that it is such a beginning, as has not any time at al. There is
then much to be said, and great difference also between Moses his place, when
he says, Jesus Christ i^ our God eternal. 1. Tim. 3.16.
that God created all in the beginning, and this when it is said, that that
word was in the beginning. For Moses speaks of the creatures, which had
their beginning to be at a certain time. But here S. John speaks not of any
thing but of God, which cannot be without his eternity and euerlastingnes.
Wherefore we must conclude, that this beginning, has not any beginning. And
hereby we see that Jesus Christ has been always. It is as much then, as if
Saint John had said, that Jesus Christ is our eternal God, who has appeared
and been made manifest unto us in the flesh, as also Saint Paul speaks
thereof. Now he adds afterward: this word was with God: as if he should say
you must of necessity separate and distinguishe him from all creatures. Mark
the purpose of the Evangelist. We must not so much as imagine (says he) that
this word had any thing at all, like unto creatures: we must go out of the
world, we must ascend above the earth and heaven, A hard question answered.
when we think upon this word. A man might demand, Before there was either
heaven or earth, was it possible, that this word should be in the beginning?
yea in deed, for S. John for a full answer, separateth this word from all the
creatures: as if he should say, when I speak unto you of this word, you must
come to God, for it is in God. Let us then regard and consider it, as a
certain eternity or euerlastingnesse, which is not in the creatures, neither
in the heaven, nor in the earth, nor in any thing whatsoever. And
notwithstanding all this, yet so it is, that the Evangelist in this place
sets out unto us, a distinction between God and his word. The father
distincted from the son, not in essence, but in person. 1. Cor. 8.4.6. 1.
Tim. 2.5.
And what manner a one is this distinction? It is not of their essence, for he
means always that this word is God: and we must conclude, seeing that we
have but one only God, and that there is but one simple essence or being in
him, that Jesus Christ, that is to say, this eternal word whereof mention is
made in this place, has not been separated or sundred from God his father, in
respect of essence: and yet notwithstanding there is some distinction. And how
is that then? thus it is: because we are not able to comprehend that which is
so high above al our understanding and reason, How there are three persons in
the Godhead.
the ancient Doctors have used the word persons, and have said, that in God
there are three persons: not as we speak in our common speech, calling three
men three persons, or else as in the Popedom, they will be so bold as to point
three Puppets or Munkeyes, and say, Lo the Trinity: but this word persons in
this matter, is used plainly to express and set out the proprieties, that are
in the essence of God. The word substance, or (as the Greeks speak)
Hypostasis is in deed more meet and convenient, because it is a word of
holy scripture, and the Apostle uses it in the first Chapter of his Epistle
to the Hebrews, Hebr. 1.3.
when he says, that Jesus Christ is the lively image, and the brightness of
the glory, yea the image or ingraued form of the substance or person of God
his Father. When he speaks in that place of the substance or person of God,
he means not the essence or being, but he speaks of his propriety which
is in the father, to wit, that he is the fountain of al things. But now let us
look to their three substances or persons, as we call them, Gods word only,
must be the rule of our faith, in all points, but specially in the article of
the Trinity.
and mark how they accord and agree, so farfoorth, as God teaches us
concerning them (as I have already said:) for we must not at any hand go
beyond these bounds and limittes. And therefore let us have an eye thereto, so
farfoorth as shall be requisite, for the exposition of the place: When men speak
of God, true it is that men of them selves are confounded, and know not what
to think or imagine, saving that they go astraie in their own cogitations
and thoughts, Romans 1.21.
as Saint Paul says: and therevppon it falls out, that they wax thereof
over proud, through their own prudencie and wisdom: and therefore GOD also
does in such sort punish them, that they entangle them selves, in such
horrible labyrinthes and mazes, that they can not at any hand come out. But
when we will suffer God to guide us unto him self by the holy scripture, we
shall know him so farfoorth as shall be necessary and meet for us. The
Trinity proved.
For we shall come to the father as to the fountain of all things: and then
we can not conceive or think upon the father without his counsel and eternal
wisdom: besides there is a certain virtue and power that remains in him,
which we shall also perceive and feel very well. Mark then how we shall find
these 3. proprieties in the essence of God. And this is that which S. John me^t
to say in this place, that that word was with God. If there were not some
distinction, he could not speak so, for that should be to speak improperly
to say, God was with him self. So then let us know, that this word has some
distinction, and is indeed to be distinguished from the heavenly father: for it
is that word, Christ begotten from before all beginnings.
that was begotten from before all time, seeing that God always had his
counsel and his wisdom. And we must not for all that so much as imagine or
think upon a beginning: for we may not say, that God has at any time been
without his understanding, counsel, and wisdom. So then we must not set
aside, and separate from God the propriety of this word, as to say, that we
could judge, The Trinity, destroieth not the unity: neither does the unity
infringe the Trinity. Gregor. Nazi^n sermo de sacro Basil,
that there had been some certain time wherein it had not been with God: for
this should be to make an idol of it, as it were. But as I have said, the
three persons are but one God: and yet for all that we must distinguish them,
because there is a certain and assured distinction of them, as is in this place
declared. And withal let us remember an old Doctors sentence, which is very
worthy to be thought upon, because it is excellent. I cannot (says he) think
upon these three proprieties, ye are set out unto me in God, but ye immediately
my understanding comes back again to one: and on the other side, it is
impossible for me to know one only God, but yt I regard and look upon al ye
three proprieties, and see the^ distinguished in mine own understanding,
according to ye light which is given me thereof in ye holy scripture. Behold how
ye faithful shall know God: knowing ye father, they will come to his wisdom,
who is this word of which there is spoken in this place, they will come also
inco^tine^tly, to that virtue and power whereof we have in part said somewhat.
And when they shall have once known these three persons, they will not any more
straggle and wa^der hither and thither, but they will come to this one and only
essence, to know that there is no more but one only God, yea such a one and
only God indeed, as has in such sort created ye world, yt he has not left
undone any thing of all that, which was requisite and necessary to accomplish
our redemption. Thus much the^ we are to mark, as concerning that which is
said, that this word was with God, to wit, that the Evangelist meant to separate
Jesus Christ from al creatures, The perfection of Gods works.
and yet notwithstanding to declare unto us the distinction which is between
him and the father. Now he adds, that that word was God: and this he does ye
more fully and better to express, ye which he meant, to wit, that Jesus Christ
was not a thing created, Christ is very God.
which had had a beginning, but that he is our true and very God, This place
has bin ill understood of some, Read this with reverence and judgment.
and they have also foolishly translated it, as to say God was the word: for if
we should say, that God is the word, the father should be no more God, the
holy Ghost should be no more God. But S. John meant to speak altogether the
contrary, to wit, ye this word is God, as if he should say, ye Jesus Christ in
respect of his deity and Godhead, is of the same essence with the father. So
he shuts not the father out from the deity, but declares that there is no
more, but one only essence in God: and although there be a distinction between
God and his word, yet must we always come back to this simple and plain
truth that they are one God, which we must worship. Arius Nestorius etc.
It is true yt ye old heretics traveled very sore, to pervert this place to
the end they might not be enforced to confess, that Jesus Christ was our true
God. But we see here, that S. John speaks so plainly, of the euerlastingnes
and eternity of this word, yt there is no place left, either for wrangling,
or starting into holes. He adds afterward yt this word was in the
beginning with God: He had not before spoken these two words together: he had
only said, This word was in the beginning also. It was with God. But now he
joins both of them together. Mark then how we ^^ght in such sort to behold
Jesus Christ that we should continually believe, that he is very God, and of
the same essence with the father. Indeed he was created in respect of his
manhood, Christ in respect of his humanity a creature.
but we must pass further, to the end we may know him to be our eternal
God, who is so indeed our God, that withal he is also, the wisdom of his
father, which has been with God from before all time. Behold then, what is
the sum of this place. Now if we shall keep and hold fast this exposition,
(as it is simply and plainly set down unto us) it shall be sufficient for us,
to instruct us to our salvation. And this verelie is all that ye we are to know
touching this point: for if we begin here foolishly to dispute, that will fall
out upon us, which in this behalf is fallen upon the Papists, as I have
already said. Moreover let us note, Blessed are they, whom other men's harms
make to beware. It is a fond travail to confirm divinity, by Philosophy.
that this is a certain foolish study and endeavor, to labor much to
confirm that which the Evangelist speaks in this place, by the doctrine of
the old Philosophers, as there are certain people, that let and trouble them
selves in it. It is true that we shall find in Plato, that he had some
understanding of God: for when he speaks of God, he says that God always
had his understanding in him self: and almost all other Philosophers speak
after this manner. Now these that are so curious and desirous, in such sort to
make the Philosophers agree with the holy scripture: suppose that they have
much profited the Christian congregation, when they are able to say, that the
Evangelists, who have spoken after this manner, have not been alone, but that
the Pagans and Heathen themselves have in deed known such things. Verily this
is much to the purpose: it is even as if a man would put a veil or shadow,
before brightness or light it self. Behold God, A fit similitude.
who inlightneth us by the doctrine of his Gospel, and we will come and put a
veil or shadow before it and say, ho, this light and brightness will be
more apparent and glitering by that veil. It is very certain, that God
would, that even these things should be known to the Heathen Philosophers,
Heathen Philosophers had some light, and wherefore it was given them.
to make them thereby so much the more inexcusable before his Majesty: but
that proves not this, to wit, that his doctrine should be confirmed by that
which they have said: for verily we see, that so much the nearer they thought
to come nigh unto God, so much the further off in that respect they removed
them selves. Romans 1.21.
And therein was fulfilled this sentence of S. Paul which he utters against
all mankind: that all they that would be over sharp sighted and subtle
witted, and did not seek God in such reverence and humility as they ought,
are fallen into a bottomless depth of error. And certainly this is a just
judgment of almighty God, when we proceed so far to defile his doctrine
mingling it amongst the foolish inventions of men. But let us now go
further. The Evangelist says: That all things were made by it, and that
without it nothing was made of all that which was made. After that he had
assured us, of the eternal essence of that word of God, he adds a
confirmation, thereby to set out unto us his eternal deity, to the end we
may be very certain of the whole matter. The creation of all things by
Christ, is a plain proof of Christ's Godhead. Romans 1.19.20.
All things (says he) were made by it. The essence of God is known to us,
not only by that which we can conceive or comprehend thereof in our own
understandings, but also when it pleases him to declare him self unto us by
his creatures: for when the scripture handles that, then does he make him
self visible, and not only visible, but S. Paul passes yet somewhat further,
saying, that although we were blind, yet we may thereby feel him as it were
with ye hand So then though we had our eyes shut, Act. 17.27.28.
yet so it is that we may know this power of God. And how so? Because it is
here within us. In who^ is it that we live, that we have our moving and being?
It is in God, who has breathed life into us, and by whom we subsist or stand.
This the^ is that which S. John shows us, saying, that all things were made
by it. By this we know, that that word of God has been from the beginning,
who also is our God. God applies himself to our rudeness.
And how know we this? Certainly we cannot climb so high, and therefore God
is come down even unto us, God I say, with that his word, so that we may know
him. And albeit that our understanding stretches not it self so far, neither
yet is able to ascend above the clouds, yet so it is that we are constrained
to know that this word is truly God. And how so? Because all things were
made by it. In it is it then, that all things have been, as the Apostle Paul
in his Epistle to the Hebrews shows the same. Hebr. 1.2. Hebr. 11.3.
We confess (says he) that the word of God is eternal and everlasting.
And why so? Because so it is, that by this word all things were made. And this
is also the same yt S. Paul speaks in the 17. Chap. of the Acts of ye
Apostles, Act. 17.24. Act. 14.17.
that God has not manifested himself unto us, without a large testimony and
witness, because we may behold him in all his creatures. So then, in as much
as al things were made by his word, He meneth Seruetus and his adherents, as I
take it. See Institut. Lib. 1. Gap. 13. Sec. 7.8.23. Ge^. 1.3.
we must know that he is our eternal God. There are certain Heretics that
suppose, that this word of God, had beginning in the creation of the world,
because there was never any speech had of the word, until such time as the
world was created: As Moses says, God said, let there be light, and the
light was made, etc. Now they would infer here upon that that word then
began. Is it so? we may rather contrariwise by that conclude, that that word
is eternal. For if a man begin to do some thing, we can not therevppon say,
that he was not before that. If this be true in creatures what will it be,
when we shall come to God? So then albeit that word of God has not spread
abroad and made manifest the power thereof, before ye creation of the world yet
none can thereupon conclude, that it was not already before that time. And this
is that which S. John meant to set out and declare by this manner of speech,
wherein it is said, yt al things were made by this word. Moreover let us mark,
A good (...) which ought well to be remembered. Romans 11.36.
that when we speak of God the Father and of his word, we say then, that God
made all things whatsoever, and that by his word: and this word by, is
attributed only unto Jesus Christ. True it is that when we speak of God singly
and by himself, and without distinction of the persons, we may well say, that
all things are by and from God: but when there is a distinction, as in this
place there is, behold then the propriety which belongs and agrees to Jesus
Christ, to wit, that al things were made by him. And this is that distinction
of persons which I have already spoken of, that is, that all things are of God
the father, but that Jesus Christ is the mean thereof Mark then what S. John
meant as if he should say, that God by his word has made all things.
Wherefore God shows that he is the fountain of them all and that it must
needs be that he should make and create all things, but yet by the mean
and power of that his word. And without it nothing was made of that which was
made, Saint John comes here to repeat the same Sentence, Two causes of S.
John's repetition.
not only because it is his custom to repeat one and the self same thing
after two sorts, but also by reason of men's ingratitude and unthankfulness.
For albeit that it is said unto them, that God made all things by his word,
yet they do not at the first, conceive, understand, or believe the same. We
see that Gods Creatures touch us not to the quick, and that we are so dull and
so blockish in our understanding, that we are notable to comprehend these
things, even in such plain and simple sort, as they are propounded and set out
unto us. Wherefore S. John, that he might the better express the same unto us,
adds, without it nothing was made, of that which was made. The dullness of
man's wit in Gods matters, should teach us true humility.
As if he should say, Surely we are accursed if we do not receive this
eternal word of God, seeing that by it is that we have been created, yea
that all the world has been made, the heaven, the stars, and the earth,
which brings forth for us our food and nourishment: to be short, that all
good things have been given us by the means of this word. So then seeing we
perceive that our life proceeds from thence, we must wholly keep our selves
fast thereto, and cast from us all that, that men will set before us to the
contrary. This is here a double exposition, in respect of the placing of the
words, not that they are changed, but because we have diversely disposed and
placed them. Our sort read it thus: That by that word all things were made, We
must heede^ look how words and matters are placed in the scripture.
and that without it nothing was made, and end there their sentence:
afterward they add, All that which was made, was life in it: But this
declaration is not aptly set. It is true that the sense which they give is in
deed almost all one: for they have in a manner the same exposition that we
have: but the manner of speech is very strange: for it is not said of the
creatures that they are life, but that is attributed unto God, Romans 8.10.
as Saint Paul says in his Epistle to the Romans, that the Spirit is life,
by reason of the freedom that has been bestowed upon us by Jesus Christ. To
be short, though we shall view all the holy Scripture, yet we shall never
find that it is said, There is a double life even in this life. Act. 17.28.
that we are life in our selves, but that God only has life, and that not
only the spiritual life, but even that life, from which all things have their
being, and by which we live, and that we have life and breath in him, as I
have already alleged out of S. Paul's saying. And by this we see the truth
of this sentence, to wit, that nothing of all that which was made, was made
without that word of God. And this is the order of the reading that has been
found and observed, in all the most old Greek Doctors, and other expositors:
The Manichees and their opinion confuted.
neither was there any but one alone that has otherwise expounded it.
Furthermore we have to note, that the Manichees labored to pervert and wrest
this place, (saying, All that was made in him was life) to prove their foolish
opinions: as that all creatures had life in them and were living, for example
Stones, Trees, Corn, Otes: All this in their fantasy was living, insomuch
that they durst not eat bread, unless they were sanctified of God before
hand. And wherefore? he must be good, that eats this, would they say. The
Devil certainly possessed them, and yet notwithstanding they would allege
places of Scripture, The Devil and his instruments do continually wrest the
scriptures.
and abuse them, to prove their foolish speculations withal. Now I meant in
deed to touch this by the way, to declare that the Devil has always
endeavored to pervert, wrest and wring the holy Scripture: but whatsoever it
be, if we search and seek after Gods truth, we shall find it pure and
simple as it is, and the Devil shall not be able to devise or perform any
thing against it or us, to turn us away from it, because it is showed and set
out unto us before our eyes, and it shall appertain to none but to us, if we
will behold it in his purity, and keep it in such sort, as God has revealed
the same unto us. Then let us come to the natural meaning. After that Saint
John had said, That nothing was made of that which was made without this word:
He adds, That in it was life. Now here he minds to set out two diverse
things: that is to say, that as all was once created by the power of that
word of God: so all things continue and are preserved by that power, and by
the same mean. Two things worthy to be marked.
And these are two matters which it behooves us well to consider and way. The
one, that we have our beginning and life by this word: the other, that we are
vpholden and maintained thereby, and that not we only, but all the world:
Also, that the world was not only created at the beginning by this word, but
also that it should be no more nor continue any longer, unless it were
preserved in it own estate, by the same mean. And therefore as I have said,
let us mark and keep fast, All things in the world are vphelde by Christ.
these two things as they are in this place pointed out unto us with the
finger by S. John. In the first place then he declares unto us, That nothing
of that which was made, was made without this word. And how then? Minds he
to accept I know not what, that was not made? Seems it, that he would say,
that the Angels were not created? No, no, he means no such thing: but minds
to declare that we have nothing at all which depends not wholly of God, and
has not it being altogether in him. Touching Angels.
It is true that the Angels have a very noble and excellent nature, but yet
notwithstanding they subsist and have their being by this word, and are founded
in it: otherwise they could not continue and abide: As also there is nothing in
the world but it is preserved by this very word. Now here we are taught and
instructed, how great our poverty and wretchedness would be, unless that
God vphelde us by his grace. And this is it that the Psalmist speaks, that so
soon as God shall withdraw his spirit from us, Psalm. 104 29.
behold we return to powder and dust, and vanish away altogether. It is true
that he speaks in that place of creatures and bodily things: but so it is,
that we see how all the rest also is vpholden, by the virtue and power of this
word. Now even as we cannot subsist or be, but by that word of God: so we must
likewise mark, that it is by the means thereof, that we have begun to have
life. And who is he that declares the same unto us? The Evangelist. This is
also the self same which the Apostle says in the first Cap. to the Hebrews,
that the son of God is the brightness of the glory, Hebr. 1.3.
or the image of his substance and person of God his Father, and that he
vpholdeth all things by his word. He uses there the word, word, but yet
in such a signification, that he means not only the power of the son of
God, but also a certain wonderful disposition, and a very fit and seemly
order, which he has set in the things created, because he is the wisdom of
God, and we may behold him in all the creatures, because he vpholdeth al things
by his virtue and power. Mark then how we have life and moving, and after the
first day of our life we continue in the same, to wit, because that God
preserves us: Man's life, and the continuance thereof is from God alone
for in respect of our selves we must needs perish every minute of an hour,
if this were not that that word of God mainteineth us. Behold then in what
sense the Evangelist says, that that word was life: that is, that not only
all things were made by it, but that they must of necessity also be grounded
thereupon, and that it maintain them in their being. Now he adds
afterward, that that life was that light of men. And wherefore is it that he
adds this? It is for two causes. The first is, that after that we have known
the might of God, and the power of that his word, both on high, and beneath,
and every where, we must then come to our selves: for this is good reason,
that we should and that with a greater diligence behold that, which touches
us very nigh. As how? I ought to know Gods goodness in this, that he
preserves, Horses, and Oxen: as David speaks to us thereof, Psalm. 36.6.
Psalm. 104.27. Genesis 1.1^.
saying that it is he that gives nourishment, and food to every beast. I
see on the other side the Earth, which by the commandment and blessing of God
brings forth her fruits. If I look the^ upon beasts, I ought to know the
goodness of God which declares it self even toward Asses, and Dogs, but
much more toward me God comes to me, that I might inwardly feel his
power: he gives me bread wherewith I am nourished, and ought I not to be
touched to the quick for so many benefits and blessings, It is true that I
should. Besides also when men set out Gods works, they speak expressly of men,
Gods power appears specially in man.
because that God does set out his most great and excellent power rather in us
then in other creatures. God then will in deed be magnified, both in heaven and
in earth, and in all his works that we see: but yet much more in a man,
because he has imprinted his own Image in us, rather then in all the rest of
his creatures. For he has not said of the Sun, the Stars, or any other
creature how excellent soever it be, Genesis 1.26.
I will make now a chief work, which may be to mine own Image and likeness.
So then the Evangelist after that he had spoken of the power of that word of
God, which spreads it self to all creatures, he comes to men. And in this
he shows unto us, that if men behold the goodness of God in every place
where they look, they cannot but much more consider and behold the same,
within their own persons. And forasmuch as God has done us this honor, that
we are magnified and made excellent in our selves, insomuche that the very
Pagans and Heathen have called Man a little world, Man a little world, and why
he is so called.
because we may see in him a principal work that surpasses all the rest,
good reason is it, that we should know and confess in it, the virtue and
power of God. It is true that we may behold God in all his creatures, but when
he manifests himself in man, then we see him, as it were by face and
countenance: whereas looking upon him in other creatures, we see him darkely,
and as it were on the back parts. So then albeit that it be said, that God is
made visible unto us in his creatures, yet it so falls out, that in them we
see but as it were, his feet, his hands, and his back: but in Man we see as
it were his face. Not that it is his face, so that we can behold him there in
imperfection I mean not so, God is visible in his creatures chiefly in man,
but in none can Gods majesty be perfectly set out
for I speak not now of divine and heavenly things, but only of this, that
it has pleased God to be known in this world to high and low. Behold then
the sum of that which S. John says, to wit, that that life was that light
of men: as if he should say, It is true, that there is in deed a certain
life spread abroad over and in all creatures. And what manner a one is that,
even that all things are made and preserved by that word of God: Man's soul a
very excellent thing.
but yet there is a more excellent matter in man, to wit, the soul,
understanding and reason. For a man shall not be without sense and feeling, as
stones: he shall not be without understanding and reason as brute beasts: but he
has a more excellent life, yea even to behold the things which are above and
beyond the world. Now consequently he adds: that that light shines in the
darkness, and that the darkness comprehended it not. He expressly puts
down that, because that that light which God placed in man, is as it were
altogether put out: and in deed if we should judge according to that which we
now can see in mortal men, we shall not much regard and esteem the grace
of God. For albeit that man was created to the image of God, Sin defaced Gods
image in man.
yet so it is, that through sin he has been disfigured and defamed. What is
it then that we see in men? We see there an image of God which is altogether
defaced and marred, because that the Devil has defiled it through sin. But
albeit that men following altogether that which Satan prompted them too, Satan
neither by force nor fraud, can hinder Christ the light.
have quenched and put out the light of God: yet so it is notwithstanding that
the Devil was not able by his subtlety to bring so much to pass, that this
light of God, should not yet shine forth in the midst of darkness. And
this is it that Saint John minded to declare, as if he should say, It is true
(my children) that if that which was first given unto men had continued and
abidden with them, we should have seen nothing now, but the glory of God
shining in every place, in steed that now we behold his Image wonderfully
defaced: and yet notwithstanding all this, if so falls out that we may
perceive in Man some brightness that God has left him, Some sparks of light
remain notwithstanding man's soul fall.
and some little spark of that his light. And this is that which the
Evangelist meant to declare. I leave untouched other things because the time
suffers us not to speak any more thereof, and because I have already been
ouerlong.

Notwithstanding we are to mark yt men have so much light of the knowledge of
God, as is sufficient to win them, and make them inexcusable before him. Men
are not what they think of themselves, but what God pronounces of them.
Let us indeuer to make our selves believe of our selves what we will or can,
yet behold God, who pronounces, that we are al darkness. And how so? let us
not attribute that unto GOD, but to our own fault. Now then, either God must
inlighten us with his brightness, or else otherwise there shall be nothing
but darkness in us, and it cannot be avoided but we shall stumble and fall
down, if we will but once lift up our selves to go forward one stepp, without
his guiding and government. And yet so it is (as I have already said) ye God
has not so destituted us, that we are altogether forsaken of him, so that we
have nothing remaining of his gifts. And that so it is, there is yet some seed
of religion in men, they have yet some remnantes of their first creation: as a
man may see that eue^ in the most wicked and reprobate: there is some
impression and print of the image of God, Man's light makes him without excuse
before God, as Romans 1.20.
and this is to make them so much the more inexcusable: for so much as they have
not profited thereby, their condemnation shall be therefore so much the more
grievous, and without doubt it shall be doubled upon them. Behold then how
notwithstanding that our nature was so corrupted we do yet retain some
little spark of that grace, which God put in our father Adam: So that this
sentence is very true, yt that light shines in darkness. Now further the
Evangelist says, that the darkness comprehended it not. Wherein he shows
how great the unthankfulness of men is. Behold God, who makes his
brightness to shine in us, and his word to lighten us, Man's malice the cause
of his own blindness.
and yet notwtstanding we darke^ and dim the same through our malice. It is
true that the Gospel it self, is a manifestation and declaration of this
light, but yet that malice and unthankfulness which is in us, puts it out,
as much as in us is, unless God remedied and redressed it, making a change in
us by his power and infinite goodness. And this is that which Saint John meant
to declare in this place: and withal he begins to prepare us to that, which
he will speak afterward, that is to say, to what end this word (which is
Jesus Christ) was sent us of God his father, that is, The mystery of our
redemption very great and needful.
to the end he might be manifested in the flesh, for our salvation. He meant
then to declare how great the mystery of our redemption was, and what need
we had of it, in saying, that we have not comprehended the brightness that
was in us: as if he should say, It could nothing at all have profited us, to
have the light that shines in us, unless we had withal been redeemed, and
that this word had executed and performed the love of God toward us, in
repairing his image, The light of our own misery is a good mean to make us
feel the mystery of our redemption.
which was defaced in us through our sin, and wholly disfigured in the first
man. Mark I say how Saint John minds to prepare us to know the effect of
our redemption: and besides he meant also to show unto us, how that the word
of God declares it self in his creatures, in as much as all things are
preserved by his strength and power. And withal he exhorts us to know and
confess, the graces that God has bestowed upon us, more excellent in deed
than upon other creatures, to the end we might magnify and praise him: The
ends of our light and knowledge.
moreover to know, that seeing he has from the beginning imprinted his own
lively image in us, and has made us feel his power, it is good reason we
should learn, to hold our selves fast to this word, and to confess both
generally and particularly, the good things that God has done for mankind,
to the end that the light which he has plentifully communicated unto us, of
his grace and goodness only, may not be quenched or put out through our
malice, but that Jesus Christ may in such sort dwell in the midst of us, that
being guided and governed by the holy Ghost, we may have such access to the
father, that he may at the length bring us into his heavenly glory. Thus I
have handled these things as shortly as was possible for me, What men should
look at in expounding the scripture.
respecting always to touch the mark, whereat the Evangelist in this place
aims: notwithstanding if there be any thing that has been omitted because
a man can not remember all, let every one speak thereof that, which God shall
have given him in that behalf: and if there be any doubt, propound the
matters, to the end that putting them out, they may be made clear and
manifest, and that the Church of God may thereby be more and more edified, when
things shall not remain in doubt, but shall be understood according to their
true meaning, after that we shall have disputed and reasoned upon them, as is
seemly, and according to God and godliness.

A Sermon of the birth of our Lord Jesus Christ.
Luke. Cap. 2. 1 ANd it came to pass in those days, that there was a
commandment from Augustus Caesar, that all the world should be taxed.

2 (This first taxing was made when Cyrenius was Governor of Syria,)

3 Therefore all went to be taxed, every man to his own City.

4 And Joseph also went up from Galilee, out of a City called Nazareth into
Judea, unto the City of David, which is called Bethlehem, (because he was of
the house and lineage of David)

5 To be taxed with Mary that was given him to wife, which was with child.

6 And so it fell out, that while they were there, the days were accomplished
that she should be delivered.

7 And she brought forth her first begotten Son, and wrapped him in swaddling
clothes, and laid him in a manger because there was no room for them in the
Inn.

8 And there were in the same country shepheardes, abiding in the field and
keeping watch by night, because of their flock.

9 And lo, the Angel of the Lord came upon them, and the glory of the Lord
shoane about them, and they were sore afraid.

10 Then the Angel said unto them be not afraid, for behold I bring you
tydinges of great joy that shall be to all people.

11 That is, that unto you is borne this day, in the City of David, a Savior
which is Christ the Lord.

12 And he shall be a sign to you, ye shall find the child swadled and
laid in a Maunger.

13 And straightway there was with the Angel, a multitude of heavenly
soldiers, praising God and saying.

14 Glory be to God in the high heavens, and peace in earth, and toward men
good will.


WE know (beloved in the Lord) that all our felicity joy, and peace, is
this, eue^ to be conjoined and knit together with the son of God, for as he
is our head, so are we likewise his body, and do also receive from him our
life, and health, and all whatsoever blessedness else. And beside, we see in
very deed, how miserable our estate should be, if we can not to him, to be
preserved under his protection. But by the way, we are never able to attain
and reach so high (seeing we are scarcely able to crawle upon the ground)
without he were alredie come near unto us by reason of his birth, who has
taken upon him our flesh, and is thereby become our brother. Neither could we at
this present fly unto our Lord Jesus Christ sitting at the right hand of God
his father, 1. Tim. 2. 5. Isaiah. 7.14. Math. 1.23.
in ye glory of the heavens, without he had abased himself to become a mortal
man, and his estate and condition to become also like unto ours. And here we
may likewise see, why the name of man was given unto him, when as he is called
the Mediator between God and man: and so by the self fame reason is called
Immanuel, which is as much to say, as God with us. And therefore as often as
we seek to be relieved and eased of our miseries by our Lord Jesus Christ,
and to make him our sure and undoubted defense, we must first of all, begin at
his birth. Now, we are not only here taught that he was made man like unto
us, but was also so despised, and made of so small account, as that he was
scarcely taken to be named among the number of men. For he was as it were
banished and denied all harbor and company, and was lodged in a Stable, and
laid in Manger. Since the^ it is thus, let us here acknowledge that Gods of
his goodness has bountifully spread abroad his infinite treasures, when as
he would in this sort abase, his dear Son for our sakes. And let us also
acknowledge that our Lord Jesus Christ has so suffered for us, as that, so
often as we seek him, we need never to go very far about, to find him,
nor yet to unite our selves truly unto him. For, for that cause was he
contented to submit him self unto all shame and rebuke, insomuche, that all
men as it were utterly forsook him. And therefore let us here learn also by
the way, humbleness, and lowliness, if we mean that he should entertayne
us. For it is very good reason, that at the least there should be a
conformity or an even agreement between the head and the members. Neither
must we so despise our selves as to make no reckoning of our selves: for we
shall by nature find such poverty and wants in our selves, as that we shall
have very good occasion altogether to abase our selves. But let us acknowledge
our selves to be such as in deed we are to the end we might offer up our
selves in true humility unto our Lord Jesus Christ, that he might acknowledge
and allow us for his. We have moreover to note by the way, that in the history
which Saint Luke here recites, that on the one side we are to learn, that the
son of God made himself of no reputation, for our salvation: and yet on the
other side, notwithstanding that he ceased not to be a sure and undoubted
testimony, that he was the Redeemer of the world, promised from the
beginning: neither took he upon him our nature, because he was not able to
defend and preserve his heavenly Majesty. Both which are here set down unto
us: for our Lord Jesus Christ was laid in a Manger, as one clean forsaken of
the world, and in extreme poverty, without honor, without reputation, and
as one subject to all bondage and slavery: and yet did the Angels in heaven
magnify him, doing him all homage and reverence. And here in the first
place, an Angel brought tydinges of his birth: but he was soon after
accompanied with an whole army, who were all present and appeared, as
witnesses sent from God, to show, that although our Lord Jesus Christ was so
abased, for our salvation, yet was he for all that the King of the whole
world, and had all things under his power and rule. And beside, the place of
Bethlehem yielded a good proof that it was even he that was promised from the
beginning. For the Prophet Micheah, Micheah. 5.2
had so prophesied of him, where it is said, And thou Bethlehem, although thou
be of no great reputation, like unto a village which makes no great show,
neither very well inhabited, yet out of thee shall he, come forth unto me,
who shall be the ruler of my people: whose going forth, have been from
everlasting. And here we see, that our Lord Jesus Christ has not spared
himself, to the end we might have ready passage unto him, and not doubt but
that he will receive us as his own body, seeing he would not only become a
mortal man, clothed with our nature, but also become like unto a poor worm
of the earth, void of all felicity. And therefore, let us not doubt how
miserable soever we be, but yt he will take us always for his members. Howbeit
on the other side, we see him marked as it were by ye hand of God, to ye end he
should be willingly received, as the man, from who^ we must look for our
salvation, and by who^ we are received into ye kingdom of God, from which we
were before banished. For we see a divine or heavenly power and majesty to be
in him, because ye Angels took him as it were for their superior and
sovereign king: neither must we doubt yt when we are under his protection, yt
he has wherwithal to defend and preserve us. Howbeit, let us know this by ye
way, yt although he has so abased himself, yet that it is no whit derogatory
from his divine power, neither yet any hinderance to us, from being safe and
sure under his government. Here, therefore we see ye sum and effect of this
history: which is, that in ye first place we might acknowledge ye son of God,
eue^ our mediator, to be linked unto us with such a bond, as yt we should not
doubt, but that we are always pertakers, both of his life, and also of his
riches. And in the mean while, let us likewise acknowledge, yt he brought with
himself to us, whatsoever was requisite for our salvation. For (as we have
already said) he was not made of so vile reputation, but that he always kept
with him his heavenly power and majesty: and although the world accounted him
to be of no credit, yet nevertheless, he was always not only ye enheritor of
this world (because he is head of the Church) but also very God for ever.
Moreover let us learn of them who are here appointed to be our masters and
guides, how to come to our lord Jesus Christ. In very deed, ye wise men of this
world, so swell with pride and presumption, as yt they will scarcely vouchsafe to
be taught of simple men, and of shepheardes of the field: and yet all the
wisdom we have, is to learn of these shepherds (of whom we have here
spoken) to come unto our Lord Jesus Christ. For if our heads were fraught with
all the knowledge in the world, to what end served it if we had not life, to
wit, him, in whom, as Saint Paul says, Colos. 2.3.
all the treasures of the world lie hid. here we see therefore at which end
we must begin: which is, That it is not hurtful unto us to follow their
steps, who have showed us the way to come unto our Lord Jesus Christ. Now God
has not done this honor unto the mighty men of this world, neither to the
wise, nor to the rich, either yet to the noble: but has chosen very shepherds
for the purpose. And since it is so, let us follow the order there set down.
Matthew. 2. 1.
It is very true that the wise men came from the East to do homage unto our
Lord Jesus Christ but it so fell out, that the shepherds first began, to the
end al pride and presumption might be cut of, and that he who would be taken
for a Christian, might be as it were a fool here in this world. Wherefore,
let not foolish arroga^cie so carry us away, 1. Cor. 3.18.
as to judge of the wonderful secrets of God, after our own fantasies, but
simply woorship them. Moreover, let us consider of the faith of these
shepheardes, and then we shall think it no hard thing to follow them: For,
they came to woorship the Redeemer of the world: but in what case found they
him? Forsooth they found him lodged in a Manger, and swadled in poor and
simple swaddling clouts, according to the sign which the Angel had given them.
Now, this strange sight seem to abashe them, yea, and to make them go back,
and not to acknowledge Jesus Christ to be a Savior. For the Scribes, and
doctors of the Jews thought in very deed, that the Redeemer which was
promised, should come with great pomp, and bring all the world under his
subjection, and be in such wonderful prosperity, as that they should have
the world at will, and get all the substance and riches of the earth into their
possession. And thus we see, that the message which was told them that they
should find him in a Stable swadled in blankets, was such a stumbling block
unto these poor men, as was able to have broken the very hearts of them, and
make the^ to be of that mind, never to come near our Lord Jesus Christ, but
rather altogether to fly his company. Now, we see yt this was the sign which
was given of the Redeemer, that he was laid in a Ma^ger, as one not worthy the
company and fellowship of men. And yet would not all this withdraw their
minds from the visiting of him. Their coming then was for this cause, to
acknowledge him to be as it were ye Lord, confessing ye God had compassion of
them, and would in the end accomplish and fulfill the promise which he had
made them from the beginning, and so confirmed them selves thereof by this
spectacle. Seeing then these Shepheardes had so great faith, that it straue
against all whatsoever might pull them back from coming unto our Lord Jesus
Christ, we shall be worthy double blame, and without all excuse, except we
learn and take forth this lesson in their school: and make not the birth of
our Lord Jesus Christ (although there appeared noworldly dignity, pomp or
nobleness therein) a stumbling block to stay, or withdraw us from the right
way, to come to submit our selves unto him as unto our siege king, and unto
him, unto whom al power and dominion is given both in heaven and earth. And
surely this is an admonition very needful for us: for as I have already said,
The doctrine of the Gospel is a very stumbling block to all proud and
foolish men, and to such as think themselves wise, we see also yt many
fantastical fellows spurn against whatsoever is contrary to their own
minds. On the other side, there were many mockers and skorners, who were never
touched with any feeling of their sins: and because they are profane people,
who never think to come to an account, and know not any other better life then
this which they see here below, they think it therefore mere foolishness
so to follow the son of God, and to be acquainted with him. And the more we
see this, so much the more ought this advertisement to strengthen us, to wit,
yt the son of God loses not a jot of his majesty and glory, neither is
any whit lessened, because he has abased himself for our salvation: but we
ought rather to wonder at it, knowing his inestimable goodness and love
toward us. We see then how we must put this doctrine in practice, which is,
we must not cease to come unto our Lord Jesus Christ, although we find not at
his hands at the first chop, the thing which our flesh, or natural affection,
desires. And although at his birth he was swadled up in cloutes, and laid in
a Manger, yet let us know and be fully resolved that he was notwithstanding a
Mediator to draw us unto his father, to open the kingdom of heaven for us,
whereout we were utterly reclosed. And although even at this day, he reigns
not gloriously, and his Church despised, yet remains there such a
playnenesse in his word, as the mighty even of this world reiecte: howebeeit
let not us for all that cease to hold our selves unto him continually, and
submit our selves under his dominion, in true obedience of Faith. As for
example, when any man preaches, it is not the thing that greatly draws us
according to our custom. We hear a man speak, and what is that? It is of no
great dignity and credit: and besides, in effect, there is nothing but the
word: on the other side, in that which is preached by the Gospel, there are
many things which seem to us to be against all reason, if we should judge
thereof after our own minds. Let us therefore understand that we shall
never submit our selves unto the thing which God shows and declares unto us,
except we humble our selves in the first place. And for a confirmation which
he has added us, unto his word, we have the Sacraments. And will one drop
of water suffice to assure us of remission of our sins, and that God has
adopted us for his children, and that although we be frail, shall we
notwithstanding be clothed with his heavenly glory, which never shall
decay? Is it possible for us to take a pawn and pledge of so notable and
great things, in so small a deal of water? May a piece of bread, and a little
Wine in the Supper of the Lord suffice to assure us that God allows us for
his children, that we live in Jesus Christ, and no separation between us? For
this might seem rather to be a matter of nothing, to see such Ceremonies
wherein is no great glory and pomp. So then, we somewhat better see, this
thing which is beer spoken by the Ministers, belongs to us, and that we
have to make our profit thereof at this day: to wit, let not us cease to draw
near unto our Lord Jesus Christ, and assure our selves that he it is in
whom we must find all goodness, and all joy and glory, although it
seems, that he is yet as it were in the Stable, in the Maunger, and in his
swaddling clothes: to wit, that there are many things which are able to make
us become dissolute or wanton, or at the least bleare our eyes, that we shall
not be able to perceive the heavenly glory which GOD his Father has given
him: I say in the same humane nature, which he took upon us. For in as
much as he is GOD, he has all thing of him self (as it is said in the
seventeenth Chapter of Saint John) but in that he is man, whatsoever he
brings us, he has received of free gift, John. 17.
that we might draw out of his fullness, John. 1.16.
and find in him whatsoever is to be desired, and so rest and content our
selves in him alone. Moreover, let us here note, that the holy Ghost means
to assure us, that we following the Ministers who are here appointed for
masters and guides, ought not to fear falling away: for seeing, the
Shepheardes had none other sign but the Stable and a Manger, we may say:
Behold a sort of simple idiotes, who are foolishly, and without any reason,
made to believe, that this was the Redeemer of the world: and yet this would
be too too easy a matter for us to do. And therefore we might stand in
doubt: but on the other side, the shepheardes were confirmed very certainly
that he was the Son of God, even he that lay so in the Manger: to wit,
when the Angel appeared unto them, and after they had heard this song which
Saint Luke sets down, where all the kingdom of heaven bear witness of
our Lord Jesus Christ, that he had all power over the creatures both of
heaven and earth. Let us therefore learn to receive (in the assurance of the
faith of Jesus Christ) whatsoever is here set before us. For this is certain
and sure that God means to convince all those, of unthankfulness, who at
this day vouchsafe not to worship his only Son, seeing he sent such a
multitude of Angels to declare that he was the promised Redeemer. We then have
a trim way to flatter our selves in our incredulity, as we see a number of
blockish people do: who make no reckoning of whatsoever is written in the
Gospel. There are also certain scorners of God so senseless, as, that
whatsoever is preached, is to them all one, for they account of it no better
then of the telling of fables. Now, as many as submit not them selves to the
woorship of our Lord Jesus Christ, are to be condemned of most obstinate and
deuillish rebellion. And because there are many faithless people, an infinite
number of the Angels of heaven shall bear witness against them: for they are
the Ministers of the truth of God. Let all the wicked therefore, and as many
as lie powdered and seasoned in their sins and corruptions, smoothe, and
harden themselves as much as they will in their infidelity, and they are sure
of this, that they have over many sufficient witnesses to ratefie and confirm
their condemnation. For the Angels in heaven appeared, to the end we should
not be excused, when as we will not receive Jesus Christ for our sovereign
King, and submit our selves unto his majesty. And therefore by the way, Let us
for our part note, that God procured our salvation, when as he sent such a
multitude of Angels, that we might come to our Lord Jesus Christ with a
cheerful mind, without any more disputing, or doubting. But be fully
resolved, that we shall find in him, whatsoever is wanting in us, and that
he will have wherewith to supplye all our pouerties and miseries: And to be
short, That it is even he, by whom God meant to communicate him self unto us.
And will we then seek for our life, any other were then in God? Now, Coloss.
2.9.
all the fullness of the Godhead is in our Lord Jesus Christ. And therefore
when we have such a testimony, it is as much as if God stretched forth his
arms, to make us feel his inestimable goodness, and only to show, that
when we have faith in Jesus Christ (I mean no hypocritical faith) we might
fully rest on him, and considering that we must hold all of him, we shall
then be partakers of all his benefits, which we want, and hunger after.
Moreover, although we see not at this day the Angels, who for that time only
appeared, yet is this testimony registered, that it might be autenticall. For
the holy Ghost has spoken it by the mouth of Saint Luke. Wherefore, let us be
contented that we have such a testimony from God, as tells us that the
Angels have borne witness of the birth of our Lord Jesus Christ, that we
knowing that he was made man, yea, and that of no estimation, for our sakes,
might have an earnest desire to attain unto the kingdom of heaven, to the
end to cleave unto him in the true unity of faith* We are after a while to
consider also of the place of his birth, to wit, of Bethlehem. Which thing is
no small nor light confirmation, when as we see the Son of God to be borne,
which the Prophet so long time before had foretold. For if Joseph and Marie
had had their house in Bethlehem, and remained there, it had been no strange
case, if she had been there delivered, and Jesus Christ to have been borne in
the same place: But the thing which at this day should have served our
purpose, had been very greatly darkened: for it had not been known that the
Prophet had not said without cause, And thou Bethlehe^, although at this day
thou be of no great reputation, like unto a village which makes no great
show, yet shall thou bring forth him, who shall be the ruler of my people.
But when Joseph and Mary abode in Nazareth, and came unto the Town of
Bethlehem at the very time when she was upon the point of her deliverance,
and Jesus Christ borne, who sees not but that the hand of GOD guided all
this geere? And therefore it can not be but that men must be willingly and
wickedly blind, when as they will not acknowledge here the handie work of
God, who has set a mark of his only Son, that he might without all doubt
be received, as the promised Messiah. In very deed there was good occasion
that made Joseph to come unto Bethlehem, and that was the public Edict of the
Roman Emperor: but to bring a woman thither great with child, and upon the
point of her deliverance, surely this was not any man his deed, but the
handie work of God. And again we see that GOD uses strange kind of
dealing for the accomplishing of his will. For what imported this Edict of
Caesar's, but a tyrannical subjection for the taxing of the people of the
Jews, and a laying of a tribute of every man at that time, which was a
signification that they should not look for any more liberty: Jesus Christ
was promised to deliver the Jews and all the faithful from the subjection of
Satan, and from all tyranny: and it seemed that this Edict was made to close
up the gate, that GOD should never accomplish the thing yt he had promised to
his people: and yet this was the means to perform it. For when Joseph and
Mary came like poor souls to serve a Tyrant, a Pagane, and an Infidel, we
see the Prophecy prove true, that Jesus was borne in Bethlehem. And GOD him
self (as I have already said) gives here a full certainty unto all his,
not to doubt of the birth of our Lord Jesus Christ.

And here we see how we must apply the instruction of these things which
are here recited unto our selves. For it was not the meaning of S. Luke, or
rather of the holy Ghost who spoke by his mouth, simplye to describe unto us
an history of that which came to pass: But has on the one side laid forth
unto us, that GOD spared not his only Son for us: and besides on the other
side, that he brought an undoubted testimony with him that he was the
redeemer of the world, and that he might be so received. Let us now
consider with our selves to make our profit by this history, so that we may
agree with the song of Angels in glorifiyng of God, and receive also that
which it affoordeth us for the gladding of our souls. In the first place, The
Angel (who brought the message unto the Shepheardes) said, Be not afraid,
for behold, I bring you tydinges of great joy. And besides, this was the
common testimony of all the multitude of the Heavenly Soldiers, which GOD had
sent, And peace in earth to men. And thus we see what it is that we must
hold fast in the first place, which is, we must seek all our joy in Jesus
Christ. For to say the truth, when as we are full of delights and
voluptuousness, it is without question, we will bathe our selves in all
pleasures: and yet if we be not too too drowsy, yea altogether blockishe,
our consciences will never be quiet, but be tormented without end and
measure: For this worm (whereof the Scripture speaks) will gnawe us, our
sins will check us, and we shall feel that God of very right, is utterly
against us, and our professed enemy. And therefore cursed are all the joys of
the world, because they shall be turned into gnashing of teeth, until such
time as we are an atonement with God. Cursed then are all joys, all honors,
and all things else that are to be desired, until we feel Gods mercy upon
us: and when we are thus reconciled unto him, we may not only rejoice with
an earthly joy, but with that joy which is namely promised in the holy
Ghost, to the end we might look for the same in him.

Now, peace and joy are things which cannot be separated: For how can it
be that we should have any thing wherein to joy, when as we see our selves
compassed about with so many miseries. And besides, when we see our selves
cursed in Adam, The children of wrath, and God being our judge, armed to
execute vengeance to the throwing of us down into the bottomless depth, what
joy is it possible for us to conceive, who stand in such a desperate estate?
And surely when we think heereon, It cannot be that we should be only
tormented with unquiet minds, but also be oppressed with the horror of Hell
fire, which surpasses all the griefs of this world: except surely the Devil
has bewitched us: as many we see which cease not herein to make themselves
merry, although they be at open defiance even with God himself. But if we had
but one drop of feeling within us, without doubt we should always live in
torment, until such time as we find God to show himself merciful unto us.
And therefore this peace must go before, that we are fully assured that God
allows us for his children and that because he imputes not our sins unto
us. Now, are we in this sort at peace with God? And if we be so, then
surely we have wherefore to rejoice: yea even with God, according to that
which I have already touched. For the very Infidelles have a certain kind of
peace (that is to say, They are so sensles, as that they make no reckoning of
the judgment of God yea they are even angry with him) but it is not with God.
For they never are at peace and rest, without it be when they forget both God,
and themselves, and become altogether brutish, howbeit S. Paul exhorts us to
be at peace with God: Romans 5.2.
that is to say, to look unto him and search how we may be at peace, that is,
we drawing near unto him, are certain and sure of his love, But how shall
this be done? forsooth even by the forgiveness of our sins, through the
love which he bears us in our Lord Jesus Christ. Let us here now note, yt
the peace which the Angels of heaven preached at this time, brought this joy,
whereof the first Angel made mention, saying, Behold, I bring you tydinges of
great joy, that is, The salvation which you have in Jesus Christ. For he is
called our peace: and this title declares unto us, that we should be
altogether separated from God, without he received us, by the means of his
only son.

Moreover, heereon we have also wherefore to glory, when God allows us for
his children, and gives us leave to claim him with open mouth as our father,
to come freely unto him, and in him to have our refuge Let us heerevpon gather
by the way, that God has so appointed his Gospel to be preached by the mouth
of men, as yet notwithstanding the Angels have gone before them and lead
them the way. True it is, that at this day the Church must be taught by the
mean of mortal creatures But how ever it is, this is no strange thing that
we bring, but do only recite the preaching of the Angels of heaven: and
that of no small number neither, but of an infinite multitude, and of an huge
army.

Moreover, we cannot but needs be inflamed to magnify our God, whenas we
are thoroughly certified of his goodness. See now why these two things are
joined together, that the Angels exhort all the world to glorify GOD, it is
because he gave such a peace upon the earth, we enjoy therefore the
benefit which God has largely bestowed upon us by the mean of our Lord
Jesus Christ his only son. And he has taken the possession of this peace,
to the end our praises might be heard to the heavens, and pearse the clouds
and that all the world might resound this song. The Lord be blessed and
magnified for ever. Heerevpon we are to gather, that our mouths must always
be stopped, and that we can never praise God, until such time as he has
caused us to feel his great goodness. For to say truly, how is it possible
for miserable sinners to bless and magnify the name of God, so long as they
have that trouble of conscience, that they know not whether God loves or
hates them? But contrariwise, their mouths, by reason of their griefs, must
needs be fast closed up, so that they are not once able to open their lips.
And therefore must GOD let us so understand in very good earnest the love he
bears us, as that we may be fully assured, that he is always our Father:
and then shall we have wherefore to bless his name.

But as we cannot possibly, in truth praise God, until such time as he has
declared unto us his bounty, even so let us also learn not to have a dead and
idle faith: but when we see that he has bountifully bestowed upon us the
great treasures of his mercy: let our mouth then do his office in stirryng up
it self to bless his name, and let our whole life also answer the same. For
this is the very right sign, Every of us must conscecrate himself to ye true
service and worship of God, because we knowing, that he has so dearly bought
us, ought by good reason to bestow all our thoughts and deeds in the blessing
and magnifying of his most holy and glorious name. And that when we acknowledge
ourselves to be in very deed his, we might understand that it proceeds of
his free mercy and goodness, that it has so pleased him to accept us unto
himself. And therefore this saying is not set down without cause, That peace
is granted to men: not for any desert, or for that we have purchased the
same, but because it pleased God. For the speech, which Saint Luke uses,
imports this much, yt we must seek after none other reason why our Lord
Jesus Christ appeared to us: but because that God had compassion of our
miseries: as it is also said in John, That God so loved the world, John. 3.16.
as that he spared not to deliver his only begotten Son to death for us.
And therefore let us after this manner come unto our Lord Jesus Christ: to
wit, that the message which is here published unto us by the Angels, might be
a burning Lantern to show us the way, and faith to be our guide, so that we
might understand that he is now God in us, because he is God with us. For
(as I have already said) he is declared to be our God with us, when as he
meant to dwell in our humane nature, as in his temple: But he is now God in
us. That is to say, we feel him conjoined to us in far greater power, then
when he showed and declared himself a mortal man. Yea, for he is now both
God and man in us. For, first he quickneth us by the power of his holy
spirit: and he is besides, man in us, because he makes us pertakers of the
Sacrifice which he offered up for our salvation: and declares unto us that it
was not without cause that he said, that his flesh was meat indeed, and
his blood, drink in deed. And therefore we see why the holy Table is made
ready for us, to wit, to ye end that we knowing our Lord Jesus to be
descended here below, John. 6.35.
and utterly abased, yet that he is not for all that separated from us,
although he be ascended into the heavens in glory and majesty. But rather
upon this condition that we might be partakers of his body and blood. And why
so? For we know that his righteousness and obedience was the satisfaction
for our sins, and has appeased the wrath of God, through the Sacrifice
which he offered of his body and blood in the same humane nature which he
took upon us. Since the^ it is so, let not us doubt when Jesus Christ bids
us to this Table, although we can perceive nothing else but bread and wine, but
that he verily dwells in us, and we so surely knit unto him, that there is
nothing which is his, but he will communicate the same to us. Let us therefore
(I say) acknowledge this, to the end we might know to make our profit of this
Sacrament which he himself has established: and let us understand, that so
often as we receive the same, that he might very well have delivered us by
some other mean from the bottomless pit of Condemnation, wherein we were
if it had pleased him: but that his meaning was to grant us more assurance of
the love he bear us, when as we have Jesus Christ for a pawn, because we
might seek after our salvation in him: and acknowledge that we are no manner
of way whatsoever, able to rejoice, until such time as he be given us as it
were amongst us, and be so near us, as that by his means we might be
brought to the kingdom of heaven, whereof we were deprived by reason of our
sins. And thus we see that Jesus Christ must be the ready way for our
salvation, if ever we intend to come unto God, and desire to have a true
spiritual joy, and a spiritual contentation and quietness: and if we also
desire to be armed against all the temptations, wherewith Satan is able to
attempt us. But and if we will be partakers of this holy table, let us
consider well with our selves, and in the first place acknowledge our miseries,
and be displeased, and utterly ashamed of them. Moreover, let us acknowledge
and confess, that God meant to assuage all our sorrows and griefs, when as
he so liberally showed himself in his only begotten Son, and would have
us fully and wholly joy in him. And although we be subject to many miseries in
this world, and are besieged with enemies like unto ravening woolues, so that
the devil cease not to make a pray of us, and the Infidelles bark at us
like mastyfe curres: although (I say) we be on every side troubled and
threatened: and although we must abide many griefs: Philip. 4.7.
yet let us hold this for a most sure ground, that we shall have always peace
in our God: and let us beseech him, that he will make us feel it by his holy
spirit, because it is a thing that surpasses all man's reason (as we have
already touched of S. Paul) and learn to be so contented with our Lord Jesus
Christ, and with the spiritual benefits whereof we are pertakers, as that we
may patiently abide all the afflictions and miseries of this world. And
besides, let us beseech him that we take it not in evil part to be
contemned, and on every side troubled, to be short, to be put too all
reproach and shame, so that Jesus Christ be with us, and blesses all our
myseries and afflictions, and that we bring forth such fruit thereby, as
that it may be known, that in the midst of all our miseries we desire
nothing else but the glofiyng of our GOD. And where the worldlinges triumph to
their shame and confusion, because all their joy is too strive against GOD, Let
our true joy be too serve him in all fear and humility, and yield our
selves wholly to his obedience. And here we see the way by which we must make
our profit upon this doctrine.

Let us now fall down before the Majesty of our good GOD, and acknowledge
our faults, beseechyng him too make us more and more to feel them: that
hereby we may learn to submit our selves unto our Lord Jesus Christ:
knowing that if we be separated from him, all our whole life, and whatsoever
benefits else we receive from GOD, shall turn to our most grievous
condemnation. And that we may feel his death and passion to be communicated
unto us, and be taken for the members of his body, to the end the afflictions
which we shall abide here in this world, may be so many helps and
furtherances unto salvation. So that we may all say, O most Mighty GOD, and
Heavenly Father. etc.

The first Sermon of the passion of our Lord Jesus Christ.
Math Cap. xxvi. 36 Then went Jesus with them into a place called Gethsemane,
and said unto his Disciples, Sit ye here, while I go, and pray yonder.

37 And he took Peter, and the two Sons of Zebedeus, and began to wax
sorrowful, and grievously troubled.

38 Then said Jesus unto them, my Soul is very heavy, even unto the death,
tarry ye here, and watch with me.

39 So he went a little farther, and fell on his face, and prayed, saying, O, my
Father, if it be possible, Let this cup pass from me: Nevertheless, not as I
will, but as thou will.


WHen any thing is spoken, which concerns our salvation, The scripture
sets before us three ends. The one is, That we might know the inestimable
love, which GOD bears us, to the end we might glorify him therefore, as he
is worthy. The second, That we should abhor our sins, as we ought, and to
be truly ashamed to humble our selves before the Majesty of our GOD. The
third, that we might in such sort esteem of our salvation, as that it might
make us forsake the world, and whatsoever thing else belongs unto this
transitory life, and to be in love with this enheritaunce, which was so
dearly purchased for us.

And here we see whereon we must cast our eyes, and bestow all our senses,
when it is told us, that the Son of GOD has redeemed us from everlasting
death, and purchased for us everlasting life. We must therefore in the first
place learn, to render unto God the praise due unto him. Now, to say truly,
he might, if he had pleased) have delivered us from the bottomless depthes
of death after an other sort: But his good will was, largely to bestow and
power upon us the treasures of his infinite goodness, when as he spared not
his only son. And our Lord Jesus would herein give us an excellent pawn of
his wonderful care toward us, when as he offered himself willingly to death.
For we shall never be touched to the quick, nor enflamed to praise our God,
without we on the other side do examine our estate, and be as it were thrown
down into the bottomless pit of hell, knowing what a thing it is to have
provoke his wrath, and to become our mortal enemy, having him as a terrible
and fearful Judge: so that it were a great deal better, that heaven and
earth, and all the creatures had conspyred against us, then that we should
once come near his Majesty, so long as he is against us. Wherefore it is very
meet that sinners should be wounded with the feeling and conceiving of their
sins, that they might know themselves to be most miserable, and fear their
estate, to the end they might thereby know how greatly they are beholden and
bound unto God, in that he has compassion upon them, and seeing them in a
desperate case, has very good will to help them, without regard of any their
worthiness, but only for their myseries sake. And so also is it (as we have
already said) because we are too too much entangled here below, and when as
God calls us unto him, our minds and affections, so keep us back, as that
we had need to make much of the heavenly life, as it is worthy, and know with
how dear a price it was purchased for us. And here we see why it is told us,
that our Lord Jesus Christ did not only mean to suffer death, and offered
himself a Sacrifice to appease the the wrath of God his Father, but also, to
the end, that he might truly and indeed be our pledge, he refused not to
abide the anguishes and griefs, which were prepared for all such as in
conscience are touched, and feel themselves guilty of everlasting death and
condemnation before God. Let us then hear rightly note that the Son of God,
was not contented to offer up his flesh and blood and yield himself unto
death, but would withal, appear before the judgment seat of GOD, in the
name and person of all sinners, ready, there to be condemned: and that because
he bear our burden. And therefore we must not be ashamed, seeing the son of
God has submitted him self to such an infirmity. Neither was it without
cause that Saint Paul exhorts us, not to be ashamed of the preaching of the
Cross, albeit it be to some foolishness, and an offense to many. For, the
more that our Lord Jesus Christ was humbled, we see thereby that the offenses
for the which we were in arrerages and behind with God, could not be
abolished, without great extremity. And in deed, we know that he was made
weak, that we might be made strong by his power, and besides, he would abide
all our sufferinges, sin excepted, to the end he might be ready at this
day to help us. For if he had not felt in his own person the fears,
doubts, and torments, which we endure, he would not be so inclined to be
merciful unto us as he is. We say, that he who knows not what hunger and
thirst means, will never be stirred up to have compassion upon those that
feel it, because they have always taken their ease, and lived in pleasure.
Now it is true, that although God in his own nature suffers not any of our
passions, yet cease he not for all that to be courteous unto us: but that is
because he is the fountain of all goodness and mercy. Nevertheless, to the
end we might be assured that our Lord Jesus Christ knows our weakness to help
it, and that we might come the boldlier unto him, and have a more familiar
access. The apostle says, Hebr. 2.10.
yt he would for the same cause be tempted even as we are. So then, we have to
observe in this text which we have read, yt when our Lord Jesus was come into
this village of Gethsamene, and namely, into the Mount Oliuet, it was to offer
him self willingly to death. And herein, his will was to be discharged of the
office and charge that was committed unto him. For why clothed he him self
with our flesh and nature, without it were to repair all our rebellions
through his obedience, to the end to purchase us full and perfect righteousness
before God his Father? And therefore offered he him self to death, because we
might not be reconciled by any other mean, neither yet appease the wrath of
God, provoked by sin, but by this only obedience. Thus we see why the Son of
God came freely unto the place, where he knew that Judas should find him. And
let us know that it so fell out, because our father Adam through his
transgression, had thrown us all down headlo^g into ye bottomless depth,
that the son of God who had power over all creatures, might be subject, and
take upon him the state of a servant: as he is likewise called the servant of
God, and of all his. See also why S. Paul, Isaiah. 42.1.
in showing us how we must stay our selves when we call upon God with full
assurance, and be heard as his children, says that we are reputed righteous
through the obedience of our Lord Jesus Christ. Romans 5.19.
For this is as it were a cloak to cover all our sins and offenses: so that
the thing that might hinder us for the obteining of grace, might not come into
a reckoning before God. But we on the contrary part see, that the price of our
redemption cost very dear, when as our Lord Jesus Christ was so tormented that
he abode the very terror and fear of death: insomuch that he sweat drops
of blood, and was as it were like one besides himself, desiring if it were
possible that he might escape that distress. And therefore since we see it to
be thus, it is good for us to come to the acknowledging of our sins. For, it
is no time for us to rock our selves here a sleep through flattery, when we
see the Son of God plunged in this extremity, as though he were in the
bottomless depthes. Now if this only came to pass unto a just man, then
ought we to be touched, insomuch as it fell out that a poor innocent suffered
for our ransom, which thing came to pass to the Son of God. But behold
how the fountain of life, has submitted him self unto death: and he which
vpholdeth all the world by his power, is now become weak: and he who has
delivered the creatures from all fear, has sustained so wonderful horror.
Wherefore, when this is told us, it can not be but that every of us must needs
be most blockish, if we enter not every man-into him self, and being touched
with his faults and iniquities, is not ashamed before God, and so sigh and
groan: and namely, by this mean to be brought unto God with true repentance.
Now it is impossible for us, rightly to convert unto God, without we condemn
our selves, and conceive both the very terror and grief of the curse which is
prepared for us, until such time, as we be brought again into favor with
God. But because we may the better conceive of the whole matter, it is said,
that our Lord Jesus took only three of his Disciples, and left the rest of
the company a good way of: neither had he them through with him, but prayde
unto God his father secretly. Wherefore, when we see this, we are to note, that
our Lord Jesus had no companion when he offered him self an oblation for us:
But finished whatsoever was requisite for our salvation. And namely, it is yet
better declared unto us, when as the Disciples slept, and could not be
keptwake, although they had bin so oftentimes before warned, that the hour
drew near wherein our Lord Jesus must suffer for the redemption of mankind,
and had exhorted them by the space of three hours, declaring unto them
continually without ceasing, that his death approached. Yet notwithstanding all
this, they slept still. Wherein is showed unto us, as in a lively picture, yt it
was meet that the son of God should take upon him all our burde^s: neither
was it fit that he should look for any other. And it was to none other end,
but that we should take up our selves for straying, as we see the miserable
Infidels do, who can not be contented to stay them selves upon our Lord Jesus
Christ, but imagine that they must have Patrons, and Aduocats, as if there were
many Redeemers. For we see namely, the blasphemies which reign in that cursed
papacy, that the merits of Saints must serve to help the death and passion of
our Lord Jesus Christ, that by the same we might be freed and discharged
toward God For although (say they) there was a general forgiveness for the
fault of original sin, and of actual sins, yet must they be mingled
together: and the blood of Jesus Christ is not sufficient except the Martyrs,
had over and besides, merited: and therefore we must also have recourse thither,
to the end God might be merciful unto us. Now, when the Devil has after this
manner ouerune the whole world, so much the more ought we to beware, that we
hold us fast unto our Lord Jesus Christ, and know that it is in him alone yt
we must find all perfection of salvation. And see why it is namely said in
the Prophet Isaiah, That God wondered, Isaiah. 63.5.
when he see that there was none on ye other side to uphold. It is very true
that God right well knew, that he alone must make our salvation perfect: But it
was to the end that we might be ashamed, and not be deceived with
hypocrisy, as if we brought nothing with us for the helping of the
forgiveness of our sins, and for the cause of God to receive us into his
love and favor: so that, we might not run hither and thither to find out
Mediators. And therefore, for the cutting off, of all this gear, it is said
that God help him self with his own arm, and ended all by his justice,
without any companion. Now this is declared unto us even as it were before our
eyes, when it is said, that three of the chief of all the Disciples, slept
like miserable beasts: in whom was nothing else but beastly blockishnesse:
which thing was as it were a Monster against nature. to see them sleep in such
extremity. And to the end we might withdraw our confidence from all Creatures,
and shut it wholly up in our Lord Jesus Christ, see why it is said, That he
went forward to the combat. Moreover, in that he went to God his father, he
shows us the remedy for the easing of all our griefs, for the mytigating of
our sorrows, and even for the raising of our selves up again, when as we
shall be as it were clean thrown down. For if we be grieved and vexed,
we know that God is not in vain named the Father of Consolation. 2. Cor. 2.3.
Again, if we be separated from him, where must we find power and strength
but in him? But by the way, we see that he would in no wise let his
business be undone. Let us then here behold the Son of GOD, who, when we
are in sorrow and anguishe guides us by his example unto the true refuge, But
let us also note what form of prayer he uses, O my Father, if it be
possible, Let this cup pass from me, or this drink: For this is spoken by
way of similitude, when he speaks of a Cruse, Glass, or a Cup? Because
the Scripture calls afflictions, bitter drinks, to the end we might know
that nothing comes by chance: But that God as an Householder distributeth to
every man as pleases him. For like as a Father will give unto every of his
children his portion, or a Master to his servants, Even so does God show
that he scourges and afflicts them with his own hand: And likewise when we
have any benefits, it comes of his free goodness, and gives us as much of
the^ as he thinks to be good for us. And after this common manner it is, yt
our Lord Jesus says that death is to him so bitter drink, and would gladly
have it to pass from him, yea If it were possible, In very deed, about this,
might many questions be moved: For it should seem at ye first sight, that
Jesus Christ had forgoten our salvation, or rather in flying from ye light,
meant to leave us in destruction, by reason of ye fear that he had conceived.
Now, this will never agree with yt which we have said: and especially, ye love
which he has showed us should be greatly darkened. But we need not to enter
into such subtle disputations: Because we know that a passion, oftentimes so
takes away ye mind of a man, as that he thinks not either of one thing or of
an other: But being vexed with the present grief, he there casts himself,
without having any other regard for the upholding of himself. Wherefore, when
our minds are thus ravished, we cannot say that the rest is clean blotted out
of our hearts, and that we have no affection. As for example, A man that
considers of some affliction of the Church, namely, of a particular
affliction, he will pray unto GOD as if the rest of the world were nothing to
him. Now, is it therefore for us to say, that this is an unkind man, and has
no care of his brethren, who have as great need also to be prayed for? No: But
it is because that this affection has taken such a mighty possession in him,
as that the rest of his affection, is as it were separated for a time. We
read, that Moses prayed to be blotted out of the Book of life: Now, if we
would cull the greater from the less, Exodus 32.32.
we would say that Moses blasphemed against GOD, because he spoke, as if GOD
had been chaungeable. For they whom GOD has ordained to everlasting life, can
never perish: And therefore it seems that Moses strives here with GOD, and
that he will do as we do, who change our council and determinations. And
besides, how honored he GOD when as he knew himself to be of the number
of the chosen, and knew that God had marked him even from his childehood to
commit so notable a charge unto him, as to be the Leader of his people, and
yet desired to be razed and cut of from GOD? And whither then was this gone?
now, a man might make many arguments: But the solution is easy, For Moses
having so fervent a zeal for the salvation of the people, and seeing besides,
the horrible threat which God had pronounced by his own mouth, forgotte
himself for a minute of time, and desired nothing else but the help of the
people.

Let us then see how our Lord Jesus Christ behaved himself. For if it was
meet that he should suffer an hundredth deaths, yea a Myllion, without
doubt he was prepared for that purpose before: Howebeit, such was his will,
not for himself, but for us, to abide the anguishes which plunged him into it
as we see. And thus much for this point. Now for the second, If it be
asked, how our Lord Jesus Christ, who is said to be altogether righteous,
the Lamb without spotte, and the very rule and glass of all righteousness,
holiness, and perfection, could will, contrary to God his will. This is the
answer, that God is the whole perfection of righteousness and judgment. For
although the Angels are conformable to the will of God, and wholly obedient unto
him, yet is their will separate: For, because they are creatures, they may have
affections which apperteine not to God. But as for us who are compassed about
with this lump of sin, we are so blockish as that we are very far from the
will of God: for our desires exceed, yea and are oftentimes very manifestly
Rebellious. But if we consider of man as he was in his pureness, to wit,
without this corruption of sin, yet without doubt his affections shall come
nothing nigh unto Gods, and yet not be corrupt. As if Adam were not thus
perverted as he is, but had continued in the same estate, wherein he was
created, yet had he abidden heat and cold, and might have suffered cares, and
fears, and such other like. And such a one we see was our Lord Jesus Christ.
For we know that his affections were without spot or blot, and they all were
squared unto the obedience of God, but yet (because he had taken our nature
upon him) he was subject to fear and to this terror whereof we even now spoke,
and unto cares and such like. We cannot see this in us, no more then in pudly
water a man can judge of anything. And thus we see how these earthly affections
cause us to flote from one side to an other, and so toss us, as that God had
need to uphold us: But the affections which we that are descended of Adam
have, are like unto clay exceedingly tempered with infection, so that we cannot
see what this passion of our Lord Jesus Christ was, if we measure it as we are
men. For when we do any thing to a good end, and our affection of it self is
just, and allowed of God, yet shall we continually fail therein. For is not
this a good and holy thing, for a father to love his chilren? And yet for all
that, this is sin in us: because there is not that order and moderation that
is required in the same: for amongst all the virtues which we may have, GOD
makes us to see that there are vices in them, to the end our pride might the
better be abated, and we might always have occasion to cast down our
heads, and be ashamed, seeing our very goodness is corrupted through sin
which dwells in us, and wherewith we are filled, and full fraught.

Moreover, as for our Lord Jesus Christ (as I have already said) it is not
for us to meruel (forasmuch as he was man) although his will differed from the
will of God his Father: But yet we must not hereby judge that there was any
sin and transgression in him. And (as we have before said) we herein
especially see, the inestimable love he bear us, whenas he so greatly feared
death, that yet of his own good will he submitted him self thereto. And
besides, when as he neither withstood it, nor yet gainesaide the supping up of
this drink wherein he felt no bitterness, what a thing was this for us to
be in this manner redeemed? Howbeit this might seem to be a merry jest:
nevertheless, when it so fell out that our Lord Jesus Christ had endured
such anguishes, it was a sign that he so loved us, as that he forgot him
self, and suffered the whole tempest to light upon his own head, that we
might be delivered from ye wrath of God. Now, there remains for us to note,
when the Son of God was after this manner tormented, that it was not because
he was to depart out of this life: For if there had been none other thing but
the separation of the soul, from the body, together, with the torments which
he was to suffer in his body, this had been no such affliction.

But let us consider of the quality of his death: and let us chiefly come to
the original thereof. For death did not only dissolve the man, but made him
also to feel the curse of God. For over and besides that, that God takes us
out of his world, and that we leave this present life, Death is unto us an
entrance as it were into the gulf of hell. And therefore, when we hear
death spoken of, we must needs be separated from GOD, and cut off from all
hope of salvation, without we had this remedy, to wit, that our Lord Jesus
Christ has suffered for us, to the end that the wound which came by reason
of it, might be no more deadly. For without him, we were so wounded by death,
that there was no more hope of salvation for us: but now the sting thereof is
broken: yea the poison thereof is so cle^sed and wiped away, that we being
humbled by death, it serves us at this day for a medicine, and is no more
deadly, because Jesus Christ has swallowed up all the curse which was in it.
Now let us see what it is, that we have too keep in mind, which is, that
son of God in crying out, O my Father, if it be possible, let this drink be
taken from me, did not regard only the suffringes in his body, neither the
shame of men, nor yet the leaving of the world: (for he could easily abide all
these things) But he respected his coming before God, and before his
judgment seat, to make an account for all our sins, and to behold all the
curses of God which were prepared. For when as there was but one only sinner,
what was this to the wrath of GOD? And when it is said that God is against us,
and will display his power to confound us, Alas, what shall become of us? Now,
it has so fallen out, that Jesus Christ did not only strive against such a
fear, but against all the cruelties that might be heaped up together. And
therefore when we see GOD call to a reckoning all those who have deserved
everlasting condemnation, and are guilty of sin, and that he himself is
there to pronounce such sentence as they have deserved, who will not conceive
all the deaths, doubts, and terrors, which may be in every one. And then
what a destruction will there be in this? Now, it has fallen out that our
Lord Jesus Christ himself alone without any help, has borne such a burden.

Let us therefore justly weight ye sorrow of the Son of God, and thereupon, let
us return to the thing which we have already touched which is, y^ on the one
side we might know how dear our salvation, and how precious our souls were
unto him, when as he would bring himself into so great extremity for our
sakes: and in acknowledging that that we have deserved, Let us see what our
estate had been, if he had not helped us. And in the mean while, let us
rejoice, when as we see death to have no more power over us that may hurt us.
In very deed, we should naturally always fear Death, and fly it: But it
is to this end, that we should think upon that inestimable benefit which
the Son of God has purchased by his death: and always consider, yt it
comes through death it self, which death imports the wrath of God, and
which wrath is as it were the gulf of hell.

Moreover, yt when we are to fight against this fear, we might know yt our
Lord Jesus Christ has so provided for all these fears, as that we might even
in the midst of death it self, come with bold countenance before our God.
True it is, that we should before all things humble our selves, and must as
we have beforesaide, be touched with the judgment of God, and with the terror
thereof, if we intend to hate our sins, and be displeased with them:
howbeit in the mean while when God calls us unto him, we must then come
with cheerful countenance. And see also what boldness is granted to all the
faithful: 2. Tim. 4.8.
for Saint Paul says, That our Lord Jesus Christ has prepared a crown for
all those which look for his coming. Wherefore, if we hope not for life in
coming before the heavenly Judge, without doubt he will refuse us, and not
know us, neither will he allow of us, although we profess our selves to be
Christians. And surely we cannot wait for our Lord Jesus Christ without we
be resolved and persuaded that he has so fought against the fears of death,
that we are thereby made free, and that he obtained victory for us. And
although we are to fight, to the end we might feel our infirmities, and
thereby have recourse unto God, which might continually draw us to a true
confession of our sins, so that God himself might be declared to him alone
to be just: yet notwithstanding let us assure our selves that Jesus Christ
has so fought as that he has got the victory, not only for himself, but for
us also: And never doubt but that by this means we may now overcome all cares,
fears, and terrors, and call upon God, seeing we are assured that he
continually stretches forth his arms to embrace us. And here we see, what
we must observe, which is, we must know that this is no speculatiue doctrine,
when it is said, That our Lord Jesus Christ has abiden the horrible fears
of death, because he felt that he was before our judge as our pledge, to the
end that in ye power of that combat we might get advantage over our
infirmities, and constantly abide in calling upon the name of God, doubting but
that he will hear us, and be continually ready, of his goodness to receive
us, unto himself: so that by that means we shall pass both through life and
death, fire, and water: and so might all feel, that our Lord Jesus has not
fought in v^ine for the obteining of such a victory, for all such as come unto
him in faith. Here then we see in sum, what it is that we must remember.
But yet by the way we see that we must fight against our affections, and
without we so do, it is impossible for us to remove our finger, but that we
shall eftsoons provoke the wrath of GOD. For behold our Lord Jesus Christ
who was both pure and sound, as we have already declared: But if any man ask
what his will was, it was in very deed the weak will of a man: but yet no
sinful will, as the will of those who were corrupted in Adam: for there was
not one spot of sin in him. Lo here a man void of all sin: But howeuer
it was, yet must he in the end, strive and endeavor to forsake himself, and
cast all this under his feet, that he might yield his obedience unto his
father. And now let us see what shall become of us, what are our affections
and thoughts? Romans 8.7.
Even so many enemies (says Saint Paul) as fight against God. We see here,
that God says that we are altogether wayward, and that whatsoever the mind of
man deuiseth, is nothing else but leasing and vanity: yea we show our selves,
even from our childhood to be seasoned with the whole infection of sin. For
the very young children who come into the world, and whose wickedness
appears not, are notwithstanding young serpents full of the poison of malice
and disdain. And here we see what our nature is even from the beginning what
then will we be (I beseech you) when we come to ryper years? Surely (as I
have already said) we are so very wicked, as that we cannot think one only
thought, which shall not be very many rebellions against God: insomuch, that we
shall never be able to give our selves either to one thing or other, but that
we shall swerve from the right rule, yea, and spurn as it were dispituously
against his Majesty. And therefore what conflict is it that we can set in
order to do any good? For when we see that our Lord Jesus Christ, in whom was
nothing but pureness and righteousness, was not able to submit himself unto
God his father, without he had denied himself, is it not to be doubted that
we are any way able thoroughly to perform it. Let us then learn to fight more
courageously: But because we see we cannot and that all our strength and power
bends it self rather to do evil, and not one drop of goodness in our
nature, but so weak as that we should be overcome an hundred times every
minute of an hour, let us come to him that was made weak, that we might (as
S. Paul says) be filled with his power. And therefore since our Lord Jesus
Christ has thus denied him self, let us learn, if we will be his
Disciples to do the like. And because we see that we cannot of our selves
attain thereto, but go altogether backewarde, let us beseech him, 2. Cor.
13.4.
that he would by the power of his holy spirit have dominion in us to
strengthen us, as it is said, yt he suffered in the infirmity of his flesh,
but was raised up again through the power of the spirit, that we might be
partakers of the afliction which he sustained, and feel the fruit and
excellency of his power in us. Here now we see in effect what it is that
we must bear in mind, when it is said that Christ gave over his own will,
that he might fully and wholly submit himself unto God his Father.
Notwithstanding, we have here continually to remember, that the Son of GOD
determined not only to set forth himself here for an example or glass, but
to show us how dearly our salvation cost him. For the Devil, meaning to
darken the infinite grace of GOD, which has been showed us, has said, That
Jesus Christ was only as it were a pattern of all virtue. For mark how
these hypocritical prattling Jack dawes in Popery behave them selves, who
although they cannot set down what obedience is, nor yet what it is to forsake
a man's self, yet they say, that whatsoever the Evangelist has written of
Jesus Christ is to this end that we should follow him, and be like unto
him. Now, this is somewhat: But yet not all, neither the principal matter For
an Angel might very well have been sent, to have told us that we must
follow him: But when Jesus Christ became the redeemer of the world, he of
his own good will submitted himself unto this miserable condition, as here
we see. And therefore must we always understand, that when we can find
nothing in our selves that may give us any hope of salvation, it remains that
we must seek for that in him, which is wanting in us. For we are never able
to obtain the grace and favor of GOD, nor yet come near him, without we
come as poor Beggars, unto Jesus Christ, which can never be done, until
such time as we know our miseries and wants: and to be short, except we know
utterly our unableness, we see then what it is that we are to remember, to
the end that after we have understood, that ye whole perfection of our life is
to obey God, and to forsake our affections and thoughts, and whatsoever else
that is in our nature which is to make us agreeable unto him: when we
understand this much, we must crave at the hands of God, that, which we have
not: And that we might know also, that our Lord Jesus Christ is not delivered
unto us for an example only, but is eft soones declared unto us, that if we be
separated from him, our life must needs be accursed, and that in death we see
the bottomless depthes of the curse, and that gulf of Gods wrath to swallowe
us quite up, and that not only one fear, but a million of fears have laid
fast hold on us, and all the creatures of God cry for vengeance on our
behalf. And therefore let us have this feeling, because we might acknowledge
our sins, sigh, and be ashamed of our selves, and take boldness to come unto
God with true humility and repentance. Let us likewise esteem of the
goodness and mercy of our God as here is showed us, and have our mouths wide
open to pay unto him the Sacrifice of thanksgiving, and depart from the
inticements of Satan, who has pitched his nets to hold us still in this
world. Let us also leave our commodities and pleasures, that we might come
unto this heavenly inheritance, which has been so dearly purchased for us,
and because we have to communicate the Supper of the Lord the next Sunday, and
that God, after he has opened unto us the kingdom of heaven, sets before us
a spiritual banquet, let us be so much the more touched with this doctrine.
And to say the truth, when we daily eat and drink for the refreshing of our
hungry bodies, God therein shows us sufficiently that he is our father, and
cares for these earthly bodies: insomuch that we cannot eat one morsel of
bread but that it witnesses unto us, that God is careful over us. But in the
Supper, is a special reason: for God does not there fill our bellies, but
lifts our minds up into the kingdom of heaven, he sets before us our
Lord Jesus Christ his son, for meat and drink. And Jesus Christ is not
only contented to receive us to his Table, but intends therewith to be our
feeder: for he shows us in effect, that his flesh is meat in deed, and
his blood drink indeed. Wherefore, when we see our Lord Jesus, thus gently
to bid us unto him, are not we too too villainous, if we hold not our selves
back from doing of any thing that may withdraw us from him? And although we
come but as men trailing our legs after us, yet let us still be displeased
with our sins, that we might obey him, and streine our selves so much as is
possible, to be rid of this world, and come to the kindgdome of heaven. And
therefore let every one consider, to what end the holy Supper serves, For
when we see that our Lord Jesus calls us unto it, that we might be partakers
of his death and passion, let us enjoy the fruit which he has obtained for
us, and by that mean be fully resolved, that God allows us for his children,
and with open mouth claim him for our father. Let us also bring with us a true
faith, because we know wherefore God the father sent our Lord Jesus unto us,
and is at this day a Mediator as he has always been. And thereupon, set us
labor to be so united to him, as that we may know yt this is not only
spoken to every of us in particular, but to every of us in general. Let us
also live together in mutual and Brotherly concord, because he himself has
sustained and borne the condemnation which God his father had pronounced
against us all. And therefore let us bend our selves that way, and let every
of us not only come thither by himself alone (as I have already said) but
also bring his fellows with him, and stir one another up, constantly to
march forward: having always respect that our life is as were away which we
must go through withal, and not stay in the midst thereof: but from day to
day so profit, and also take pain to bring them near, who are far of, as
that it may be our whole joy, life glory, and contentment, and in such sort
help one another, until the time that GOD has fully and wholly gathered us
together unto himself.

Let us now therefore fall down before the Majesty of our good GOD, and
acknowledge our sins, beseeching him to cause us so to feel them, as that
we be not only displeased with them, but also that we may be more and more
rydde and cleansed of them, and so fight against our selves, as that he alone
may bear rule in us, and we well agree unto his holy will. And in the mean
while, let us likewise beseech him that it would please him to have mercy upon
his miserable world: and that as it was his will in general, his only son
should be a redeemer for all, and his Gospel preached to all, so also yt he
would not suffer us at this day to be hard hearted, and fly form such a
benefit: But that we might have an eye and ear thereto, and one of us draw
on another, until such time as he has brought us to be perfect with
himself. So that we may all say with an humble heart, O Almighty God, and
heavenly father, etc.

The second Sermon of the Passion.
Matthew xxvj. 40 AFter that, he came unto his Disciples, and found them a
sleep, and said to Peter, What? could ye not watch with me one hour?

41 Watch and pray, that ye enter not into temptation: the spirit in deed is
ready, but the flesh is weak.

42 Again, he went away the second time, and prayed, saying, O my father, if
this Cup cannot pass away from me, but that I must drink it, thy will be
done.

43 And he came and found them a sleep again, for their eyes were heavy.

44 So he left them and went again, and prayed the third time, saying the
same words.

45 The came he unto his Disciples, and said unto them, sleep hence forth
and take your rest, behold the hour is at hand, and the son of man is given
into the hands of sinners.

46 Arise, let us go: behold, he is at hand that betrayeth me.

47 And while he yet spoke, Lo Judas, one of the twelve came, and with him a
great multitude with Swords and staves, from the high Priests and Elders of
the people.

48 But he that betrayed him, had given them a token, saying whom soever that
I shall kiss, that is he, lay hold on him.

49 And forthwith he came to Jesus, and said, God save thee Master, and
kissed him.

50 Then Jesus said unto him, Friend, wherefore come thou? then came they,
and laid hands on Jesus, and took him.


WE have this morning seen, how the Son of God was strengthened by prayer
for the abiding of so hard and dangerous a combat, as the appearing before the
judgment seat of god his father to receive sentence of comdemnation as our
pledge or borrowe. For it behooued that man's weakness should be seen in him:
and yet was this nothing at all derogatorie from his divine Majesty, although
he was thus made of no reputation for our salvation. And we have here
besides to note, that he prayed not only once wherein we see, that he has
by his example, exhorted us not to faint, although we are not heard so soon
as we would. Wherefore they that are faint hearted, because God, answers
them not at the first, show that they know not what prayer is: For the right
rule for us to come unto God, is to persevere and continue. And therefore the
chiefest exercise of our faith is prayer, Yet, faith cannot be without hope.
Then there is no question of it that God should feed our homours so soon as
we have once opened our lips, and framed our petitions? But it is meet that
he should delay them, and make us oftentimes to languishe, that we might
know what it is to pray earnestly, and without hypocrisy, and that we might
also declare that our faith is so established upon the word of God, as that it
brideleth, to the end we might patiently abide, until such time as the fit
opportunity be come, wherein we should be helped. Let us therefore mark that
our Lord Jesus Christ did not pray only once, to God his father, but went also
again the second time.

Moreover, we are to call to mind the thing before touched, to wit, that our
Lord Jesus Christ has not here framed a light prayer, but yet was such an one
as if he were determined to be quite ryd of him self: yea that he, who is
the power of God his father, and who vpholdeth the whole world, yet because he
must show him self a weak man, keeping our place, and settled in our person,
has showed, that when he went again to pray, that he did it not to make a
show thereof (as many profane people imagine, that when Jesus Christ appeared,
he suffered nothing) but to the end to teach us that we are no way able to
escape the hand and punishment of God, and his curse, but by this mean. Now,
it is here declared unto us (as it was this morning) that our Lord Jesus Christ
was put to the extremity, because that the burden which he had taken upon
him was not to be borne, without the invincible power of the spirit of God,
had helped him. Neither must we think this to be any superfluous kind of
speech, when he repeated these words. Mat. 6.7.
For, that which is said in the other text, That when we pray unto God we must
not use much babble, as they do who use many repetitions, thinking thereby to
obtain very much, is not meant but that we should continue in prayer: but it
is spoken to this end, to find fault with the hypocrisy and superstition of
those who think (as a man would say) to rend the ears of God therewith, to
make him believe, and persuade him to do that for them which they desire:
which folly we have seen reign in the world. And yet even among us, how many
are there, which use this kind of sorcerie, for although they say not their
Aue Maria, yet when they have said their Pater Noster, do think that they
have obtained very much, and think that God takes a reckoning of all the
words which they have thus repeated in their prayer. Now, I call that, right
sorcerie: for they villainously profane the prayer which our Lord Jesus Christ
delivered unto us, wherein he has commanded us in a short summarie,
whatsoever we ought and is lawful for us to crave at the hands of God. And
yet this is no let, why a man who is sore grieved, but that he may oftentimes
return and pray unto God: and when he has powered out some sighs, he may
also begin again. And therefore when we go unto him without ambition, and
for no glorious show: and besides, think not by our over much babbling to have
gotten any thing, but are driven by an earnest affection, then is our
perseuera^ce right, after ye example of our Lord Jesus Christ. Now this point
is to be marked of us which we have touched, to wit, that the chiefest point
of all our petitions is this, to have God so to rule over us, as that we agree
with one accord, to submit our selves unto his good will. And this, I say, is a
necessary point, for us. For look upon our Lord Jesus Christ, although all
his affections, were just holy, and agreeing unto righteousness, yet because
he was a natural man, it was meet he should fight against anguishe, and
sorrow, that might any way lay hold on him, and hold him captive under the
obedience of GOD his father. And therefore how shall we do, in whom is nothing
else but wickedness, and rebellion, and so corrupt, as that we are not able to
apply our minds to nothing whatsoever, but that God is eft soones offended
therewith, Since then it is so, let us, when we pray unto GOD, so bridle our
selves, as that none of us follow our own lusts as we are wonted: But let
us understand that we shall have greatly profited, whenas we can subdue them,
to the end that God might have maistrie over us, There is also a very notable
saying, Whe^as our lord Jesus Christ says unto his Disciples, Watch, and pray,
that ye enter not into temptation: for although the spirit in deed be
ready, yet is the flesh weak. He then here shows that the principallest
spur to prick us on to call upon God is this, That we must fight, and that
our enemies are at hand, and very strong, and we not able possibly to resist
them, except our aid come from above, and that God fights for us. And this
we know, that when a man is assured of himself, he desires to follow
altogether his pleasures, and to sleep at his ease: for we are not willingly
careful nor studious, except necessity drives us thereto. Surely, it is an
excellent thing to be at rest and quiet: But we think we shall never be at
rest, without we become as it were like brute beasts. And therefore it is
even so, as that necessity must drive us to be watchful. Wherefore it was
not causeless that our Lord Jesus told us that we must abide many allarmes.
For that which he once spoke unto his Diciples, apperteineth unto us all in
general: because we must all our life long, be continually ready to abide
many temptations. For the Devil is our perpetual enemy, if we be the
members of our Lord Jesus Christ. And therefore there will be open war
without end or measure. Let us also see with what an enemy we have to deal
withal: it is not with one alone, but the number of them is infinite.

Moreover, the Devil has an exceeding number of ways to cast us down into
the bottom of Hell: one while he trippeth us openly, another while he
plays under the board, and by his craft will suddenly be upon us an hundred
thousand times before we think on him. And if there were none other thing in
it but even the saying of Saint Paul, Ephe. 6. 12.
it were sufficient enough to make us to be careful and to take heed, for
thus he says, That our enemies are mighty which rule in the air over our
heads, and we here, like unto poor worms of the earth, creeping below.
Saint Peter also uses the like reason, 1. Pet. 5.8.
and says, That our enemy is like unto a roaring Lion which seeks his play,
and never rests. And here we see what we are to observe, in that our Lord
Jesus says, That we must stand upon our guard least we enter into
temptation.

Moreover, although we be wakefull, and keep good watch, yet can we not be
so free, but yt the Devil will lift him self up against us, and assail us many
and sundry ways. Neither can we break his blows so far of: but that
before we enter into the fight, we had need beware that we be not tempted
over head and cares, as we say, And therefore let us learn, that although the
faithful and children of God desire to be at rest, yet must they not desire
to be here at their ease: but be contented to have God to make perfect his
power in their infirmity: For Saint Paul also says that he must do the
like. ^. Cor. 12.9.
And this is, say I, the state and condition of all the children of GOD, even
to fight in this world, because they cannot serve God without some striving.
For although they be weak, and may be let, yea even oftentimes thrown
down, 1. John. 5.4.
let it suffice them that God helps them, and always rest upon this
promise, That our faith shall continually overcome the world. Nevertheless,
the remedy is set before us, which is, we must fight. True it is that Satan
will never leave to begin again to assail us, but yet Jesus Christ on the
otherside, commands us to watch.

Moreover, he shows that they which presume upon their own strengthes, that
Satan will an hundred thousand times sooner overthrow them, then that they
shall get any one maistrie of him. What is it then that we must do? Forsooth,
we must humbly confess that there is nothing in us, and therefore must run
unto our good God. And thus we see what our true armor and weap on is: what
it is that puts from us all fear and terror, and what it is that must
assure and resolve us to continue safe and sound even unto the end: to wit,
whenas we call upon the name of god: For as Solomon says, his name is an
invincible strong Tower, Pro. 18. 10.
and that the righteous which runs to it, shall be exalted. And that is it
which is spoken by the Prophet Joel, Joel. 2.32.
That although the world were turned vpside down, yet whosoever shall call upon
the name of the lord shall be saved. Acts. 2.21.
Which thing is namely applied unto the reign of our Lord Jesus Christ, to
the end we might be persuaded, that although our salvation were as it were
wavering, and we as it were see a thousand hazardes, yet that God will
protect us, and we feel his power always near us, and ready to help us, if
so be we will seek unto him by prayers and supplications, which is the very
sum and effect of that we are to remember.

Now, that we might be the better confirmed in this doctrine, let us note,
that when our Lord Jesus prayed, he did not only pray for himself, and for
his own behoof, but has so consecrated all our petitions and prayers, as
that they are sanctified, and allowed of God according to his hearts desire,
as is said in John, John. 17.
He was sanctified, that we might be sanctified in him. And this may also
be a very good conclusion for us. That he prayed, because his prayer is
available, and strong, even at this day, by mean whereof we are all heard?
And this reason we are highly to esteem of, when he says, that the spirit
is ready, but the flesh, weak: which declares unto us, that we have all
need, of that remedy which he here ordained for his Disciples. For many
think, that if they be never so little well disposed, that they have gotten
all the world: and this supposall in very deed makes them nothing worth. And
hereby they become soon after so idle, and cold, as that they fall from GOD,
and contemn his aid: which is the cause also why God many times withdraws
him self and hides his power. For it is good reason that when men trust too
much unto them selves, they should be left to their own wills, that GOD
might scorn their arrogant and foolish imagination. Wherefore, to the end,
both great and small, might know and understand that they ought not lightly
to pass over the help of God, and the graces which they have received of him,
he must therefore always continue and increase that in them, which he has
given unto them, that they might be made strong. It is said here that the
spirit is ready, etc. That is to say, that although we feel some
willingness in our selves, and that God has set us in the right way, and
given us his hand, so that we may find by very good proof that he guides
us by his holy spirit: Although I say, we have all this, yet must we not be
slack in praying. And why so? Because if we well consider the matter, we are
no better then a puffed of wind. Now, no doubt of it we shall find many
remnants of infirmities in us, and although god has alredie so helped us, as
that we are highly to thank him, and to magnify his goodness, yet is it good
reason we should stoop and cast down our heads, and see in very deed that
if he forsake us, we shall soon, I say, not only be weakened, but be
utterly overthrown. To be short, our Lord Jesus Christ his meaning here, is
to show, that the most perfect, and forewarde of those, upon whom God has
enlarged the graces and virtues of his holy spirit, must notwithstanding
humble themselves, and carefully and fearfully walk, and call upon God every
hour, that they might know that it is not enough for him to have begun,
except he make it perfect: and that all goodness comes from him: so that
when he has given a good mind, he must eftsoons grant the perfourmance
thereof: For So Much as, perseverance is the most special and rarest gift that
may be. And thus we see whereunto the exhortation of our Lord Jesus tends.

Now, if they who call themselves spiritual, to wit, who have a fervent zeal
to serve GOD, and still have recourse unto his Majesty with Prayers and
supplications, are yet so weak, as that they may be overthrown, even in the
minute of an hour, except they continually call upon GOD: How shall they then
do, who are so earthly and heavy as is lamentable, insomuch as they are not
able to traile their legs after them and have scarsely any good motion, or
yet one good thought: how greatly ought these men, I say, in respect of the
rest enforce themselves? Let every man therefore examine himself, and we
shall find our selves to be so cold and blockishe, as when any question shall
be moved of praying unto God, we go to it, sometimes more for a fashion,
then for any affection and love we have thereto, when we see this to be in us,
let us learn to be displeased with such a vice, and with such a coldness:
yea and let us detest such a corruption, and do our best to call upon God, and
lift up our minds unto heaven, and seek for the remedy which is here set
before us Thus we see in effect what it is that we must remember. For where it
is said that the Disciples were a sleep the third time, yea although they
were so lively stirred up (over and besides that which we have this morning
spoken of, to wit, that we right well see that our Lord Jesus Christ chose
unto him no companion for the helping of him to finishe the work of our
salvation) Let us also behold our dullness: for it is most certain, that we
have no more ablenes then these three of who^ mention is here made: and yet
were they the most notable men of all the company, and those whom Jesus Christ
had marked as it were to be the very flower of the twelve, for the publishig
of the Gospel throughout the world. And although here was already never so
good a beginning, yet for all that, we see how weak they were. And this is
set down to this end, that we should altogether have recourse unto the Son
of God, and seek for our want, in him: and not to be faint hearted, whenas we
shall feel such weakness in our selves. In very deed, the example of the
Apostles must not give us occasion to flatter ourselves (as, many there are
which will say that they may very well sleep, because that Peter, John and
James stepped) But let us be angry with our selves for our sins and know that
our Lord Jesus is ready to receive us, if that we will come unto him.

Moreover, this has always been the most special reason which we have
declared this morning. That what soever is in men, must needs be weak, to
the end we might know that in him is the accomplishment of our salvation,
whom God had appointed to be our Mediator. And besides, we are to note, that
the nearer we come unto our Lord Jesus Christ, we ought then to be most
watchful. For, the worldlinges, and such as God has cut of as rotten members,
and forsakes the^, never have any great conflict: Because the Devil has
already dominion over them. And therefore we see that they may sleep at
pleasure. But as our Lord Jesus shows us this favor, to call us unto
himself, and familiarly to come near us, even so likewise does Satan prepare
combats for us, because he would retire us from the obedience of the son
of God. And therefore, I say, when he sees us in any good towardness, then
does he most roughly assail us. Wherefore let every man make ready
himself, knowing whereunto God has called him, and what his charge is. This
then is the sum of that we are to keep in mind.

Moreover, where it is said, Sleep hence forth and take your rest, behold,
the hour is at hand: this is as much as if he had said that they should
be soon suddenly set upon, except God watched over them, And yet by the way,
he checked them, saying, What? Do you see in what state you stand? Behold
the Devil bends all his power for the destruction of mankind, and it must
come pass that in me the kingdom of God must be recovered, or else all
creatures must perish: and yet you still sleep here. Now this admonition
served for the present: But in the end, the Disciples knew that they must
yield all the praise of salvation unto God: yea considering their
unthankfulness, which appeared in so beastly blockishnes. And so, we are not
admonished (as I have already said) that the son of God must show him self
to be our redeemer, even himself alone, without any companion.

Moreover, let us eft soones learn, that it is needful that God should
watch over us, so long as we our selves do sleep. For, how often shall it
come to pass that the Devil will oppress us an hundred thousand times: and
what way have we to resist him, except God has compassion on us, although he
sees us therein to be as it were like brute beasts? But yet must not this
give us occasion to go astray, and to leave our prayers and supplications. But
we must rather continually call to mind this saying of the Psalm, he that
watches over Israel neither sleeps nor slumbereth. And therefore, let us for
our parts be watchful, according to that exhortation which we have heard made
unto us. And yet let us understand thus much, that how ever we watch, yet
must God keep a good watch, or else our enemies would soon have great
advantage of us. It follows that Jesus Christ said unto his Disciples,
Arise, let us go, behold, he is at hand, which betrayeth us. He would not
have them to go with him (as has been before said) but because he would
have them see, how that he spared not himself for them, nor yet for all
mankind, for he offered himself to receive all the blows, to free them:
that this saying might be accomplished, That he had lost no whit of all that
which his heavenly Father had given him, and committed unto his charge and
protection. Howbeit, he shows hereby that he went willingly to death
according to that which we have this morning handeled, that the Sacrifice of
obedience must answer the blotting out of all our rebellions. For if our Lord
Jesus Christ had not willingly offered up himself to appease the wrath of God
his Father, his death and passion had served us to no purpose: But he came to
this point, and declared how he had taken upon him our nature, because he
would accomplish our redemption, and when he was in the principal action, he
meant not to give over his office. For it is said in the Story, That Judas had
given them a token, that whomsoever he kissed, the same was Jesus, and should
lay hands on him, and when he was come near him, he kissed him, and said
unto him, All Hail, or God save thee Master. Now let us note, that this was
the manner of saluting, As we see, that in some Countries they embrace one
another, and other some shake hands. And the manner of the Jews was altogether
to kiss one another, as we see by the holy Scripture. Moreover, a man would
think it very strange, that Judas being gone form the company of Jesus Christ
but a while before, to wit, even the selfsame night before, returned and
kissed him, as if he had come from some far journey. But he used this manner
of courtesy because he came like a man half afraid. And mark, why it is
said in the other Gospel, That he said, Master, God save thee, or all hail
Master, he seemed at that time to be very angry, that his Master was thus
dealt with: and when he saw such a company come to take him, he drew near and
kissed Jesus Christ, as who should say, O my good Master, They seek for
thee, see how thine enemies compass thee, seeking to take away thy life, and
to cut thee of, from amongst men if they once lay hold on the. Now this seemed
to be a sign of great compassion in Judas. But it is said soon after that
Jesus Christ rebuked him, saying, Friend, Wherefore art thou come? Which is
as much as if he had said, Thou wicked man which have sit at my Table with
me, and wast as one of my own body, when we were united together as the
children of God (for as I was your head, even so did I acknowledge you to be
as my members) and now thou come be betray me, yea even with a kiss. And
heerevpon we have to note, that the Son of God must needs be marked, that
the Scripture might be the better thought of and believed, and we might
know, that GOD had chosen him to be our redeemer. For all this was prefigured
in the person of David, who was as it were a Mirror and image of the Son of
God. And again, he says they were no strangers that showed themselves his
open enemies: Psalm. 41.9.
But it was (says he (even my famyliar friend whom I trusted, who eat of
my bread, that traitorously lifted up the heel against me, it is he even
he, that has circumuented me, and falsely betrayed me. Yea, even the very
self same man (as it is said in another place) which accompanied me to go
into the house of the Lord together. Psalm. 55.14.
As if he he should have said, it was not only a familiar and gentle kind
of friendship, as should be between men that live in common one with
another: But also an holy brotherhoode consecrated unto the name of the Lord.
And thus we see what the meaning of the holy Ghost is to show us, that is,
that nothing came to pass unto the Son of GOD, which was not both spoken of
and figured before, to the end we might be so much the more confirmed, that is
he whom GOD had always established, since he carried with him such, and so
infallible marks.

Moreover we see in the person of Judas, that the Church of God shall
continually be subject to much treason. True it is, that it is very much to
have Satan and all his furniture against us, and all that which we have before
spoken of, and besides, to have them also our enemies who openly fight against
God, and seek altogether the overthrow of his Church. This, I tell you, is
very much that we have to deal against such enemies: But yet it pleases
the Lord to prove our patience herein, that is, that there should be always
amiddest us home enemies, who should be full of treason and disloialtie. And
although this be an horrible pestilence, yet shall the Church never be without
it, nor clean rid thereof. In deed we ought to look well unto it, and keep
us from it, and it is the duty of every man as much as lies in him, to root
and blot out this filthy infection: and yet when we have all done, God will
have a number of Iudasses continually to be in it. For since, it was figured in
David, and performed in our Lord Jesus Christ, it is meet that we should be
made like unto him (according to that saying of Saint Paul) for he bear as it
were the ensigns, Romans 8.29.
and badges of the house of God, being the first born of all the faithful. And
therefore our estate ought to be like unto his. But we may here see, that this
is spoken of a troubled conscience, when as God sends a troubled, frantike,
or blockishe mind, whereof he oftentimes speaks by his Prophets. Wherefore,
let us here look upon Judas, who shows the reward of those which wittingly
fight against God, that they must needs become so desperate, as that there is
in them neither sense nor reason: and yet notwithstanding, altogether go about
hypocritically to hide it, until such time as God spyte of their teethes
draws, and brings them unto their last condemnation. It should seem at
the first sight, that these two things should be contrary the one to the
other, that a man should run his head against God, like a wild Bull, and so
forget him as to do nothing else but spit at the Son, and be angry with
nature, and yet notwithstanding goes about to hyde him self with subtlenes,
and thinks to have gotten something through his hypocrisy. It may be said,
that these two things agree not very well together: But we see them agree
well enough in Judas For he had found by good proof the heavenly power of our
Lord Jesus Christ: and for his own part, had both seen, and done a number of
miracles in his name. And although he knew, the Son of God, to be Lord both
of life and death, yet betrayeth he him, and bids them wisely to keep him,
for otherwise (says he) he will soon be gone and escape from you. We see
here then that Judas, was altogether without sense and reason, and as it were
like a frantike or mad man: and yet by his kiss, and fair words, in
saying, Alas good Master, he thought by these shifts honestly to discharge
him self. But see how Satan bleareth their eyes whom he holds within his
nets.

Let us therefore learn in the first place to humble our selves, to the end
none of us spurn against this so hard a stone: to wit, that we make not war
against our Lord Jesus Christ. And therefore let us beware how we lift up
our selves in so deuilishe a rage, as to fight against the truth, and so
skirmishe against our consciences, as wittingly to provoke the wrath of God
against us, as if we would stand at defiaunce with him. Let us, I say, take heed of this thing: and in the mean while, let us not so flatter our selves in
our hypocrisy, and fond devises, least in the end we deceive and beguile
our selves. For we see how it fell out with Judas (as the story tells us)
he needed no judge to condemn him, nor yet to be enforced to unsay that he
had said: But he confessed that he had sold and betrayed innocent blood.
And yet craved he not pardon for his misdeed: but went, and desperately hung
him self, and therewithal his bowelles burst out.

Acts. 18.
Let us therefore be well advised how we suffer Satan to have any such
entrance into us, least he clean put out our eyes, when as we shall lie
sleeping in our sins: and think by such means to escape the hand of God:
Psalm. 2. 12.
and let us put far from us this hypocrisy. And besides, let us know, that
we are commanded to kiss the Son of God: But to this end, to reverence
him as our King, and as the sovereign Lord over all creatures. For this
saying, to kiss, imports nothing else, but a reverence, and solemn
protestation that we are his: as he says: ye call me Master, and therein
you do well. But let us, when we come unto him, be well advised, not to call
him Master at the tongues end, and in the mean while are no better then his
enemies: and make an hypocritical kind of reverence, John. 13.13.
and kick against him with the heel: That is to say, Let us not become like
Rebels, and disloyal Roges, but show our selves to have sought none other
means then to keep us within his Church, to the end we might serve our God.
Let us then take heed unto all this. Moreover, although the words of our Lord
Jesus Christ, did not at the first, show their effect in Judas, yet in the
end, by the virtue of the same words, yet it fell out that he hung him
self, Ioh. 18.6.
without looking for any other condemnation. And in very deed S. John tells
us how our Lord Jesus Christ has thundered, although he uses but few words,
against them who came to seek him, saying, I am he. Behold, what a band
Pylate the Governor of the country sent: and what a number of people the
Priests had gotten together, and sent them out furnished with Clubs, swords,
and staves: and Jesus Christ is him self alone: Isaiah. 53.7.
and (as Isaiah says of him) like a Lamb brought to the shambles. And what
were the words he spoke: forsooth even this, I am he. And by and by they all
went back, and fell forthwith to the ground. Whereupon came this falling?
Herein we see, that although our Lord Jesus Christ humbled him self for a time,
yea and was made of no reputation, yet kept he with him, when he thought good,
his heavenly power, that he might throw down headlong all his enemies,
whenever it pleased him. Let us now compare our time, with the time that was
then. It fell out, that Jesus Christ was tied and fast nailed (as hereafter we
shall see) and must cease to be Lord over his enemies: For Satan had let go
the raynes to push them on into all fury and cruelty. Luke. 22.53.
And this is it whereof S. Luke speaks. This is the power of darkness. But
how ever it was, in thus saying, I am he, it so fell out that the enemies were
confounded and ashamed. What will he then do, when he comes in Majesty with
all his Angels? When he shall make a footestoole of all those that have
resisted him? When he comes with a terrible countenance, and incomprehensible
wrath? According to the saying of Paul to the Thessalonians. These. 2.^.
How then shall the wicked and contemners of the Majesty of God, and of the
word of our lord Jesus Christ stand before his face, when as he so overthrew
his enemies, even then when he was ready to suffer, and use none other
defense then the same, which God his Father used: for as he said, he could
have called to have had a million of Angels to be sent him, but he would
not, and yet his meaning was to show, that he could, if it pleased him, even
with the breath of his mouth overthrow whatsoever stood against him. By this we
have to learn, to fear the words of our Lord Jesus Christ: and although he
is not here conversant amongst us, after a visible sort, nevertheless, since the
Gospel is preached by his authority, and that he says, he that hears you,
Luke 8.16.
hears me: Let us learn most reverently to receive whatsoever is preached
in his name, and submit our selves thereto: and we shall find yt this saying
which thus made the soldiers, and those that were sent against him, too fall,
must be our only foundation, and stay. For what is all our joy and comfort
without the son of God, appears unto us, and that we see him nigh us, and
shows us what a one he is, and wherefore it was that God his Father sent him
unto us? And so, let us understand, by this saying, I am he, That when it shall
please our Lord Jesus Christ to manifest him self, as he does to all his
faithful, that he therein declares unto us, why he calls us unto him self,
why he is come down unto us, and why he dwells in us, by the power of his
holy spirit, and thus we see wherein all our felicity and quietness
rests. But if we will become rebellious, and contemn the word of God, as a
number of profane men do, whereon we ought to build our salvation let us be
assured that it will be a lightening to throw us all down headlong into the
pit of hell. And so let us fear, and although our Lord Jesus Christ opens
unto us the gate, and says after an other manner, behold me, which he has
not done to those who were his professed enemies, let us come unto him.
Moreover, let us also learn, so patiently to bear the treasons which we see
to be at this day in the Church, as that we yet abhor and detest them, and
so show our selves truly and in deed to cleave fast unto the Son of God,
because he is our head: and since we have his truth, let us live so together
one with an other, as that we may be united together in true and brotherly
concord. And this is it that we are to remember. But how ever it be, let us
learn this principal point for our instruction, which we must gather out of
this Text, to wit, That the Son of God became fully and wholly obedient, that
he might repair our transgressions. It is very true (as I have already
said) that all the members of God must be ruled after his example: and it is
great reason, since he who is Lord and master over all, so humbled him self,
that we should be ready both in life and death to obey our God: But yet let us
understand, yt this is an especial obedience which our Lord Jesus Christ
showed in this behalf, to wit, by reason of the fruit and effect which came
thereby. The Apostle took the death of our Lord Jesus Christ for an example,
very well, for it strengthened them when as they were to abide the combat for
the testimony of the Gospel: then slept they not: for we see their
watchfulness, and readiness in the following of their calling: neither feared
they the torments of death, but offered them selves when God called them
thereto for the glorifying of his name, and the confessing of our Lord Jesus
Christ: But they chiefly stood upon this, that all our spots are washed and
cleansed by the sheading of the blood of our Redeemer, that he fully satisfied
God his father for all our debtes for which we were bound, and has obtained
for us perfect righteousness. And therefore we must understand the difference
that is between the head and the members: and learn, that by nature we are
wholly given to do evil, and although God has partly regenerated us, yet does
our flesh still resist against his majesty notwithstanding through the power
and virtue of ye obedience which we see to be in our Lord Jesus Christ, let us
not leave of to do those things which may please our God according to his
hearts desire. And although we cannot do the good we would, but do the evil
we would not, and oftentimes slip, or else are too too slack, let us look unto
that which the Son of God has suffered for the amending of all our offenses.
and behold that he has so combatted, as that he was not against it, when as
our sins and offenses were laid unto him, as this morning has more at large
been spoken. Seeing then that our Lord Jesus Christ, has fully and wholly made
satisfaction, and that although we at this day have done our best to obey God,
and cannot come to yt perfection we ought, but continually traile our legs
after us, and have many things in us which may be amended, yet let us know yt
we shall not but please God, and our imperfections be continually abolished
through the obedience of our Lord Jesus Christ, so yt they shall never come in
account against us before his majesty. And besides, let every one according
to the measure of the faith, and grace which he has received, strive to fight,
until the time we attain unto the heavenly rest. And although we see our
weakness to be so great, and convinced that we are not able once to think a
good thought, and being cast down, not able to rise again, except God reach
us his hand, and strengthens us every minute, Let us beseech him to augment
in us the graces of his holy spirit, as he has promised us, and has set
Jesus Christ before us to be our head and Captain, to the end we might get
that victory which he has obtained for us, the fruit whereof we already
feel, and then shall perfectly and thoroughly feel.

Let us now fall down before the Majesty of our good God, in such
acknowledgement of our offenses, as that it may rightly humble us before him,
and bring us to true repentance: and more and more labor to make void
whatsoever is against his righteousness. And because we cannot be without
conflicts and enemies, that it would please him to power upon his, the succor
which he has promised: and make us so to feel it, as that we may resist unto
the end, all temptations: and learn also to thank him for all our victories,
without attributing any of them unto our selves, to the end we provoke not his
wrath through arrogance, but beseeching him to continue his graces continually
in us, and prosecute more and more the thing which he has done and begun in
us. That he will not only bestow this grace, etc.

The third Sermon of the Passion.
Matthew xxvi. 51 ANd behold, one of them which were with Jesus, stretched out
his hand, and drew his sword, and struck a servant of the high Priest, and
smote of his ear.

52 Then Jesus said unto him, put up thy sword into his place, for all that
take the sword, shall perish with the sword.

53 Either think thou, that I cannot pray to my Father, and he will give me
more then twelve legions of Angels?

54 How then should the Scriptures be fulfilled, which say, that it must be so?

55 The same hour said Jesus to the multitude, ye be come out as it were
against a thief, with swords and staves to take me: I sat daily preaching
in the Temple among you, and ye took me not.

56 But all this was done, that the Scriptures of the Prophets might be
fulfilled, The^ all the Disciples forsook him and fled.

57 And they took Jesus, and led him to Caiphas the high Priest, where the
Scribes and the Elders were assembled.

58 And Peter followed him a far of unto the high Priests hall, and went in,
and sat with the servants to see the end.

59 Now the chief Priests and the Elders, and all the whole Council sought
false witness against Jesus, to put him to death.

60 But they found none, and though many false witnesses came, yet found they
none: but at the last came two false witnesses.

61 And said, This man said, I can destroy the Temple of God, and build it in
three days.

62 Then the chief Priest arose, and said to him, answerest thou nothing?
What is the matter, that these men witness against thee?

63 ^ut Jesus held his peace, Then the chief Priest answered, and said to him,
I charge thee by the living God, that thou tell us, if thou be the Christ, the
Son of God.

64 Jesus said to him, thou have said it: Nevertheless, I say unto you,
hereafter shall ye see the son of man, sitting at the right hand of the power
of God, and come in the clouds of the heaven.

65 Then the high Priest rent his clothes, saying, He has blasphemed: What
have we any more need of witnesses? Behold, now ye have heard his blasphemy.

66 What think ye? They answered and said, he is worthy to dye.


IF we would at the first sight, according to man's reason, judge of the taking
of our Lord Jesus Christ, it would amaze us to see that he never resisted.
For a man would think it became not his majesty to suffer such shame and
rebuke, and not to withstand it any whit at all. On the other side, Peter's
zeal were greatly to be commended, because he adventured him self unto
death. For, he see before his face the multitude of the enemies: and him self
alone man: yet, by reason of the love he bear to his master, he drew, and
desired rather to dye forthwith, then to suffer his master to be so wronged.
Wherein we see, that we must very humbly and modestly acknowledge to what end
it was why the Son of God did, and suffered all these things, and also
understand, that whatsoever seems good in our eyes, to be stark staring
naught: But we are to beseech God so to guide and govern us, as that we none
otherwise judge, then accordingly as he has showed us in his word. For
behold, what an offense the Gospel is to a number of people: and what a number
of scoffers there are of it, and all to their destruction: By reason of their
arrogant, and rash judgment thereof. Howbeeit, to the end we might not be
deceived, we must always in the first place, return to that which our Lord
Jesus Christ sets down unto us: which is, the will of God his father. And
thus much for this point. And besides, we are to consider of the end thereof,
which to us, would seem very strange. Wherefore when we look unto these
two considerations, we shall then have occasion to honor God, and acknowledge
that whatsoever we think to be foolish; the very Angels account it to be
great wisdom. And for the better understanding hereof, let us look unto that
which is here recyted of Peter. For thus it is said, That when he had drawn
his Swoorde, he cut off Malchus ear, a servant of Caiphas. Here, we see,
how fool hardy we are, when we follow our own opinion: and are so blinded,
as yt we care not what we do: But when we should obey God, we are so slack as
is lamentable: and in such sort forget our selves, as that the least thing in
the world makes us to change our copy. And thus we see we shall have always
an hundredth times more mind to follow our fond imaginations, then to do the
thing which God commands us, and which our calling bears us in. We see this
over much in the example of Peter. For as after shall be showed, when he was to
confess our Lord Jesus Christ, he swear to his own destruction: and yet was
he co^te^ted to adventure his life, when as he had no such commandment. Now,
what was the cause that made him to draw? Surely he did it as it were in a
fury: For his Master taught him not to do any such thing. And when he
forsook his master, knew he not before this saying, Whosoever shall deny me
before men, I will deny him before my father which is in heaven? Mat. 10.33.
But he was (as I have before said) cockbrayned: and this fond desire which he
had to defend our Lord Jesus after his manner, carried him away. Let us therefore
after his example, learn to endeavor our selves to walk whither soever God
calls us, and not to think it any hard matter to do which he commands:
neither let us attempt any thing, no not so much as the wagging of our little
finger, except God allow of it, and that we have a testimony that he guides
us. And thus much for this point, And in very deed, our Lord Jesus shows
him that he has grievously offended, because he was not ignorant of this
point of the law, which says, that whosoever sheddeth man's blood, his blood
shall be shed again.

And therefore Saint Peter was to have kept this lesson in mind, That God
would not have any force nor violence used. Genesis 9.6.
And (that which is more) in what School was he brought up by the space of
three years? And besides, did not our Lord Jesus put him in mind, as much as
was possible, to behave himself gently and graciously? From whence then should
he fetch any allowance of this his rash dealing. Wherefore we have so much
the rather to observe that which we have already spoken: to wit, that if we
fetch our zeal from men, and be flattered, and well like off, yet will GOD
condemn us, if we transgress his commandment never so little. And
therefore we shall never be said to be praise worthy, except we walk as God
teaches us by his word. For so soon as we pass this measure, all our virtues
stink and become abominable. Lo then what becomes of all our devotions:
For when soever we shall have travailed never so much to do the thing which
seems good in our own brains, God will utterly condemn it, without it be
squared by his word: For he allows not nor accompteth any thing to be lawful
in truth, but his very word. But as for the history which we are now in hand
with, the second reason is much more to be considered of. For, the matter which
we have already touched is general: but this saing properly belongs unto the
death and passion of our Lord Jesus Christ, when he says, Think thou that
I cannot pray to my father, and he will give me more then twelve legions of
Angels. Now a legion, in those days was wont to be four or five thousand men.
And therefore (says he) see what an heavenly army I am able to have, and yet
am I contented to put all this quietlye up, why then come thou to take upon
thee here more then God would have thee to do, or can abide thou should
do.

Now it is very lawful for us to call upon God, and to beseech him to defend
our life: and as he accompteth it to be precious, even so must we desire him,
that it would please him also to keep and preserve it. But our Lord Jesus
tells him that he would nor ought not now to do it. And wherefore then
would Peter use violence, contrary to that order which God has permitted and
established by his word. If a mean which of it self is lawful, ought not to
be practiced: what shall become of that which God has forbidden, and declared
to be punishable?

We then here see (as I have already said) that the son of God submitted him
self to all rebuke and shame, and desired rather to be bound and fast manacled
as a malefactor and a condemned person, then to be made a liar by any miracle,
and would have god to stretch forth his arm to warrant him. And hereby we
may understand how greatly he esteemed of our salvation. Howbeit here is one
point which I have already noted: to wit, that he sends us back to the will
and purpose of God his father. For without this also it should seem strange, yt
he would not crave ye aid which he right well knew he might have: and it should
seem he tempted God, whenas he would not pray for it. For, we are promised, yt
the Angels shall be round about them which fear God: yea and shall bear them
in their hands, Psalm. 34.7. Psalm. 91.11
yt they shall not hurt them selves against a stone, and no evil shall come to
them in their ways: now when God promises us any thing, he would that the
same should put us in mind to pray unto him for it. And therefore as often as
we are in need, our recourse must be unto him, yt he might place his Angels to
guide us, every one according to his room and office. And this order we see ye
holy Patriarks and Fathers practiced. For thus said Abraham, the Angel of the
Lord who never failed me, Genesis 24.7
shall be in thy way with thee, and make thy journey prosperous. This order the^
used the holy fathers. Wherefore then would our Lord Jesus Christ have ye
Angels to help him? Luke 22.43.
For because (as S. Luke recites) he was thereupon before comforted, and the
Angels served him, to the end to mittigate the anguish wherein he was. Why, it
should seem then that he contemned the necessary aid of God, no not so, but
he respected that which afterward he said, How should the scriptures be
fulfilled? etc. As if he should have said, that if we doubted of any thing, we
might and ought then to beseech the Lord to look upon us with his eye of
mercy and compassion, so make us by all means possible to feel his power and
virtue: But when we are resolved that of necessity it must be so, and know the
will of God to be such, then must we none otherwise beseech him but to fortify
us with an invincible and constant power, never to gain say it, nor yet be
carried away with our affections, but wholye go with cheerful courage and
countenance whether soever it pleases him to call us. As for example, if our
enemies persecute us, and we know not how God has determined to deal with us,
nor what will be our end, we are to beseech him, yt as our life is dear unto
him, and has taken it to keep, that he would also show our delyueraunce by
the effect. And when we are persuaded that God means to call us unto him
self, we must leave of all kind of questining, and fully resolve our selves
to obey his majesty's unchangeable decree and ordenaunce. And thus we see the
meaning of our Lord Jesus Christ. For he prayed all his life long, yea and
before he entered into ye mighty combat which he abode, he besought his heavenly
Father, yt if it were possible, yt that cup might pas over him: But he by and
by concluded, yt since God his father had so ordained it, and say yt he must
discharge that charge which was committed unto him which was to offer up an
everlasting sacrifice, to blot out y^ sins of the world: and when he see him
self to be called thereto, and yt it was a resolute conclusion set down, ye
same I say was ye very cause why he absteyned from praying to God for the
contrary And therefore he would not that either Angels or yet men should help
him, nor yet to have God his father cause him to feel his power for his
deliverance from death: but it sufficed him that he had this spirit of
constancy, willingly to go to do his office. Lo here the full content and
meaning hereof. We now see in the first place, that the will of GOD must so
stay and bridle us, as that when we think things to be far unlike and
against al reason, to esteem more of the ordinance of God, then of any thing
that our fond and vain brain can comprehend. Wherefore we must throw our
imaginatio^s clean under ye feet, when we perceive that God has otherwise
provided. And this is one piece of the obedience of our faith, when we think
God to be so wise, as that he has power and authority to do whatsoever
pleases him. And although we can make reasons to ye contrary, let us well
understand that they are but smoke and vanity, and yt God knows al things,
and from who^ no secrets are hid, yea and his will to be the rule of al
wisdom and righteousness. And besides, whatsoever our mind says to the
contrary, it is by reason of our gross understanding, for we know that the
wisdom of God is infinite, and scarcely have we three drammes of wit. It is
there fore no marvel though men grow wild and savage, when God rules the^
not as they would themselves. And why so? Forsooth because we are very ydiots.
And in very deed, so long as our wit and reason bear any rule, it is even
very beastly: Wherefore, because we cannot find out the bottomless depth of
Gods judgments, let us learn to honor that which is kept secret from us:
Let us I say, humbly and reverently honor it, and say that whatsoever God does
is just and right, though we cannot perceive how. And thus much for this, Now,
seeing it was the will of God that his son should be put to death, let not us
be ashamed of that which he suffered: nor yet think yt the wicked did bear ye
sway, and that ye son of God could not have found means to have defended
himself: For all came from ye will, and unchangeable decree of God, which he
had determined therein. And therefore we see why our Lord Jesus says in S. Luke.
Luke. 22.53.
This is now your very hour, and ye power of darkness. As if he should have
said, what? make no great boast of yt you have done For ye devil is your
master and ringleader: By wc he shows yt they did nothing but by ye leave of
God: And although ye devil urged the^ thereto, yet neither they nor he could
have brought any thing to pass, if God had not lice^sed them. Thus we see in
su^me, that our eyes and all our senses must be fastened upon the will of God,
and upon his everlasting council, when we hear the death and passion of our
Lord Jesus Christ spoken of, For he declared that this was the will of God,
because it is written. For if Jesus Christ had not had some testimony of ye
thing which God his father had ordained, he might as yet have stood in doubt,
but he knew what his office was. And God would not have sent him down here
below, but that he gave him forthwith an express charge withal. It is very
true, that inasmuch as our Lord Jesus is God eternal, that he needed not to be
taught of ye scripture: but inasmuch as he is our redeemer, and is clothed with
our nature, yt he might be of right brotherhood, it was meet he should be taught
the holy scripture, and we see also that he at no time refused any such
instruction. So the^, because God showed him, whereunto he had called him, we
see whereupon he established himself: and we also see why he behaved himself
like a prisoner, and would not start away, because he knew that he must fulfill
the charge committed unto him, which was, to offer himself a sacrifice for the
rede^ptio^ of us al: And therefore we are to learn, that for so much as the will
of God is secret, and inco^prehe^sible in himself, we must have recourse unto
the holy scripture. True it is, that God determines of things in his secret
council, which we think to come by chance (as we say) which is not showed
unto us: neither have we always a special revelation, that we are able to
say, that God has determined either this thing or that. And therefore must we
suspe^d our judgments: for we see why it is that we pray him to heal us of
our sickness, or why we would have him to deliver us from any other affliction
whereinto we are fallen. And why do we so? Because we know not what he will
do. In very deed, we must not appoint him a law, but that this condition must
always be adjoined, that his will be done: But all our prayers ought to tend
to this point, to crave at his hands whatsoever he knows to be necessary
and profitable for us, and to leave unto himself whatsoever is laid up in his
secret council, to the end he might do that which to his majesty shall seem
best. But when we have a testimony out of the holy scripture, that God wills
any thing, we must not (as I have already said) stand against it. Now, we are
here a great deal better confirmed as touching the person of our Lord Jesus
Christ, that he was not thus cruelly afflicted, and so shamefully and
slanderously handled, only as the ungodly and wicked men lusted, but because
God had so decreed it. And how appears this by the holy scripture? For were
not ye sacrifices in ye law ordained two thousand years before Jesus Christ was
borne? And had not God enspired and taught the ancient Fathers how to
sacrifice, before the law was either given, or written. Or could the blood of
brute beasts obtain remission for sins, and make men acceptable unto God?
No: But it was to show, that God should be reconciled by a Redeemer whom he had
established: and since that time he has set down an express mention and
declaration by the scriptures. Isaiah. 53. 2.
We also see how the Prophets have spoken thereof, and namely he alleges
them. For, when Isaiah says, That the Redeemer should be disfigured, and
disdayned, deformed, and vnbeautifull like a Leaper, scourged and beaten by the
hand of God, that he should be an horrible thing to behold: to be short, that
his life should be taken from him: in what power was this prophesied of? was it
because God could not withstand Satan and all the rabble of the wicked? No: But
it was because he had pronounced by the mouth of Isaiah the thing which he had
before appointed. Dan. 9. 24.
And in Daniell it is a great deal more expressly set down. Seeing then it is
so, that God has declared that his only Son must be sacrificed for our
redemption and salvation, we are now much more confirmed in that which I have
already spoken, which is, we must always see that it is the hand of God which
governs, when as we see the Son of God to be so subjected to the slanders
and reproaches of mortal men. We see also why Saint Peter namely says in the
Acts, Act. 4, 27.
That Judas, all the Jews, yea, and all the soldiers, and Pylate also, had
done none other thing, but that which the hand and Council of God had
determined: as hereafter shall more at large be handled. And here we see
whereunto we must look, when we would not be troubled in our foolish
imaginations, which is, that God has sent down here below his only begotten
Son, that he might accept his obedience through his death and passion, for
the taking away of all our sins and iniquities. And this is the second point
which I have handled, to wit, the fruit and benefit which comes to us by the
suffering of our Lord Jesus. For if we knew not why it was, we should lose the
taste of yt which is here recited unto us. But when it is said yt he was bound
and manacled for our deliverance: and that we see what the state and condition
of our nature is, to wit, that Satan holds us under the tyranny of sin and
death, that we are very bondslaues, so that in stead that we were created
after the image of God, there must needs be found in us nothing but corruption,
and accursednesse, and must be led into this cursed captivity like miserable
and wretched beasts. Now, when we know all this, and that we on the other side
see, that the Son of God refused not to be slanderously bound, to the end
that all the spiritual bonds of sin and death, wc keep us bound under ye
bondage of Satan, might be broken in sunder, the^ have we wherefore to glorify
God, and with open mouth to triumph in the death and passion of our Lord Jesus
Christ, Luke. 22.51.
and in his taking, whereof mention here is made. Thus we see what we have to
remember in this place: and heervpo^ ye evangelist says, yt our Lord Jesus
healed the servant whom Peter hurt, not because he was worthy to be healed,
but for the saluing of the offense that was given. For this had been a defaming
of the doctrine of the Gospel, and of the redemption of our Lord Jesus Christ,
(I call that the redemption of our Lord Jesus Christ which he purchased for
us) if this hurt had not been healed: so that it might have been said that
he had withstood the Governor of the Country, and all the Priests, and that
he kept in that place, as it were a standing, for thieves and robbers. And this
was to have darkened all the glory of the son of God, and to have made the
Gospel for ever to have been slandered. We see also that this zeal of Peter's
was diuelishe: For the Devil went about to make Jesus Christ and all his
doctrine to be infamous. And here we see to what end all our painted devotion
tends, when we will serve God as pleases our selves, and every man take leave
to do whatsoever he thinks best in his own eyes.

Wherefore, Jesus Christ meant to take away this offense, to the end he would
not have his doctrine to be slaundered. Howbeeit we may here see the
abominable unthankfulness of such as are not moved by such a miracle. For
behold, the Soldiers who came to manacle our Lord Jesus Christ, see what a
number of ways the power of the Spirit of GOD wrought in him: For, but a
little before, he had with a word of his mouth, made them turn back: and by
and by, he heals a man who hadd his ear cut of: and yet all this did them
no good. We see then, that when the Devil has once bewitched us, and bleared
our eyes, that neither the graces of GOD, nor yet all his power, can touch us,
but that we will follow, and go on in our fury and rage: and have as it were
even a swines snowte to root in every thing: and let God say and do what he
please, yet will we, continually remain obstinate, which is an horrible thing.
And therefore we are to beseech the Lord to grant us wisdom that we may
profit by his graces, and be brought to love him, and that we may be also
touched when he lifts up his hand to show us, that he is our judge, so that
we be not afeard to return unto him in true repentance. And this is in effect
the thing that we are to learn hereby. But how ever it was, our Lord Jesus
Christ stopped the mouths of the ungodly when as he had healed Cayphas
servant. Hereupon it is said, that Jesus was led to Cayphas house, and was
there examined to the end. John. 18.13.
Now, for the making short of the matter, we will not speak of that which
Saint John writes of Annas, who was Cayphas father in law: and it may be
that Jesus Christ was led thither for honors sake, or else because the way so
served, hoping that all were there assembled. Well, Jesus was led to Cayphas
house, and there examined. And it is namely said, That the high Priests
sought false witness against him, but they found none. And in the end, That
there came two false witnesses, and said, That he said, he would build up
the temple again in three days, here we say that our Lord Jesus was
charged: not that the high priests were moved with any zeal: as many times
they which persecute innocents, think they do God high service, for in very
deed we see, how Saint Paul was driven with such a fury, 1. Tim. 1.13.
as that he was like unto a thief (for so he calls himself) who wasted and
spoiled every where: and yet thought himself to be a very zealous man. But it
fared not so with Cayphas and his company. For what was it that they sought,
but only unjustly to overthrow Jesus Christ? And thus we see that it was
very ambytion that drove them, manifestly to stand against God, which is a
most horrible thing. For Cayphas and all his company were the children of Leui,
even an holy Tribe which GOD himself had chosen? and not men, for God had so
appointed yt by his Law. In very deed there was a villainous and horrible
corruption amongst them, because the priesthood was bought at those days, and
whereas it should have been an office for term of life (as God had ordained
it) every one circumuented his fellow, and whosoever brought the greatest
sum of money, carried away this dignity. Now, this was a villainous and
detestable corruption, that they would make them selves like unto thieves and
unlawful dealers in so holy and honorable an estate, never the less, the
Priest always continued in the tribe of Leui, which God had consecrated to do
him service. And yet we see that they became all the enemies of God, Satan had
made them all drunk, yea they were all stark madd against the redeemer of the
world, who was the end of the law.

Let us therefore heereuppon note, that they which are in dignity and in high
degree, will not at all times so faithfully do their duties, but that they had
need beware of themselves, even as of those which might become the enemies of
God. And herein we may see the over gross folly of the Papists, when they
rest upon this title and dignity of priesthood. For, put the case that God had
commanded there should be a Pope (which never was commanded) and that his
seat should be at Rome (which is yet a less matter) howbeit if all this were
true, yet we see that in the person of Cayphas and his like, as many as have
been advanced to honor, may abuse their power and authority. And therefore let
not us be so foolish as to occupy our heads about maskes: neither yet let God
lose his authority, when soever any honorable title is given us: as we see the
Papists do, when as they forsake all the holy scripture and reverence their
idols. Let us learn then not to lessen the glory of God, under ye coulor of
any worldly dignity, but let him have all his sovereign dominion. Psalm. 118.22.
And thus much for this point. And as for any offense which we may conceive in
our own fantasies, let us mark that which is said in the Psalm (as also our
Lord Jesus Christ has before alleged) That he is the corner stone which the
builders forsook. Mat. 21.42.
And who were they that were the builders of the house and Church of God?
forsooth the Priests: for it is they that should indeed discharge them selves
of that office: and yet they forsook the head corner stone which god had laid.
And although this stone was refused, yet was it laid in the chief place of
the building: that is to say, God left not to accomplish that which he had
ordained by his council, when he raised up his only son, and had advanced
him agreat deal more, then he was before abased: Phil. 2.10.
For every knee must bow to him. Now, when it is said that the Priests went
about to seek false witnesses against him, they did it not simply to forge or
feinge a falt against him, but that they might have some coulor and cloak to
vex and grieve our Lord Jesus. And this is very true, that he spoke these
words, destroy you this Temple, and within three days I will build it up
again. And here we see the words of our Lord Jesus Christ as they proceeded
out of his mouth. Ioh. 2.19.
Now, the witnesses which were brought in rehearce the very self same words,
wherefore, a man would say that these were good and faithful witnesses: and yet
the holy ghost calls them false witnesses, because they turned this saying
wickedly: For our Lord Jesus spoke of his body, which was the true temple of
his divine majesty. For the material Temple which was builte in Jerusalem was
but a figure, and shadow thereof, as we know: But the whole fullness of the
Godhead had his being in our Lord Jesus, as S. Paul witnesses, yea corporally
and substantially. And therefore here is to be noted, Col. 2.9.
that we must not simply look into the words of a testimonye, but to the
meaning of the speaker. Now, this is a very good and profitable instruction
for us, because we are so greatly given to wickedness and leasing, that if
we have any coulor, it is enough, and do think that God has pardoned us,
when we have by any such false means charged any man. And therefore, we must
not stay simply upon words, neither yet upon the manner and fashion of the^ but
look to the worthiness of the cause. For they which may at al times defend and
say yt they have deposed nothing but that which was said or done, are yet taken
before god for falls witnesses, as here we see: whereupon it is said, yt Cayphas
said unto Jesus christ What is the matter? answerest thou nothing? see thou
not that these men witness against thee? And yet Jesus Christ all this while,
held his peace, and put up al these reuiling and slanderous words. Now, it may
be thought a strange thing ye Jesus Christ who had very just occasion to
disprove such a false testimony, did not once gain say it: howbeit) as I have
before said, and as hereafter shall more at large appear) Jesus christ was
not the^ to defend his doctrine as before he had done. And therefore we are
wisely to distinguish of al ye circumstau^ces: for, after Jesus christ had
fasted in the wilderness, god his father sent him to puplish ye doctrine of ye
gospel. Now we see that all that time, he always mightily defended the
doctrine whereof he was a minister: and we see also how he set himfelfe
against whatsoever might be said to the contrary. And thus we see how he
discharged his duty, because he was appointed and sent to be a Minister of
the word. But here is one special regard to be had: and that is this, that
he must be the redeemer of the world, and be condemned not because he
preached the Gospel, but that he should be thrown down into the
bottomless depth, and suffer for our cause, by reason he bear as it were in
his own person all the curses and transgressions of those who deserved
everlasting death. Wherefore, because Jesus Christ took upon him this office,
to bear the burden of all such as have deadly offended the Majesty of God,
that was the reason why he held his peace. And so, let us note, that when it
was meet for Jesus Christ to defend the doctrine of the Gospel, and that it so
stood with his office and calling, he faithfully discharged the same. But when
in holding his peace he played the part of a redeemer, as though he was
contented willingly to be condemned, it was not for his own cause yt he held
his peace, but (as I have already said) for our sakes. True it is yt he spoke
(as we shall ofttimes see) but it was not in his own defense, which did but so
much the more kindle the rage and fury of the ungodly against himself. And
thus we see, that it was not his meaning to escape death, but was contented,
willingly to be overthrown, to the end he might declare that he had quite
forgotten himself, to discharge us before God his father. Now he neither
respected himself, his own life, nor yet his honor: For he cared not to abide
all the shame and slander of the world, so that our sins might be taken
away, and we pardoned of our condemnation. And hereupon it is said, That the
high Priest charged him by the living God, to tell him, whether he were Christ,
the blessed son of God, he answered, That it was so: But that they should
see his Majesty, when it would be too late for them, because such their
dealing should be their destruction and overthrow. Now our Lord Jesus
Christ spoke not this here, to make the high Priest and his company to yield
gently, but rather to prick him faster on: and as he was before full of malice
and cruelty, this was to make the fire to burst out into a greater flambe,
Howbeit we have said, that Jesus Christ respected not himself, but rather
discharged that office whereof he had taken the charge, which was, to be the
redeemer of the world. Moreover, we see here in the first place, that the
contemners of God, and such as Satan has altogether possessed, will use some
coulored kind of religion: For a man would think, that the hye Priest did his
duty in charging Jesus Christ by the name of the living God. But see into what
a mischief we are plunged, when Satan has once blindfoulded our eyes: for he
then throws us headlong into such shamlesnesse, as that we have no more
reverence unto God, then we are ashamed before men. Now, this answer of our
Lord Jesus, gives us to note, that he meant to declare to Cayphas, and the
rest, that although he were for a time, as a man would say, abased, yet would
not yt lessen his majesty, but that he should be always taken to be ye only
son of God. But yet there is one thing farther to be considered of: which is,
for our better confirmation, that although he was thus abased for our
salvation, he lost no part of his heavenly majesty, but was contented that men
should oppress him, to the end we might be fully certified, that we should be
found honorable before God, because that all the shames which we have
deserved, should be abolished. And therefore, because our Lord Jesus held his
peace, and defended not his good cause, let our mouths now be opened to call
upon God, as if we were just: for he is our aduocat which speaks for us: now
then, because our Lord Jesus held his peace, he did it to this end that he
might now freely make intercession for us unto God his father: and although we
are but miserable worms, yet have we access to God, to call famyliarly upon
him and wc open mouth to challenge him for our father. And this is it which he
meant to show us, saying, Hereafter shall you see the son of man, sitting at
the right hand of the power of God. We must therefore let slip all regard which
might bring with it any offense, when as we see our Lord Jesus to be thus
abased. And let us also see what the end of it was: His meaning then was to
be condemned without resistaunce before the judgment seat of God, that we
might frankly go thither without fear. Let us therefore in sum learn, that
as often as we hear the passion of the history recited unto us, so to sigh and
groan, since the son of God must needs so wonderfully suffer for us, as that
in the mean while we tremble at his majesty, until such time as he appears
unto us: and be so fully resolved, that when soever he shall come, it shall make
us effectually to feel the fruit which he has purchased unto us by his death
and passion. And besides, let us fear to be of ye number of such as he thus
threatens, saying, Hereafter shall you see: For it is meet that the wicked
and reprobate should feel how terrible the judgment seat of God is, and how
great his power is to throw them headlong into hell, when as he sets him
self against them.

And when Saint Paul also will speak of the condemnation which the wicked and
cursed of God shall abide, he says yt they shall tremble and fear at the
countenance of his infinite majesty. Since the^ it is so, let us learn to
humble our selves before our Lord Jesus, 2. These. 1.9.
let us not look to behold with the eye the majesty which he will show at
his last coming, but let us look upon him at this day as our King and as he
is head of the Angels and of all creatures, and receive him as our sovereign
Prince: giving unto him that honor which to him belongs, knowing, that since
he is made our wisdom, redemption, righteousness, and holiness in God his
father, that to him we must give all praise, 1. Cor. 30.
and be filled with the fullness which we must draw out of him. And therefore
let us be well advised to do this honor unto our Lord Jesus Christ, although
we see not at this day his judgment seat set up: but let us behold it with the
eyes of faith, and beseech God to inlighte^ us with his holy spirit, that we
may be strengthened to call upon him in the last hour, so that it may carye us
beyond all our wits and understandings, that we might so glorify our Lord
Jesus Christ at this day as he deserves. And this is the effect which we are
to keep in mind. But as concerning that which is said, yt Cayphas and the
Priests condemned him to death, let us learn, not to fear the obstinate
boldness of the ungodly, and enemies of the truth. Now, this is a very
necessary doctrine for us at this day: for we see the mighty men of this
world, with open mouth speak evil of the Gospel: yea we see some even amidst
us which profess the Gospel, and would be taken for people reformed, and from
whom, as it should seem, there comes nothing else out of their mouths but the
Gospel, who notwithstanding like Deuilles incarnate, or rather like wild and
cruel beasts whom Satan possesses, do condemn the doctrine of the Gospel.
And we need not go very far to see al these things. Wherefore that we might be
strengthened against such offenses, and learn, always to glorify our God: Let
Cayphas and such like vomit out their blasphemies as much as they lust, and say
that Jesus Christ is worthy of death, and must hold his peace at such a point,
because it is naught. And let them also infect the air with their villainous
and damnable blasphemies never so much: yet let us hold us to this saying of
our Lord Jesus Christ: that although we at this day so falsely condemn his
truth, and stand in doubt of it, and that it be also falsified, evil spoken
of, and turned clean contrary to the meaning thereof, yet is he, strong and
mighty enough to defend it, and let us patiently look for his apparaunce,
for our redemption. And in the mean while, let us al learn to humble our
selves, and give him all the glory, since it was his will so to abase him
self, and to make him self of no reputation in the world for our salvation.

Let us now fall down before the majesty of our good God and acknowledge our
offenses, beseeching him to cause us more and more so to feel them, as that
we may be brought with true confession, to seek for the grace of our Lord
Jesus Christ, as behooves us to do, and come unto him like famished and hungry
souls, and make account, that the benefits which he has purchased for us, are
not to be valued, to the end to make us feel our selves to be so much the
more bound unto him, that we might thereby be stirred up to give our selves
wholly to worship him, and be displeased with our sins and iniquities, until
such time as we be even ashamed of them and that God has mercy and compassion
upon us, and not suffer us when we are once come unto him, never to forsake
him, but to be more and more confirmed toward him, and not to care for what
soever offenses the Devil shall lay before us: and that we might in such sort
persevere unto the end in the confession of his Gospel, as that our Lord
Jesus Christ might acknowledge and allow us at the latter day for his
Scholars. Now, that it would not only please him to bestow upon us this
grace. etc.

The fourth Sermon of the passion.
Matthew Cap. xxvi. 67 Then spatte they in his face, and buffeted him, and
other smot him with their rods.

68 Saying, prophecy unto us O Christ, who is he that smote thee.

69 Peter sat without in the hall: and a Maid came unto him, saying, thou
also waste with Jesus of Galyle.

70 But he denied before them all, saying, I woat not what thou say.

71 And when he went out into the Porche, another Maid saw him, and said unto
them that were there, this man was also with Jesus of Nazareth.

72 And again he denied with an oath, saying, I know not the man.

73 So after a while, came unto him they that stood by, and said unto Peter,
Surely* thou art also one of them, for even thy speech bewraieth thee.

74 Then began he to curse himself, and to swear, saying, I know not the
man, and immediatlye the Cock crew.

75 Then Peter remembered the words of Jesus, which had said unto him, before
the Cock crow, thou shall deny me thrice. So he went out and wept bitterly.

Chapter xxvij. 1 When the morning was come, all the chief Priests, and
Elders of the people, took counsel against Jesus, to put him to death.

2 And led him away bound, and delivered him unto Pontius Pylate the Governor.

3 Then, when Judas which betrayed him, saw that he was condemned he
repented himself, and brought again the thyrtie pieces of Silver, to the
chief Priests and Elders.

4 Saying, I have sinned betrayinge the innocent blood. But they said, what is
that to us? look thou to it.

5 And when he had cast down the Silver pieces in the temple, he departed and
hanged him self.

6 And the chief priests took the Silver pieces, and said, it is not lawful
for us to put them into the treasury, because it is the price of blood.

7 And they took counsel, and bought with them a potters field, for the
burial of Strangers.

8 Wherefore, that field is called, the field of blood, until this day.

9 (Then was fulfilled that which was spoken by Jeremiah the Prophet, saying,
and they took their silver pieces, the price of him that was valued, whom they
of the children of Israel valued.

10 And they gave them for the potters field, as the Lord appointed me.)

11 And Jesus stood before the Governor, and the Governor asked him, saying,
Art thou the King of the Jews? Jesus said unto him, thou say it. etc.


2. Cor. 2.16.
AS Saint Paul tells us that the preaching of the Gospel is a savor of life
unto those whom God has called to be saved, and a savor of death unto the
reprobate which perish: even so have we here also two notable examples set
before us, and worthy the remembrance, to show that the death and passion of
the son of God, was salvation unto the one, and a condemnation to the other.
For in the fall of Peter, we see what the work was, which must draw him from
out the bottomless death, wherinto he fell headlong. For, as much as in him
lay, he banished himself the heavenly kingdom, estraunged him self from all
hope of salvation, and cut him self clean of from the Church, as a rotten
member. And yet the death of our Lord Jesus Christ was it, that must do him
good, although he deserved it not.

And as for Judas, it is said, that when he see our Lord Jesus Christ to be
condemned, he desperately hung himself. Now, he should (as we have said) have
taken a good heart with him, to have put his trust in God, by reason of the
condemnation of our Lord Jesus Christ: because we are pardoned by the power
and virtue thereof. Howbeit, it was meet that these two specktacles should
here be set before us, to the end we might the better know, that if we are
not called by an especial grace and favor, to be pertakers of the fruit of
the death and passion of the son of God, it will avayle us nothing. And
therefore, it is not enough that our Lord Jesus Christ suffered, without the
benefit which he obtained for us, be bestowed upon us, and we to have the full
possession thereof. And even then are we most assured of it, whe^as we are
drawn unto him by Faith. But to the end we might the more perfectly understand
the matter, let us follow the text of the Storye as it is set down. It is
said, that our Lord Jesus Christ was shamefully entreated in the house of
Cayphas, that they spit in his face, buffeted him and slanderously skorned
him, by calling him a Prophet. Now, all this, was to let us understand, that
what soever he suffered in in his own person, was to deliver and free us
before God and his Angels. For there needs no spitting in our face, to cause
us appear before God, spotted and blemished, because we are not only deformed
and ougly by reason of our sins, but also full of abominable infections.

Moreover, we here see how that the Son of God the derye lively Image of his
Father, Heb. 1.13.
in whom his glory and majesty shines, has suffered all these shames, that
we might now appear before God in his name to obtain favor and grace, and
thereby acknowledge us as his Children, being clean void of all spots and
blemishes. And this is it which we are to consider of, in this first place. Now
let us come to the fall of Peter. It is said, That when a Maid saw him, she
told him that he was one of Jesus Disciples, but he denied it. And that an
other Maid told him the like tale, and he again denied it. Afterward,
diverse pressed him with it, and urged it more upon him, and then he began to
swear and curse him self, as if he should have said, I pray God I be damned
and come to naught, and the earth open and swallow me up, If I know him.

Here then we see how horribly and greeuouslye Peter fell thrice, which ought
greatly to fear us in reading of the Story. Now, we know how zealous he was:
John 24.
Moreover our Lord Jesus Christ commended him, and was called Peeter to
signify unto us the constancy of his faith: he was brought up in a very good
School, and he had heard this doctrine taught, whosoever denies me before
men, Math. 10.33.
I will also deny him before my father which is in heaven. And yet we see how
he fell. And here every of us has good occasion to tremble and be afearde:
because Peter's weakness was no greater then ours, if we be not helped from
above: wherefore, in the first place we see, how frail we are, so soon as God
takes his hand from us. For mention is not here made of a skorner, nor of a
profane man, neither yet of one who had not tasted of the gospel, nor that
feared God, or yet reverenced our Lord Jesus Christ. But it was all clean
contrary: because there were excellent gifts in Peter. Math. 16.17.
For the son of God fayde unto him, Flesh and blood has not revealed these
things unto thee, but my father which is in heaven. We see then that the holy
ghost was in Peter. And yet what a combat had he about the denyinge of our Lord
Jesus? yea with a silly Maid. But if a man, had so spoken unto him, or if some
honorable personage had made him afeard, he might have had some coulor for
himself, but we see yt a poor Maid was enough to cause him forsake the hope
of life and salvation. Let us therefore look upon the person of Peeter, and we
shall see that God had need to strengthen us every mynute of an hour, because
we are not else able to abide it: and although we have labored to come near
unto his majesty, and that we have done many virtuous deeds, yet shall we,
in the turning of an hand, be altogether changed, without God continues in
us an invincible constancy, and therefore let us learn to put Paul's
admonition in practice, which is this let him that thinks he stands, ^.
Cor. 10.12
beware he falls not. It is very true, we are not able to uphold our selves,
but let us run unto him that has the mean to do it: and in the mean while,
let us (as Saint Paul says in another place) walk most humbly: since it is
God that gives both to will and to perform, and that of his free mercy and
goodness. For thus it is said, make an end of your salvation in fear and in
trembling: as if he should have said, put a part from you all presumption and
negligence Now, when we see how many ways we have need of Gods help, Phil.
2.12.
is it not good reason that we should stand upon our guard, and not presume any
whit of our own strength, but carefully night and day call upon him, and put
our selves into his keeping and government. And we are besides to weigh and
consider, that although the temptations be not great, yet would they soon
oppress us, if God of his grace did not help, and remedy them. And they who
think them selves most bold, when they are far from blows, become even
like white lyuered soldiers, if there blow never so small a wind. In very
deed if God assist us, we are sure to stand fast, although there arise never
so great tempests. For we understand by the similitude which our Lord Jesus
Christ brings in that if an house be buylt upon a rock, although there come
never so great rage of winds and waters, yet will it stand fast: But that
which is built upon the sand will have a great fall and soon decay. So then
when we shall be built upon God, Matthew. 7.24.
and that he shall hold us with his mighty hand, we may very well abide great
and stout alarmes: But if there were no enemy at all to fight against us, yet
should we be soon overthrown, if God once hold himself far from us,
and takes from us his hand as we have seen by Peter.

But he has done a great deal worsse, for he denied not our Lord Jesus
Christ for once, but as often as he was asked the question. We see, that he
forced not to pass continually from evil to worse, as to fall to cursing,
whenas he prayed God that he would curse him, and swallow him up into the pyt
of Hell. And therefore when we see this, let us understand, that he which
falls, whenas he had most need to stand up, will throw him self
continually down into a greater depth of destruction, yea even unto his utter
overthrow for ever, without God help to remedy him. Thus we see what our
estate and condition is: for even from the beginning it is a wonder to see how
we flatter our selves of our own strength and therefore our Lord Jesus shows
us by proof that it is nothing, and that whenever there blows never so
little a wind, we are soon overthrown. And yet we persuade our selves, that
we are able to stand as of our selves: But we do but all this while increase
our own sorrow, adding sin to sin, and exceed more grievously in
wickedness. If Saint Peter had been tempted an hundred times, in a day, he
would have denied Jesus Christ an hundred times, and a thowsande in the head
of it. Lo in what case he had been, if God had not had compassion upon him:
but he spared him, and would not prove him any further. Surely, these three
falls which are here spoken of, are even enough to show us an horrible example,
and to make ye hairs of our head stand upright, to see peter so forget him
self the third time, and become a very beast in the denying of his salvation.
But over and besides this, we are to mark that if he had been troubled with
any other temptations, he would none otherwise have resisted them, and that
had been to have cast him to the deepest place of hell, if God had not so
greatly favored him.

And thus we see what profyt we are to prick out of this doctrine. Now, we
hear not these things, to the end we should judge Peter, and condemn his
cowardlynesse. Yet may we in truth justly do it: But yet by the way, we must
in the first place learn, that in knowing our weakness, we might likewise
understand that there is nothing in us, and not be proudlye puffed up, by
attributing to our selves through a vain and foolish opinion, any power or
strength. And in the mean while, let us also know, that for so much as ye
devil has so many ways, to devise our destruction yt he will soon compass
us, seeing S. Peter fell when there was no show of it. And besides, let us at
last understand that our Lord Jesus has compassion upon us, when he will not
suffer us to be tempted above our strengthes. For it is certain, that ye
mischief will be so much the more seen, and we shall understand that after we
have committed one offense, we shall be ready to redouble it, and never have
end, except he, through his goodness hold us in. And thus we see all the
things which here are to be observed. But by the way it is said, Luke.
22.61.
That after Peter heard the Cock crow and (as S. Luke recites it) after that
Jesus Christ had looked upon him, he went out and wept bitterly. Upon this
conclusion, it is showed us (as I have before said) that the death and passion
of our Lord Jesus Christ had presently brought forth her effect and power, for
so much as Peter was raised up from so horrible a fall. For, was not this a
miracle, that God should have compassion on him, and that he had already
obtained mercy, after he had committed so detest able a falt? we have said
that it could not be excused by ignorance, as if it had been a small falt? to
deny Jesus Christ: for it was said, and told him, that if he rendered not a
reason and a testimony of his faith before men, he was worthy to be altogether
rased from before the Angels of God, Luke. 9.26.
and his name blotted out of the book of life: and yet he made no reckoning to
redeem this miserable and transitory life, with so villainous and strange a
denial: not being called to come before ye judges. He was not extremely
questioned withal, for it was but a Maid that spoke to him: and if they had
dealt somewhat more roughlye with him, the very worst had been this, they
would have but scourged and beaten him like a miserable wretched caytife. And
yet he still forgot the fear of God.

Wherefore, when we see this, let us so much the more think of our selves, that
it must needs be that God would power out the infinite treasures of his
goodness, whenas he made Peter to be a pertaker of the fruit of the death and
passion of his son. Here is the^ a miracle, to cause us all to be in an
admiration, that Peter obtained forgiveness for so heinous an offense: as
appears by his repentance. For this is most sure, that if a man be touched to
the quick, after he has fallen, and weepeth and growneth before God for his
pardon, it is a token that God has already received him, and reconciled him
unto him self. For repentance, is a singular gift proceeding from the holy
Ghost, showing us that god is merciful unto us, and would not have us to
perish, but draws us unto him self. And this we see to be in Peter: wherefore
it follows, yt the death and passion of our Lord Jesus Christ was already
available unto him, after a wonderful manner, as has been before said. But let
us here in the first place note, that S. Peter abode still sleepy and
blockishe, until such time as he perceived the token which our Lord Jesus had
told him of, to wit, that the Cock should not crow till he had denied him
thrice, or else that the Cock should not crow the second time, before Peter had
made his three denials. Since then it is so, if our Lord Jesus Christ had not
forewarned him, he had stood styff in his sin, and been plunged always in
destruction, knowing yt we had need to be still called upon whe^as we have
committed any offense. For if God should take away his grace from us, and not
exhort us to turn unto him, without doubt, Satan would prevent us, and al our
senses would become blockish, so that we should have no one good motion to
return into ye way of salvation. And this is it which we are over and besides,
to behold in the person of Peter. But when S. Luke tells ye Jesus Christ
looked on him, we are hereby the better taught, yt it is not enough that we be
pricked forward, and be pulled by the ear to return unto God, but Jesus
christ must also cast his look and countenance upon us. Now, this is true,
that he speaks not here, but of ye look of the eyes: but although our Lord
Jesus be not conuersaunt wc us in a visible manner: yet without doubt, until
such time as he casts his eye upon us, we shall be altogether dulled in our
sins, and never think either of weeping or groaning, and although we have
provoked the wrath of God, and although he has bent his bow, and drawn his
sword, yet will we still be negligent, until such time as our Lord Jesus
christ causes us to feel yt he has not forgotten us, and would not have us
perish, but will draw us out of destruction. And to prove this to be so, we
daily hear Sermons, by which we are exhorted to repentance: but how are we
touched with them? nether were there ever, any mo admonitions: and besides, do
not al the^ creatures of God stir us up to come unto him? surely, if there
were but one drop of wisdom in our minds, would not the very rising of the
Sun call us to an acknowledgement of the worship of God. And besides, if we
behold how the earth and the Elements do their duties, and the beasts and
trees theirs, this were enough to show us that we must submit our selves unto
his majesty, to the end he might be gloryfyed in us: and yet we think no whit
at all of it. But the Cock may crow as loud as he lust, and not ye Cock
alone, but God also causes al his creatures both in heaven and earth to cry
out, to exhort us to come unto him: and that which is more, he vouchsafes to
open his holy mouth both by his law, Prophets, and Gospel, and says unto us,
return unto me O ye people: and yet we see our selves to be so dull and
blockish, as is monstrous. And therefore our Lord Jesus Christ must look upon
us with his eye of mercy, as he did upon Peeter, that he might draw out of us
true gronings, to be witnesses of our repentance. For, where it is said, that
Peter wept bitterly, it was to this end to declare unto us the sorrow whereof
Saint Paul speaks, that is to salvation, and therefore we should not fly it,
2. Cor. 7.10.
but seek after it and although we naturally desire to be continually in
pleasure, and to feel no cross, yet must we be brought to be sorrowful, for
when God afflicts us, our hearts must needs be grieved in that we have
offended him: for this sorrow brings us to quietness, and makes us to rejoice
both before God and the Angels. And we shall anon see that Judas repented him,
but it was after another and diverse manner. But we find by Peter's weeping, that
he was greatly displeased with his sin, and returned forthwith unto Jesus
Christ. We are also to note, that he went out to weep. Surely, this proceeded
of weakness, because he was a fearde that the company should see him repent.
But be as be may, no doubt of it when he wept by him self, it was a good token
that he was touched with his sin and offense: because he sought not to have
men to be witnesses of his repentance, but wept alone before God. And in this
we see what it is for us to do: for if we only bewail our sins and
transgressions in the sight of men, by this we show our hypocrysie: but when we
withdraw our selves from company and examine our sins and offenses, and be
then sorrowful, that argues that we are no hypocrites, but that we know who
is our Judge, and do there beseech him of pardon and forgiunesse, knowing also
that it is the office of God, to pull all damned souls out of the pit of
hell. And this is the sum which we are to consider, of that which is here
mentioned, of Peter's fall, and of the three denialles, by which he deserved to
be clean cut of from the Kingdom of God, if so be Jesus Christ had not
stretched out the power of his death and passion, to bring him to repentance,
as here it came to pass, now, it is said anon after, that the Priests and
governors took counsel to condemn him: But because they had no power to do
it, they brought him manacled and bound unto Pontius Pilate, the governor of
ye Country, who had authority, After this, it is said in the Gospel, ye Judas
repented him, when he see ye Jesus Christ was condemned, and cast them the
money, which he had receued for a reward, for his treachery, and therwt
confessed his falt. Howbeit, ye priests would not receive the money, but bought
a field of a Potter, wherein was potters earth, which served to none other
purpose, for it was good, neither for tyllage nor seed. And this Field they
bought to burye the dead bodies: which they did under a coulor of devotion:
for they said it was not lawful to put that silver among the offerings of the
temple. And hereupon the Evangelist says, that that which the Prophet had
spoken of was accomplished, yt the thirty pence which the children of Israel
valued God at, might be bestowed upon a potters yard. Here we are to
consider of that which has been before spoken, to wit, that the death and
passion of our Lord Jesus Christ is not effectual to all men, because it is a
special grace which God bestows upon his chosen, whenas he touches them
by his holy spirit, and although they fall, yet lifts he them up again, yea
and though they stray like wandering sheep, yet gathers he them together
again, and gives them his hand to bring them to ye fould. For we see how
Judas was clean rased out from amongst the number of Gods Children, and
therefore it was meet his condemnation should be seen and laid wide open
before the face of the whole world. And so let us learn (as we have already
said) altogether to acknowledge the inestimable goodness of our God. For as he
has declared his love unto mankind, when he spared not his only begotten
son, but put him to death for sinners: Even so declares he unto us the
especall love he bears us, whenas he touches us with the acknowledging of
our sins by his holy spirit, and causes us to groan, that we might be
brought unto him by true repentance.

Wherefore, the entrance which we have to come unto our Lord Jesus Christ,
comes not from our selves, but because that God governs us, and pleases to
show his choice. Now, these circumstaunces are greatly to be noted: we see
that Judas who was one of our Lord Jesus Christ his Disciples, wrought
miracles in his name: and yet what became of him? let us learn carefully to
fear and walk, and submit our selves wholye unto our God: and beseech him,
not to suffer us so shamefully to fall, as did this miserable man. And again,
let us also beseech him, that if we shall fall at any time into the like, to lift
us up by his power, that we may return unto him: not with such repentance as
Judas did, but with a true and right confession. For, the wicked as it is said
by the prophets Jeremiah and Ezechiel, will laugh God to skorne as much as is
possible: because they take pleasure, and glory in their sins, and in the end
become like shameless whores. But yet God at the last makes them to feel their
sins, and so terrifieth them as that they chafe and cry out alas:
nevertheless, they do not thus of any hope they have neither do they present
them selves before God: But are rather pushed forward with a fury: and fly
from him as far they can, and would be glad to pluck him out of his thorn
by the ears. For there is no speaking to the^, because they are angry, and
rebelliously whet their teeth against him. Howbeit we must be brought to
another kind of repentance: which is, we must not become like wild and
savage beasts, seeing we cannot escape the hand and heavy judgment of God:
but let us confess our sin, and abhor it, and still draw near unto God,
with out enforcement: and worship him willingly, and confess ye we are worthy
of destruction: but yet let us be assured, that although we are guilty of an
hundred thousand deaths, that he will always have compassion on us, for we
see how Peter repented. But the repentance of Judas ought to show us, that it
is not enough that we feel our sins, bt we must be fully brought home unto
God. And this is a very notable thing to consider: because we see that a great
number, and almost all men do flatter themselves: for they think, that if
they have in word acknowledged their offenses, be they never so heinous, that
they are clean discharged of them, as if their mouths were fully cleansed.
Again if a man be earnest with them, they think they are offered great wrong.
What? say they, have I not confessed my falts? and have I not repented me? And
this is all the reckoning that they make of it: as if God were a young child who
would be appeased with a smiling and dissembling countenance, full of leasing and
hipocrysy. Howbeit this is our common manner, for we would appease god we know
not how: eue^ as it is said with such a repentance as Judas repented. Wherefore,
let us fear and tremble when God gives us warning, and causes us to feel
our sins, and not stay altogether upon it: for yt is no true repentance: but
this is the true trial by which we must know whether we be true penitent
sinners or not: which is, whenas we of our own accord, seek to be at peace
with God, and forsake not his judgment, yea, seeing he receives us to mercy.
Which, he will do whenas we shall condem our selves: for whsoeuer shall be his own
judge, and condemn himself before God, and before Angels, and men, ye man I
say, shall be justified and pardoned, because he desires none other thing
but to have God merciful unto him. This then is the sum and effect of that
which we are here to observe. Now, Judas must needs make this confession,
because the priests might be so much ye more without excuse. The Evangelist
likewise makes this recital, that we might the better behold how Satan had
blinded al these reprobates: and that every of us might look narowly into
himself. And when God sets before us such exampels of his ire and
vengeance, and (to be short) that we, like men betwitched, and void of sense
and reason, become so beastly, as to throw our selves headlonge into an
hellishe fury: This is to make every of us to stoop, and to cause us know
that we may oftentimes fall into the same were if not that our God preserves
us by his grace and goodness. But by the way let us beware that we fight not
against our own consciences, as the priests did: for as many as so harden
themselves against God, shall in the end fall into such a reprobate sense, as
that they shall be clean without all reason: for, after they have once so
exceeded against GOD, they will also be past all shame before men. For it is
good reason that the whole world should see their beastliness, and yt there
shamlesnes should be so known, as that every man might abhor their villainy.
Here then we see why the Evangelist makes this recital, that when Judas
came to restore the silver, the priests were no whit moved therewith. Indeed,
they said it was not lawful to put it into the treasury, because it was the
price of blood. And here also we may see, that hypocrites will always be sure
to have some fine shifttes or other, to shadow and cover their iniquities, but
it is all to mock God: For they never come perfectly and soundly unto him. For,
what is this to say, ho, surely we will never put this silver amongst the holy
offerings, because it is the price of blood. Now, I pray you tell me, from
whence came this silver? truly, we know this, that ye priests lived upon the
offerings of the temple: as at this day, they which in popery, are called
prelates and churchmen, glottonously consume the offerings, and never care to
what use they put them. But although the Priests took from the oblations of the
temple, the silver which they gave to Judas, they never cared, nor yet
respected it: and now they make a doubt to put yt silver again into the
Treasury. But by your leave, they thrust back Judas as it were after a
scoffing manner, and as if they should have said, now sir, this villain has
betrayed his master, and it is no matter to us whether he has done well or
ill: nevertheless, because we for our parts will not be pertakers of his
offense, and make clean hands of it (because they had bestowed this money to
such an use) we will buy a field with it to bury strangers in. As who should
say, that they had satisfied God well enough, and that he could desire no
more at their hands, although they had offended in that thing which they did.
Thus we see, yt hypocrites will be sure to have wherewith to make satisfaction,
and so think by this mean to buy out them selves: howbeit these are but
childish toys. Nevertheless, let us understand, that this thing is set down
unto us, yt we might know, that when we have fallen, we should acknowledge our
falts indeed, and not go about the bush this way and that way, but wholly and
freely condemn our selves, and this is it, which we are here showed. But in
the mean while, let us beseech the Lord to take away the wymples wherewith
Satan goes about to blindfould us, that we stand not stiff in our
flatteries, thereby to excuse our naughtines, and let us more and more make a
good trial to condemn all our sins, and confess the^ truly. Moreover, we see
also how god overthrows the opinion of hypocrites, so that in the end they are
clean put by, their pretended purpose. For, the priests would gladly have
blotted out their offense, that it might never have come in question again:
and this was their pretense, whenas they bought a field to bury strangers in
But God turned all quite and clean against their meaning: for the Field was to
be called the bloodye, and murdering field, everlastingly to remain in the
mouths of men, women and children: so that this detestable falt which the
priests committed, might be daily made known and manifested, that it might
be said, this is the bloody field, which was bought with the price of
treason. And who were they that did it? Forsooth, even the priests and heads
of the people.

So then we see, that when hypocrites go about to hide and muffle their
misdeeds, then God so much the more discovers their villainies, and causes
all men to know, and abhor their detestable shamlesnesse. And here we see
the reason why we have said, that we ought so much the more aduisedlye to
come unto God, and lay open our sins, which is to this end, yt it would
please him to bury the^ even in the sight of himself, of his Angels, and of the
whole world, whenas we, for our parts have thus acknowledged them. And in the
end, the Evangelist alleges one place out of ye prophet, to show, that this
is not only recited because of Judas sin, and of the devilish obstinacy of the
priests, but for the condemnation of all the people in general. For there it
is said, that that which was written by the Prophet was accomplished, That God
was valued at thirty pieces of silver, Zach. 11.13
and the same was cast into the Potters field, now Zachariah, out of whom this
place is taken, compares our Lord Jesus unto a shepherd, and says that when
he meant to govern the people of the Jews, he took his staff or shepherds
crook called beauty, that he might be able to say, that the estate of this
people was so well appointed as was possible, if it could have been contented to
have been guyded by the hand of God. And could they desire any thing more? Now
to prove that this is true, I pray you what great joy and felicity could we
have, if God were not careful over us, and played the part of a shepherd
amongst us. And thus we see what a government God used over this people, whenas
this wand is spoken of, and not of a staff to lay on them and utterly to
bruise them, but to guide and govern the sheep peaceably which were tractable
and teacheable. Howbeit it is said that he took a wand the second time, as
indeed, when the people returned from the captivity of Babylon, God thrust
himself into the office of a shepherd: For after so horrible an overthrow as
was before, he gathered the people together, that he might peaceably govern
them under his hand. But in the end they dealt so unthankfully with him, as yt
he could not choose but clearly forsake them. And therefore he said Ah Sirrah I
see well enough how it fares with you: and I do nothing else but lose both my
time and travel amongst you. And there he spoke after the manner of men. Well,
go to now, dispatch me at once, and pay me, that I were gone And thereupon they
brought him thirty pieces of silver. What quoth he, is this the reward and
pay which I shall have of you? For when he spoke of the thirty pence, he had
respect unto the oblations that were offered in the Temple. For as they
hypocritically used them without faith and repentance) they were no better
then vain ceremonies and yet notwithstanding the Priests made great account
of them.

And after this sort, deal the Papists at this day, for when they have made
a great number of whim whames, and glorious devotions, they by and by think
that God is as a man would say greatly behoulden to them. Now, God says for
all this, that they are but apish toys. For, says he, what have I got by
you? ye see well enough that I have but a Shepheardes pay, and ye think I am
bound unto you for it. Tush, tushe, it is nothing so, for I have no need of
it: go your ways and cast it into the Potters house, and fill up your holes
and cranies therewith: go your ways I forgive you, and bestow it on your
Potters clay. As if he should have said, If you like to have it in your temple,
stuff that with it? For I will have no part nor portion with you, and will rydde
my hands clearly of it: and think not yt I will be contented in bringing me
here as it were trifles for pay: for be you assured that I like not of any of
all this gear. And this is the sum and effect which the Prophet meant hereby.
Now, we know that, that which was then foretold of our God, was fulfilled in
the person of our Lord Jesus Christ, who is our very God manifested in the
flesh.

Wherefore it must needs be that this place should be veryfied by a visible
manner, and that Jesus Christ should be valued at thirty pence only, that
is to say, 1 Timothy 3.16.
the people very vnthankfullye dealt with him* whom God had appointed to be
the everlasting Shepherd of this people. And this is most certain, that
because the people could not abide that God should be their Governor, yet
our Lord Jesus has always played the office of a mediator, although he never
showed him self in our humane nature. And this is it which we ought here
still to remember, to the end that we for our parts might learn, seeinge
that God has been so favorable unto us to gather us together as it were under
his protection, and to take us to be of his fould, and delivers unto us our
Lord Jesus Christ for our shepherd, let not us in such sort wound him, as to
grieve his spirit through our rebellious and unthankful dealing, and not pay
him (as we say) with nifles and trifles, but let us take him for our God and
King, since he has pleased so to vouchsafe it, and consecrate our selves unto
him all the days of our life, and not pay him with counterfeit coin, but
yield unto him both our bodies and souls. For it is good reason that we
should yield unto him all government over us, and we to be only his, seeing he
seeks only our salvation. Now to conclude it is said that when our Lord
Jesus was brought before Pylate he made no answer, and that Pylate asked him,
saying, why speak thou not? do not thou see that these men witness
against thee? and that he held his peace, insomuch that the Judge wondered at
him. Now, we are here in the first place to call to mind, that when our
Lord Jesus Christ appeared before an earthly Judge, it was to this end, that
we might be delivered from the condemnation which we have deserved to feel,
Isai. 45.23.
before the heavenly Judge. For we know that we cannot go from that which is
spoken of, by ye Prophet Isaiah, yt every knee must bow before the majesty of
God. And therefore, since God is the Judge of the whole world how is it
possible that we can stand before his face? for there is none of us all, but
must needs be enforced to say, that we are worthy to be condemned an hundred
thousand times. And although we have lived but one year, yet have we committed
an hundred thousand faults, which deserve everlasting condemnation, and is so
engraued in our hearts as that we cannot deny it. Wherefore, since God is
clearer sighted then we, how can it be that he should not condemn us, seeing
every of us must needs in sundry wise condemn him self? howbeit we see our
Lord Jesus Christ to be driven to this extremity, as that he was accused
before an earthly Judge, and so profane a man, as that there was nothing in
him but couetuousnesse and ambition. And therefore since the son of God was
brought thus low, it was to this end that we might understand and know that
we might bouldlye present our selves before the maiesti of God, for the
receiving of us, so that we should never need to fear courageously to come
before his tribunal seat, because we are sure that he will have mercy upon us.
Moreover, we know yt Jesus Christ has power, authority, and dominion to be
Judge over the whole world: and yt when Pylate had thus condemned him, it was
to this end that we might bouldly come unto him, because we know, that he shall
come to be our Judge. And again, that we might understand, because he held his
peace, that his meaning was to abide to be condemned for us, and not answer
for his justification, since he knew he must be condemned for our sakes.
For although he was without fal^, yet bare he all our sins upon him. And
therefore it is no wonder though he held his peace, and were overcome: for
otherwise he could not have performed the office of a Mediator, without he had
been condemned, and confessed that he was worthy to dye for our cause. And this
is the meaning why our Lord Jesus Christ held his peace, that we might with
open mouth call upon God, and beseech him of pardon for all our sins and
transgressions.

Let us now fall down before the majesty of our good God, and acknowledge our
offenses, beseeching him to touch us unfeignedly and to the quick, that we
might groan and weep before him for the same. And although they be great and
grievous, yet that he would not suffer us to be desperately shut out, but to
be always subject and run unto him. And forsomuche as of our selves we are
blockish, and shall be never able to attain thereto, let us beseech him to
look upon us with his eye of mercy, as he has ordained our Lord Jesus
Christ to have care over us, as a Shepharde has over his Sheep, that he
would also so gather us unto himself, as yt we follow not the war of
destruction from the which he has pulled us, but walk in that good way,
wherinto he has brought us. Let us also beseech him so to continue us in it,
as that we provoke not his heavy wrath against us, and thereby forsake us for
being any longer our Shepherd: But to defend us with his favor and grace, and
offer up such sacryfices unto him, as that we might know that he has not lost
his labor in gouerninge of us, but that we might answer his holy calling. And
for so much as it has pleased him to draw us unto him, and ch^se us for his
people, and enheritance although we are no way able to satisfy the hundredth
part of our duty, yet that it would please him to uphold us through his
goodness, and that we might always make an estimation, of the benefit of the
death and passion, which our Lord Jesus Christ has suffered, until such
time as we are rydde of all our sins, and be clothed with the perfection
whereunto he has at this day called us. That he would not only bestow this
grace upon us, but up on all people and nations of the world. etc.

The fyfth Sermon of the passion.
Matthew xxvii. 11 And Jesus stood before the Governor, and the Governor
asked him saying, art thou the King of the Jews; Jesus said unto him, thou
say it.

12 And when he was accused of the chief priest and Elders, he answered
nothing.

13 Then said Pylate unto him, hear thou not how many things they lay
against thee?

14 But he answered him not one word: insomuch that the Governor marueled
greatly.

15 Now at the feast the Governor was wonted to deliver unto the people a
prisoner, whom they would.

16 And they had then a notable prisoner called Barabbas.

17 When they were gathered together, Pylate said unto them, whether will ye
that I let lose unto you Barabbas, or Jesus which is called Christ?

18 For he knew well, that for envy they had delivered him.

19 Also when he was set down upon the judgment seat, his wife sent to him,
saying, have thou nothing to do with that just man: for I have suffered many
things this day in a dream, by reason of him.

20 But the chief Priests and the Elders had persuaded the people that they
should ask Barabbas and destroy Jesus.

21 Then the Governor answered, and said unto them, whether of the twain
will ye that I let lose unto you? and they said Barabbas.

22 Pylate said unto them, what shall I do then with Jesus which is called
Christ? They all said unto him, let him be crucified.

23 Then said the Governor, But what evil has he done? Then they cried out
the more, saying, Let him be crucified.

24 When Pylate saw that he prevailed nothing, but that more tumult was made,
he took water and washed his hands before the multitude, saying I am innocent
of the blood of this just man: look you unto it.

25 Then answered all the people and said, his blood be upon us, and on our
children.

26 Then let he Barabbas loose unto them, and scourged Jesus, and delivered him
to be crucified.


We have here before already seen, that our Lord Jesus so willingly offered
himself to be made a sheriffee, for the repairing and blot^ing out of our
iniquities through his obedience, as that he was very well contented to be
condemned. And here we see why it is said, that he answered to none of the
accusations that were brought against him. He was able ^ust ^i^ally to have
done it, but he held his peace, as it is also laid of him by the Prophet
Isaiah. Which thing was not done, Isaiah. 53. 7.
only to show his patience, but also that we might be able at this day freely
to glory, that we are just and innocent before God (although our own
consciences accuse and condemn us) because we know he has received us to
^^^^y, and that also in sins are taken away by reason of the perfection thee
was found to be in our Lord Jesus Christ. And thus we see how that the Son of
God has purchased us liberty, that we might be able boldly to glory that we
are the children of God, and taken before him to be righteous, to wit, when he
would make no reply for the setting forth of his pureness of life. Now, in
very deed a man would at the first sight, think it very strange that he
held his peace, and yet said, that he was King of the Jews: For these things
seem to be clean contrary. Howbeit, Ioh. 6.15.
S. John goes on further, and says that he declared, that his kingdom was
not of this world: and besides, said, that he was the Son of God: For he
protested that he was come into the world to defend the truth. And all this
agrees very well together: For it must needs be that our Lord Jesus should
show him self to be the King of the Jews, and the Son of God also:
without ye would have denied the Prophecies; howbeit he did not this to
acquit himself: but choose rather to hold his peace, and use few words because
he would be condemned. We have then here to note, that when we hear the
silence of Jesus Christ spoken of, it was, because he would make no excuse: and
therefore held his peace: and yet was he contented to speak as much as was
needful. We see also why. S. Paul says that he made a good confession before
Pontius Pylate. 1. Tim. 6.13.
For if our Lord Jesus would have stood to his defense, the Judge was already
persuaded of his innocence. And so by his speaking he might have had the day.
And this was it that made Pylate so to wonder: and yet our Lord Jesus was
contented ^o vn^nesse as much as God had enjoined him to do: not (...) that he
should teach (for that was no place for the purpose bu^ to confirm and ratefie
the doctrine, which before he had de^^e^^^. Now we are on the one side to note
by the way, that the offense which chiefliest troubled the Jews, was that he
had made a gar^o^^ and hindered the payment of tribute to the Emperor of Rome:
which was a thing to move the Governor being a Pagan, whom the Emperor had
sent thither to wrath. In deed this is very certain, that our Lord Jesus
showed himself to be a king, John. 6.15.
but yet no earthly Prince: for we see, that when the Jews would have crowned
him, he withdrew himself and hid him in a mountain: and thereby he cut the
throat of this slander, because he should have made the Gospel to have been
evil spoken of if he had perverted the politic order and government of the
world. For be that came to call us all to ye kingdom of heaven and to make us
partakers thereof, meant not to abolish earthly kingdoms, seeing they are
vpholden by him, and his power. And therefore it was not meet that the Gospel
should carry with it any such blame, as that Jesus Christ was come to usurp
any worldly power, or authority. And here we see why he namely says unto
Pylate that his kingdom was not of this world. And to say the truth, what
were it, and if the kingdom of Jesus Christ were earthly. For what should we
get by putting our trust in him, 1. Cor. 15.19.
when as we see our estate to be so miserable in the world. Truly the very
Infidels are in better case then we, considering the afflictions which we must
abide. In deed it is true that God sends his scourges over the face of the
whole earth; and they which desire as much as is possible to be freed from
them, shall neither will nor choose but be subject to a number of miseries and
afflictions. And yet for all this, we shall always be more roughly handled: For
God must first begin, to chastise his own house and Church. And therefore, if
our Lord Jesus had been an earthly King, it should seem that we were mere
strangers unto him.

Moreover, let it be that we had all the pleasures in the world, and that by
the mean of the Son of God, we were here as in a Paradise, yet should our
life be but a shadow, and our felicity very short, and transitory. And
therefore, we ought very well to know, and be fully persuaded, that the
kingdom of our Lord Jesus Christ is heavenly, that we might bend our selves
to the everlasting life, whereunto we are called. Thus we see, that the
kingdom of Jesus Christ is everlasting, because it consists not of any thing
in this corrupt world. Let us therefore patiently bear all our adversities,
considering, it neither diminishes nor lesseneth the grace which our Lord
Jesus Christ has obtained for us: for they are eue^ so many helps to our
salvation, as Paul witnesses. Romans 8.28.
And when the world shall despise and mock us, and we suffer many slanders,
abide hunger, and thirst, draw our legs after us, and be harried on every
side, yet must we have this consideration, that God accepts of us. And this
is, as if he chocked us by the thin, and said, Look up a soft, and set not
your minds upon these worldly matters. This then is the sum which we are
here to observe. And to say the truth, it is not without cause that our Lord
Jesus spoke so confidently, that he was borne and came into the world to say
the truth: and that whosoever would have any good taste, should stay him
self upon his word. By this we see, that this is a doctrine of great weight
^ to understand that the kingdom of our Lord Jesus Christ is not here on
earth.

For if this had been a light saying, he would have passed it over lightly:
But when he said that he came into the world to tell the truth, this was as
if he would have us give good ear, meditate in our hearts, and apply our
minds to this doctrine: this was, to make us forsake the world and all the
creatures thereof, that we might come to this heavenly King, and seek after
the spiritual benefits, which are communicated to us in him, to the end we
might enjoy them in such measure as he knows ^o be most profitable for our
salvation. And let us, of all that which we see to be the very summarie of
the Gospel, note well this saying, That Jesus Christ came into the world to
speak the truth: to the end we might hereupon conclude, that whenever we
shall give diligent ear unto his word, that it shall not be in vain: because
this is a certain and resolute conclusion, that whatsoever he had given them
the choice either of Jesus, or Barabbas, who (as S. John says) was a thief:
John. 18.40.
and the other Evangelists say, that he was a notorious naughty man, both a
murderer, and a sower of sedition and trouble in the Town. Now, this was a
detestable pestelence of al others: and yet the people cried out, Let us have
Barabbas, and let him be pardoned, and Jesus Christ crucified. By this custom
of letting loose a prisoner at Easter, we see with what foolish devotions men
are carried. For they thought the feast to be so much the more honorable, in
the loosing of a prisoner, and that they did God great service: and yet all was
very abominable: For it is said, That he that justifies the wicked, Prou.
17.15.
and he that condemns the just, even they both are abomination unto the Lord
And therefore it is meet that they which sit in the place of justice should be
of upright minds: For when he armeth them with his sword, he says not, do as
you think good your selves. For his meaning is, that they should have a
fatherly care over the people, and to be very wary how they lift up them
selves cruelly, to wrong others, by abusing of their credit and authority, but
would have them rather be gentle and pitiful. Yet must they punish
wickedness, for God so commands them. But what do we men? Forsooth, we
think we honor the feast of Easter, when as we offend God, and manifestly
transgress his word. By this we are admonished not to follow our own
fantasies, when the matter concer^eth the service of God, but altogether do
his will.

Let us not therefore feign a devotion which seems good in our own eyes, but
be contented to do the thing which God has ordained and allowed. And here we
see what arises upon this kind of custom, to wit, that we make laws
accordingly at this day: so that whatsoever is received for a common order,
seems to be lawful. And yet howsoever it seems to us, God utterly
condemns it. Now, we see what abuse has come herein, which is this, that
this corruption has made Barabbas to be preferred before ye son of God. A
man here would at the first sight think it very strange that our Lord Jesus
should be thus lightly esteemed of, and a thief and murderer greatlier
privileged then he: that he, should find such favor and grace amongst men,
and Jesus Christ to be so shamefully and slanderously handled. For, was it not
enough that the son of God was crucified, and abode a most sla^derous kind of
death, without he must also be greatly tormented. The death of the cross was
but as a punishment for thieves: and it was not only, as at this day the
gallows should be, but it was as if he should have abidden the wheel. Was it
not then enough, that after Jesus Christ had been buffeted, and spetted on, and
brought even down to the pit of hell, but that he must in comparison be
showed to be accursed of al ye world? For, if we should judge of it according
to natural reason, and look upon the outward show, surely we should be
confounded, but we must lift up the eyes of faith a great deal higher, and
come unto that which before we have said: to wit, that all this was governed by
ye counsel of God And therefore let us not stand upon that which the people, and
Pylate did, but let us behold ye unchangeable decree of God: which is, yt for
the better humbling of us, his will was to have his Son so shamefully to be
cast down, yea to be cast under the feet of all the malefactors of the world:
being crucified between two thieves, as hereafter shall be seen. We see the^
what it is for us to observe, when it is here said that Barabbas must be let
lose, and Jesus Christ be made the most abominable man of the world Yet for
all this, Pilate went about to have delivered our Lord Jesus: but it was by a
deuilish mean, to wit, by buffeting of him (which they then called punishing)
and would have let him gone, when he had so punished him, as one that had
committed a fault: For by this he pretended to appease the stir of the
people. Now, if our Lord Jesus had bin thus delivered, what had become of the
Gospel, and of the salvation of the world? For this correction which Pylate,
brought him to, was a sign and token of dishonestie for ever, as if the
Gospel had been a wicked doctrine, considering, that the Judge of the country
condemned it: and the person of our Lord Jesus Christ was clearly refused. And
yet, had we all bin lost, because there was none other mean to reco^cile us
unto God, but by the death of his only son. And thus we see that the death
of our Lord Jesus, was the very open way unto life. So then, we see that the
Devil did the best he could not to have our Lord Jesus to dye: and yet who
clapped, the Priests and their like, upon the backs to pursue Jesus Christ
unto death, but the Devil himself? This is very true. for he bewitched them:
and as we see that God sends the spirit of trouble and madness upon all the
ungodly, so that they are one against an other: even as the waves of the Sea
beat one an other: even so was the Devil carried, when as on the one side, he
went about to abolish the memory of our Lord Jesus Christ, and besides, on the
other side, meant to hinder the redemption of mankind. But God so handled ye
matter, as that the very mouth of the Judge should bear witness of the
innocence of his son: and yet for all yt he has promised he will perform.
And therefore when David would strengthen him self against all temptations,
Psalm. 12.
he says that the word of God was like unto silver which had been seven times
purified in the fire. Even so, as oftentimes as we doubt of ye promises of our
lord Jesus Christ, and shall be troubled and grieved (as that is the subtletie
of Satan, to make us loath our selves, and to be out of heart.) Let us return
unto this testimony, that howeuer it is, our Lord Jesus Christ has appeared
unto the world, that he might be a faithful witness for us: and let us at this
day be assured, that he in effect shows us, that he has not given us all
these promises in vain, because he will without all doubt perform them. And
thus much we have in sum to consider of. Moreover when Pylate said, What is
the truth? Let us note that when he moved this question, he spoke it not for
any desire to learn, but after a despightful and scornful manner: which is at
this day, a vice that reigns in many. For when we speak of the truth of God,
we mean the doctrine of the Gospel: And S. Paul also so calls it, Ephe. 1.13.
to ye end we might make a difference thereof from all other knowledge. In very
deed if any thing be told us which has bin done, yt is a truth: But when God
calls us unto him, and would draw us from this world, that we might come to
the heavenly life, this truth ought to be set in the highest degree, and should
make no reckoning of the rest in respect of it. Let us now consider how the
world reuerenceth the word of the Gospel. The wysest worldlinges (for so they
are accounted) are so presumptuously blind, as when that is spoken of unto
them, will thus say, what I beseech you? Have we lived thus many years in the
world, and do you think we know not the Gospel, nor any thing else. But they
will al be ashamed whenas they shall be told that the truth of the Gospel has
been buried, and that they ought to look more narrowly unto it: Now heerevpon
we hear well enough how they scoff and jest. And even so fared it with
Pylate. For because the Emperor had sent him to be his Lieutenant in the
Country of Judea, he thought he had great wrong done him, when a man spoke
of a truth which he knew not of. What? (says he) think thou that we are
all fools? and do nothing else but lie? Are we not able to discern between
good and ill? And is it meet for thee to reprove me and say, I know not the
truth, who am here set in office, and do represent the person of the
Emperor? Thus we see the meaning of Pylate, which is, he proudely swelled
like a Toade, and would not be so taken, as to be once thought, that he was
not able to discern between good and bad.

And indeed, we see that he tarried not to hear what our Lord Jesus would
say, but cast out these despitefull words, and went his way. Since then it
is so, let us consider with our selves, that although there be at this day,
many Pylates which refuse to learn in the school of GOD, and to become
teacheable, as if they were wise enough, yet let not us give over submitting of
our selves unto his obedience, but accept of that which our Lord shows and
sets before us: because we know that the truth will not grow up in our
minds, by reason they are full of vanity and leasinges, and we plunged over
head and ears in darkness, until such time as God draws us out of it.

And therefore, let us understand yt the truth far passes our minds and
powers, and that GOD must be our Master, to bring us unto it: and we also
very young and feeble, to receive yt which he shows us: and let us hold
this truth for so precious a Jewel, as that when we have compassed both
heaven and earth, and think we have learned all, that it is all but smoke,
and will sleete away, until such time as we buyld upon this most certain and
unchangeable word. And this is the effect of that which here we are to
consider of. Now, it is by and by said, That as Pilate was set down in the
judgment seat, his wife sent unto him and prayed him not to co^de^ne Jesus
Christ, because she had been troubled with many things in her dreams* of him.
No doubt of it, it was ye will of God, diverse ways, to testify of his
innocence: yea even by Pylates own mouth (as already has bin said, and as
herafter shall be seen more at large) not but that God had concluded what should
become of his only Son. And so, for so much as his will was that he should
be the Sacrifice, to take away, the sins of the world, it must needs be yt
the Scripture should be fulfilled. But it must also needs fall out yt our Lord
Jesus must be proved a just and an innocent man, yt we might ye better
understand that he was condemned for our sakes, of which comdemnation we were
guilty: and that whensoever we hear of the death and passion of our Lord Jesus
Christ, we should continually remember our sins and iniquities. Hereupon it
is said, That Pilate desired to let loose our Lord Jesus: For although he had
the chiefest authority, without controlme^t, yet because he was in a strange
country, and amongst a mutinous company, yea, and had a garrison in the
town, the sedition troubled him. And here we see what the cause was why he
would subtly and friendly proceed in the matter, Forsooth it was by reason
that he would have appeased the people. Then it is said, that he offered them
their ancient custom, which was, That every Easter he should let loose unto
the^ whatsoever prisoner they would. For his meaning was that he should die,
yt he might be ye sacrifice, wc should be offered for our salvation and
redemption. God has but one only and plain will and meaning, but it is
wonderful to us, and his proceedings are so strange, that we must be feign to
cast down our eyes, and yet confess that our Lord Jesus has suffered, but not
as me^ would, but because yt we should have such a pawn of ye infinite love of
God, and that our Lord Jesus Christ might declare it, whereby he might show how
precious and deer yt salvation of our souls are to him, and therefore let us
well consider of al these things. Moreover, in the end John says, That
although Jesus Christ was scourged, yet that the people strayned themselves, to
cry out the louder, to have him put to death. The^ Pilat rehearsed again, that
he heard that Jesus was the son of God: which were the words that touched
him, and was more a fearde of that, then he was before. And mark why he asked,
whence art thou? and when Jesus Christ held his peace, know not thou
(says he) that I have power to loose and condemn thee. Now, we see here why
the Jews brought in, such an accusation against our Lord Jesus Christ.

In very deed, the offense which might the rather move the Governor of the
Country, was, because he took upon him a kingdom: But when they see that
their malice was discovered, and that Pylat right well knew that they were but
fained leasings, they thereupon said, we have a law by which he ought to dye.
And that, they reserved for their privilege, to the end they might not reason
about religion. For the Romans who were profane people, and served their
idols only for fashions sake, would maintain their dominion, every man as he
was minded. And thereupon they said, he has made him self the Son of God,
and therefore has he blasphemed. It is true, that if our Lord Jesus had not
been the redeemer of the world, he had been worthy to have dyed, for calling
of him self the only Son of God: For we are all the Children of God, seeing
he has adopted us by his grace, and this is the common vain, and phrase of
the holy scripture. And they which have received any special grace, as Princes,
and magistrates, are called the Sons of God another way.

Wherefore, by a far greater reason, may Jesus Christ, Psalm. 82.^.
who was perfectly anointed with the graces and virtues of the holy Ghost, very
well be called the Son of God. But if he had not been the redeemer of the
world, and had called himself, for honors sake the only son of God, surely
it had been a deadlye offense. But how fell it out, that the Jews accused him
hereof? In the first place we are to note that it was for want of knowledge of
the scriptures, because they knew not that he which should be the redeemer,
should be manifested, to be the living God. And therefore because they had no
knowledge of the Scripture, nor acquainted therewith but were like unto brut
beasts by reason of their negligence, see why they were so bold to condemn
Jesus Christ.

The like rashness we see to be in all those which are ignorant. For when we
shall at this day hear them cry, thou heretic: they speak it not because
they are able to prove it, but the most doltish of them are carried with such a
rage, as that they will (forsooth) he zealous, of the honor of God, and yet
know why nor wherefore. Moreover, they must enquire whether Jesus Christ was
the Messiah, or not: howbeit the Jews refused him without asking any question.

By this we are to learn, that if we will have such a zeal as God lyketh of,
we must be ruled by a true knowledge and be taught by his word. For we may
utter whoat words, but they shall be but so many of Satan his rages, if we
speak not like the Scholars of God: because he is the only competent Judge,
and reserueth this office to himself, to show us, what his will is. Seeing
then it is so, let us follow the word of God simplye, and be quiet: and let
our zeal be ruled by it, and this is it which we are to observe in the first
place. But when it is said, That Pylate was more afearde then he was before,
when he heard the Son of God spoken of: here we see in the person of a
wretched pagan, that a little seed of religion moved and pricked him, and so
solycited his conscience as that he knew not which way to turn him. He see
Jesus Christ altogether deformed, and he him self had caused him to be
scourged and he was before that very shamfully used, with spitting and
buffeting in the house of Cayphas to be short, a man utterly despised and
forsaken of all men: and yet the name of God moved Pontius Pilate, and
engendered in him a marvelous fear. What then shall we do whenas we shall become
like unto brute beasts. For when any man shall speak to us of God, if we be
not some way kept in and restrained, we shall after the example of Pylate, be
condemned in the latter day, we shall at this day see such deuilish and horrible
skorners, that if a man say unto them, behold what God shows us, and
allege his word, and allow of that which they refuse, they care not, but will
stop their ears, hood wynke their eyes, and their minds are otherwise
occupied, and so proud, as that there is no speaking of giving ear: For thus
they please them selves we are at a good point (say they) and so it shall be:
It is even so, yet look upon Pilate, who never had heard a word of the
doctrine of God, yea he contemned the law so that what soever the Jews did, he
thought it to be but a fond devised thing, and worshipped his Idols: yet the
name of GOD touched him, and he contained himself thereby, whenas he hard it
spoken of. And did he this for any Majesty or pomp that he see to be in
Christ Jesus? No, for, the very name of God was it, that moved him to this
reverence. What then shall become of them who shall be condemned by this fear
of Pilat, so long as they follow their accustomed manner of life, so that there
can be nothing wrong from them, although a man do not only talk unto them
of the name of God, and speak as it were sometimes glaunsingly, but offers
also both to teach them, and point the^ out with the finger, the testimonies
of the Scripture? If they vouchsafe not to consider of it, nor yet give any
diligent attendance thereto, must it not needs be, but that the Devil has
altogether possessed them, and give us to understand that they are very
monsters, who have quite given over all the seed of Religion, and obstinately
set themselves against God, in dispite of nature? And this is it which we have
to consider of. Now howeuer it is, we on the contrary part also see, that
whatsoever fear we have, and whatsoever our minds and understanding can
comprehend for the honoring of God, will be like none other thing but as a
bright lightning, which flasheth in our faces, and is soon gone. For how did
Pilate fear God, we see that it stand him not, but showed so great cruelty,
as if God had never been? Thus we see, that they who are not governed by the
spirit of God, shall on the one side be so possessed with fear, as that they
shall at sometimes be made to stoop: But yet they new gi^e over ^^ting up of
their horns, quickly forgetting themselves, Exo. 8.8.28. and. 9.17. and
10.17. and Ex. 8.19.
and dulling their consciences to do wickedly. For we see that Pharao was
many times put in fear, when as he said, I beseech thee pray unto God for
me, And when he see the wo^de of God so apparently Surely, quoth he, this is
the finger of GOD, and I must needs submit my self unto him. But within a
while after he became worse, then ever he was, even so fared it with Pilate.
Now, this is to admonish us, that we make not account of the fear of GOD,
as of a blaste of wind, but let it be strongly rooted in our hearts. For how
did Pilate fear God, Forsooth it was such a fear as made him only to be more
inexcusable. And here we may see why God awakeneth the consciences of those
that are a sleep, and would utterly cast of the yoke, which brings them to a
more narrow consideration of themselves, so that they shall be made, spite of
their teethes, to acknowledge their miseries, and feel their sins, although
they would walter themselves asleep in them. And therefore all the doubts,
which all the contemners of God and the wicked have, are even so many
adiournaments or days over, which God grants them, to make them void of
all excuse of ignorance. But anon after, they let slip the Reine, and run
at randon, without any stay: as here we see Pilate did. At the beginning he
was greatly afearde, but soon after he returned to his old byas again. For
thus he said to Jesus, Know not thou that I have power to loose, and
condemn thee? Let us here in the first place note, that if he had been a
thief, yet could not he once remove his finger, without God had given him
power. How then durst Pilate warrant himself such an outrageous license, to
condemn and pardon as pleased him. And surely it were much better to set at
liberty all Thieves, to rob and spoil in the woods, then to set men in so
honorable a place. who take pleasure and delight in their authority, and never
have any care of conscience, but bring the whole world unto confusion.

Now, we see here (as I have said) that Pilate his fear never took deep
root in him, but was only a puffed of wind. Wherefore let us learn to have
asure and constant fear of God, that we may walk in his obedience, and
valiantly fight against whatsoever might put us by, and always thus restrain
our selves, as that we provoke not him to wrath, who has all power over us.
And this is it which we are here to consider of. Let us also besides
consider, that the glory which Pilate attributed to himself, is
notwithstanding turned to his great shame. For his enemies could never speak
worse of him then for this: to wit, that he would be taken to be a man of no
discretion to discern betwixt good and bad: and yet he boasted himself of
it. Here therefore we see, that the higher the dispisers of God think to
advance them selves, they must always feel, that they are the more shamefully
to be thrown down: and God so gives them over into a reprobate sense, as
that they brag of their iniquities, that they might become detestable both in
heaven and earth. What is there then for us to do? Forsooth, let us learn to
glory in that which is good, and have an eye to do the thing that is lawefull.
For they which glory in their mightiness, and in their authority, without
doubt do provoke the Lord to anger, because they have many times gotten their
riches and credit by unlawful means, as by rioting, cruelty, and all kinds
of extortion. Wherefore when they glory herein, it is as it were to set them
selves against the Lord. For he that has gotten every way by spoil, will say
I am wealthy: and see, he will say, I have gotten, whenas he has sucked the
blood of the poor out of them. But how? Surely, by deceit and wicked
practices, in robbing the one, and glutting the other. Another man, through
abition, and unlawful means, is advanced to some honor, and heerevpon
forsooth, this man would be greatly feared. And this kind of dealing is
manyfestly to stand against God, And therefore (as I have said) let us learn
to glory in that which God allows and likes of. True it is, that although
there be valor in us, yet is it not lawful to usurp the commendation which
God reserueth to himself, and for the which we ought to honor him, because,
all that we have comes of his free gift. Wherefore, we must not without
doubt, glory in our selves, as if that which God gives us apperteined unto us:
But, I say, our glory should be only in this, that it has pleased God to
adopt us for his children, and has given us his grace to walk in his fear,
and power also to abstain from evil. And heerin, ought to be all our glory.
And besides, if we be of no reputation in the world, let us beseech him to
grant us patience, and rather desire to live in this estate, then to be
exalted, and yet to rejoice and be glad, but not as the worldlinges do, who,
make themselves such sport, as that there is nothing that is able to hold
them in. And therefore the sum and effect wherein we must glory: is this, to
will and desire no more then God would have us to do, and set our selves
against whatsoever he misliketh of, although the world and all such as commit
tyranny, and exceed in doing wickedly, rejoice in it. Wherefore let us gladly
and willingly leave all these glories, desiring nothing else but to have God to
acknowledge and allow us for his children. And this is in effect, the thing
which we have here to consider of.

Now, for a full conclusion, it is said, That when Pilate saw he prevailed
nothing, and that the people made a greater stir, he washed his hands, and
said, I am innocent of the blood of this man. We have already said, that our
Lord Jesus must be found innocent, even by the Testimony of the judges
own mouth. For where it is laid that Jesus Christ was condemned, and
suffered under Pontius Pilate, it is not sufficient for us that we have
understood the History. But we must eftsoons acknowledge that Jesus Christ
was not only innocent, but was also the fountain of all holiness and
perfection. Why then was he condemned? John. 1.29. 1. Pet. 1.19. Galat. 3.13.
it should seem that here are two diverse and sundry things. For, it is
said, that he is the unspotted Lamb of God. And because he was the Lamb of
God, it was meet that he should be condemned as a Sacrifice. This word,
Lamb, imports that he must be offered up. And what is it that the law
calls Sacrifices? Forsooth, it is sins, and curses. And we see why it is
said that our Lord Jesus was accursed for us: to wit, he received unto
himself, the curse which was due for our sins. Thus we see in what quality
and state he was condemned: because GOD had established, that he should be
as it were the Lamb, which should be offered for a Sacrifice. Howbeit it was
meet he should be known to be without spot, and his purity be openly
seen, to the end we might take hold of our sins, until the time we
know Jesus Christ to be the myrror of all perfection, and enter into the
trial and examining of our sins, and be displeased with them, and
condemned, and we should have been, had he not delivered and freed us. Now,
when Pilate had taken the Basin and washed his hands, that was over trifling a
a Ceremony and a very foolish fashion: as though he could have discharged
himself before God for it: Howbeit, when he attempted to appease the rage of
the people, that was not to make his excuse unto God, For, he protested not
before God, that he was innocent: but said only to the people, look well to
your selves my masters: For, as for my self I am innocent. As if he should
have said, it is you that enforce me to do this. But all this (as I have
said) will not excuse him. Neither did he the duty of a Judge: For he should
have chosen rather to die an hundred times, then to have declined from the
doing of his duty, whenas he see such troubles in the world, yea, he ought
to have had this magnanimity with him, to do the thing which he knew to be
both good and just. But when he saw the people in this heat, he was contented
to be carried as pleased them. Notwithstanding, he must, in spite of his
bearde, be a witness of the innocence of Jesus Christ, even for the
iustifiyng of him by his own mouth. And yet he would needs condemn him,
howbeit therein lies al our comfort: for we know that when we are at this day
brought to appear before the judgment seat of God, it is not to the end we
should be condemned. But because the blood of our Lord Jesus Christ which
was shed for us, is the true and right clensing and washing of our souls, he
receives us as pure and clean. And thus we see whereunto we must trust. Yet
for all this, we here what the Jews say: for they are so headlong carried, by
the strength of Satan, as that they cry out, His blood be upon us and upon our
children. Now they were Gods inheritance, and the very elect and chosen
amongst all the nations of the earth, and yet they gave over this honor, and
all the promises of salvation, and this holy aliance which God had established
with their line. And here we see how they were deproued of all the benefits
which God had before distributed unto them, because they came of the seed of
Abraham: and it came so to pass that the blood of our Lord Jesus must fall on
their heads even to the utter destruction of them and their posterity, as
before he had also declared* For thus it is said, Mat. 23.3^
It must needs be that your iniquity must be great, and yt the blood of
Martyrs even from the just Ab^^, unto Zachare as the son of Ba^acheas whom
ye sometime slew, do put you in remembrance, and that you might see that you
have been always murderers of the Prophets, and by that mean have wa^^ed
against God and his word. Thus we see that the blood of our Lord Jesus, which
should be the salvation of the whole world, but specially of the Jews,
because the first begotten, apperteineth to them, has cried for vengeance
against them. Howbeit, let us now learn to plunge our selves in, and beseech
the Lord to light upon us after another manner, both upon us and upon our
children particularly: that is to say, yt we might be washed and cleansed of
the^, whe^as we see our selves, by reason of our sins, to be abominable in ye
sight of god, until such time as we be washed: and let us suffer the blood
which has been shed for our redemption, to light upon us, and be deawed with
it, by the power of the holy Spirit (as Saint Peter says in his Canonical
Epistle) and have great regard how we refuse the grace which God offers
unto us, 1. Pet. 1.2.
which ye Jews lost through their unthankfulness, and provoked him more and
more to wrath. And therefore let us at this day dispose our selves and be
ready to receive the cleansing of our Lord Jesus Christ, which we cannot lay
hold on, but by faith, and beseech the Lord, that we may not receive this
washing in vain: but that we may from day to day have all our spots wyped
away. Let us also desire our God that it would please him to increase in us
this purity, which our Lord Jesus Christ purchased for us, until such time
as we are come unto his kingdom, where we shall be discharged of all the
corruptions of our sins.

Let us now fall down before the Majesty of our good God, and acknowledge
our offenses, beseeching him that we may have such a lively feeling of them,
as that it may make us run with a greater desire to the remedy which is set
before us: (to wit, to the death which his only Son suffered. And that we
may come with such repentance, as may obtain mercy at his hands: and that,
not only for a day, but that it may also continue with us both in life and
death. And in the mean while that we might be so renewed by his holy spirit,
as yt we might persevere in serving and glorifiyng of him as he is worthy, and
wholly cleene unto our Lord Jesus Christ: that since he died, and is risen
again, we might live and die in him, and seek nothing else, but to make our
selves conformable and fit unto his word. And so, Let us all say, O
Almighty God, and heavenly father, etc.

The sixth Sermon of the Passion.
Matthew.xxvii. 27 THen the soldiers of the governor took Jesus into the
common hall, and gathered about him the whole band.

28 And they stripped him, and put upon him a Scarlet Robe.

29 And platted a crown of thorns, and put it upon his head, and a reed in
his right hand, and bowed their knees before him, and mocked him, saying, God
save thee King of the Jews.

30 And spetted upon him, and took a reed and smote him on the head.

31 Thus, when they had mocked him, they took the Robe from him, and put his
own raiment on him, and lead him away to crucify him.

32 And as they came out they found a man of Cyrene, named Simon, him they
compelled to bear his cross.

33 And when they came to the place called Golgotha (that is to say, the place
of dead men's sculles)

34 They gave vinegar to drink, mingled with Gall: and when he had tasted
thereof, he would not drink.

35 And when they had crucified him, they parted his garments, and did cast
lots, that it might be fulfilled, which was spoken by the Prophet, They
divided my garments among them, and upon my vesture they cast lottes.

36 And they sat and watched him there.

37 They set up also over his head the cause, written, THIS IS JESUS THE KING
OF THE JEWS.

38 And there were two thieves crucified with him, one on the right hand,
another on the left.

39 And they that passed by, reviled him, wagging their heads.

40 And saying, thou that destroyedst the temple, and builded st^^ in three
days, save thy self: If thou be the son of God come down from the cross.

41 Likewise also the high Priests mockinge him with the Scribes and Elders,
and Pharisees said,

42 He saved others, but he cannot save himself. If he be the King of
Israel, let him now come down from the cross, and we will believe him.

43 He trusts in God, let him deliver him now, if he will have him: for he
said, I am the son of God.

44 That same also, the thieves which were crucified with him, cast in his
teeth.


AS concerning the matter which before we have handeled, we must yet a great
deal better consider, that the kingdom of our Lord Jesus Christ is not of
this world. For we see that he was shamefully dealt withal and made a very
jesting stock: and in steed of a kingly Diadem, he had a crown of thorn:
in steed of a Scepter a Reed, and besides, whatsoever shame might be devised
against a man, it was done to him. And therefore if we shall let our senses stay
upon the thing which is here rehearsed it will be a marvelous object of
offense as it were, to estrange us from our Lord Jesus Christ, and so
consequently from all hope of salvation. But we must look upon the spiritual
kingdom, whereof mention has here before ben made, by faith: and then
conclude, That although we make a jest at the kingdom of our Lord Jesus
Christ, yet does God and the Angels esteem of it according to the
worthiness thereof. Yea and we are to call to mind, that the son of God was
after that sort entreated, in his own person, to the end he might take upon
him all the rebuke and shame, which we justly had deserved. For, how can we
come before the Majesty of God, so long as we are defiled with sin and
iniquity? But because our Lord Jesus was contented to have his face spet on,
to be buffetted, and abide all reproach, see how we at this day are
acknowledged and allowed to ^e the children of God* and herein stands all our
trust and confidence. We have moreover continually to consider, that GOD will
cause us a little better to feel our sins and iniquities, to the end we
might abhor and dete^^ them, when as we see, that the Son of God must
repair and amend them, and suffered so much, to purchase us grace and
pardon, and the heavenly father also, not to spare him, for the doing of it.
Thus, when we see that our sins were such as wrought so great a confusion and
shame to the Son of God, we ought to be humbled, and be altogether ashamed of
our selves, yet notwithstanding, we must take a good heart unto us, and be so
fully assured as not once to doubt when we shall come before the Majesty of
God, that our Lord Jesus Christ has purchased our pardon, seeing he was
contented, for our cause, to be so lightly regarded. For by this mean, he has
gotten us glory and worship eue^ before God and his Angels. Now it is here said
that our Lord Ies^^, was (...) to the place called Golgotha, to wit, a place
of dead men's ^kulles* The Hebrew word, from whence this is derived, signify
the to roll or bowl: Howebeit they then used it so, because that when any
carcass is through rotted and turned to dust, the head is then very dry, and
like a round bowl: Wherefore they called the name of this place Golgotha,
because that many malefactors (...) there punished, and there their heads
remained. And here we are to remember the saying of the Apostle in his Epistle
to the Hebrews, Heb. 13.11.
That our Lord Jesus Christ was led out of the Town as the burnt offerings
were wont to be, whose blood was carries into the Sanctuary for the wyping
away of the sins of the people* Now, it was said, that that sacrifice was as
a man w^^^d say, accursed: and therefore it was meet it should be carried a
great way of.

Thus we see, that the son of God would take upon him this state and
condition, that we might in very (...) to that God has now freed and pardoned
us; For we are worthy that GOD should give us over, and power upon us his
h^rrible (...), so long as he sees what we are. Wherefore, there is now other
way for us to obtain pardon, but to come unto our Lord Jesus Christ, and
receive al our succor from him, because he discharged us of a great burden,
whenas he would as it were, be^^^e accused and abhorred for our sakes that we
might find favor before God, and so obey his holy will. For, although Pylate
his Judge, had oftentimes justified him, yet for all that must he take upon him
in his own person, al whatsoever was requisite for our redemption, for he was
our pledge and surety, and therefore must wholly answers for us. So then, when
we have understood that our Lord Jesus was thus cast of, as one not worthy to
be accounted amongst ye fellowship of men, yea, even so stinking, as that he
could not be abidden: when we see all this, I say, let us learn to follow him,
and forsake ye world, as here in this place we are exhorted. And if it so fall
out, that we must needs be made jesting stocks, and be cut of as rotten
members, and be abhorred and detested. Let us patiently abide all this gear,
and not see it, until such time as that day comes wherein our sorrows shall be
turned into joy, and God shall wype away the tears from our eyes, and that the
thing which is now thought to be, as shameful, shall then be wholly turned
to honor and glory. For without al doubt, look whatsoever we suffer for the
name of Jesus Christ, is more honorable before God, then all the pompes and
glittering shows of this world. And this is it which we are to consider of
in this place. Now the Evangelist goes on and says, that they which passed
by, mocked our Lord Jesus, but especially the Priests, the Scribes, and such
like. And what was the matter I beseech you? Forsooth thus they said: If he
be the Son of GOD, let him come down and save himself for he has saved
others, and if he be the king of Israel, let him now show himself so.
Here we see how terrible blind these wretched people were, whom Satan had
so possessed as that they had neither feeling nor yet discretion. We see also
the Priests, who should have been the Angels or messengers of GOD: for he
had appointed them for that purpose, Malach.
to the end his word and will, might be known from their mouths. We see
likewise the Scribes, who were acquainted with the law, and yet by thinking to
make our Lord Jesus no body, declared that they troade under foot the Holy
Scripture, all the Religion whereof they so much bragged. For when the Messiah
was spoken of unto them before, Mat. 2.5.
they could say that he must be borne in Bethlehem, and they were
advertised and informed also that the redeemer which was promised them, must
suffer such a death. And this was no dark thing: The place of Isaiah also was
manifest, if so be there had been a recital made of that which our Lord
Jesus endured. They might therefore, know that it was impossible to have those
things better set down in order, then the Prophet had done, although he
spoke of it many years before. And besides, there are many sayings both in
Zachery, and in Daniell, that God would gather his people together, and thereby
restore his Church again: which is, that the redeemer should suffer all the
shame and curse of the world. Why then are they so bent against the son of
God, when he discharged his office, as has sufficiently been declared by the
Prophets? Surely, we may see that Satan carried them away, whenas they had
forgotten all that they knew before. And therefore, let us be well advised, so
to walk in the fear of God, as that when we have had a taste of his word, we
reverently receive him, and obey our Lord Jesus Christ who is there, offered
unto us. For in him it is, that we must find all perfect blessedness: if so
be we come humbly unto him. For if we think to rest with God, it is reason
our fool hardiness should be paid the same wages, that these wretched men of
whom here we read, were, who were so violently carried with fury and rage.

Now, we are to make our profit by these blasphemies, in turning them clean
contrary. For we see, that because our Lord Jesus Christ would be our king
and head, it cost him therefore his life, And the enemies of the truth said. ^f
he be the king of Israel, let him save himself: But this must he abide in his
own person, for the purchasing of our salvation. Why then would not our Lord
Jesus Christ spare himself? Wherefore suffered he so bitter and slanderous a
death, but because it could not be, that we should be delivered but only by
such a ransom. And therefore we ought to bend our selves against all the
supporters of Satan, and against all such villainies as vomit out such
blasphemies as the Evangelist speaks of: and be most assured, that we have in
deed a king, who has more esteemed of our salvation, then of his own life,
and abidden whatsoever was meet for our redemption, having none other respect,
but to redeem that which was lost. For our case were desperate, if the son
of God had left us in our estate and condition. But when he so humbled himself
unto death, by which we are delivered and abode all this so patiently, this is
the cause why God now stretches forth his hand and power, to succor us in
our necessity. And therefore it was meet ye God should forsake our Lord Jesus
Christ, that we might at this day understand, that he is watchful over our
salvation, and will be ready to help our wantes, when we call on him for it.
Let us also learn to arm our selves against such temptations, whenas the
Devil shall go about to assail us, and would make us believe that God has
forsaken us, and turned his back upon us, thereby to make us think it, a
vain thing, to put our trust in him. Wherefore, let us even then understand,
that Jesus Christ is the true defendor of all the faithful, and has showed
us the way what to do: and therefore it is good reason that we should follow him
in the same trace. For, he has abidden, to have such blaspemies to be powered
out against him, and yet has so constantly withstood, as that he has obtained
hereby victory for us. And therefore let us valiantly resist whenas the Devil
shall come to attempt us, to turn our faith vpside down, and shut the gate
against us, that we should not have access to God, as though he had clearly
forgotten us. But let us follow our Lord Jesus Christ and wait the good time
when god stretches forth his arm, to show that he has compassion upon us,
and is our father, although he suffers us for a while to be so beaten down.
And thus we see what ye iestes and scofs are which were blyrted out against our
Lord Jesus Yet had they more of them, for thus they said, He trusted in God, let
him deliver him now, if he love him. This saying, was already prefigured in
the person of David: Psalm. 22.9.
For these very words are recited, when as he complained that his enemies had
taken occasion to speak evil against him, and tread him under foot,
reproching him for the trust and confidence that he had in God. Now, it is
certain, that this is the deadliest wou^d that Satan can give us: For as the
life of man consists in the soul, even so the life of the soul consists
in faith, and in the refuge which we have unto God, being stayed upon his
promises. If we be spoiled hereof, we are clean undone, and utterly spoiled.
And thus we see why Satan went about to turn the faith which Jesus had in God
his father vpside down It is true that Jesus Christ fought with another manner
of power the^ we are able: for no incredulity could touch him: But howeuer it
was, yet he felt how grievous those temptations were. For as the Devil had
before devised such things, he now redoubled them in his supporters. For he
had said unto him, If thou be the son of God make these stones to become
bread, that thou may eat: because thou art hunger staruen. Ma.. 4.13.
And see thou not that thou must be tried whether thou have any power or no.

Now in this, Jesus Christ felt no more, then when they here reproched him
for putting his trust in God. And although we have not the like power so to
resist, without falling: yet ought we to be strengthened by him, because we
know that he vanquished and overcame all these temptations for us, and for
our commodity. And this is also another thing which they said, That he had
saved others, and could not save himself. Here we see again, that they were
given over into a reprobate sense. For, in that he saved others, was not this
a sure and an infallible token of his heavenly power? Jesus Christ raised the
dead, which they knew well enough, he gave the blind their sight, he healed
the sick of the palsy, restored the lame, and cast out the Devils themselves.
And thus we see that Jesus Christ powered forth the great treasures of his
goodness, and power in all his miracles: and yet they reproched him with them
for all that. We therefore here see that these miserable bewitched people,
without constraint of any man, are their own Judges, to take away all excuse
from themselves: so that when they shall appear before the judgment seat of
our Lord Jesus Christ, they shall never be able to allege any thing to save
themselves: for behold their own mouths condemn them. For if our Lord
Jesus saved other, without doubt he was able to save himself, but that he
preferred others before him self. What other thing can here be seen, save
only a wonderful goodness, in that he would be thrown down as men thought
to draw us out of the bottomeles depthes: that he would suffer all that we
deserved, to the end he might acquit us thereof: to be short, he forsook all
temporal welfare: that is to say, he cared not for his life, he spared not
his own person, that we might be assured of our everlasting salvation, and
have such a pawn and payment for it. So much the more therefore ought our
faith to be strengthened: and when we see, that al whatsoever the devil has
devised to trouble and hinder us from going to our Lord Jesus Christ, ought to
serve for our furtherance, that we might be thereof assured and profit our
selves thereby. Now, this is certain, that the Devil bends all his force to
hinder us in this behalf. For he knowing wherein our salvation lies, has
set himself altogether against it, that he might spoil us thereof. For he
knows, that if he can bring us to be offended at the person of our Lord
Jesus Christ, that we are all undone by it: and we have too too much
experience thereof.

Moreover, all the offenses which the Devil rayseth against us, and sets
before our eyes, to withdraw us from the son of God, should be things to
confirm us. For (as already has been declared) when it is said that Jesus
Christ saved others, and not himself: it is a speech which in our judgment
should cause us to conceive a disdain against the person of the son of God
even to refuse him, and not to trust in him. But let us clean contrary
understand, that when the son of God had no regard to himself nor cared for
his own life, it was, because he esteemed the salvation of souls to be so
dear and precious, as that he would bestow all he had thereon. And therefore,
since it is so, we should be so fully minded, as to call on him, and be
thoroughly certified, that he suffered not on vain for us.

Now, for that they said, Behold him which destroys the temple, and builds
it again it three days, this was too too villainous a malice to feign that
Jesus Christ said, that he would destroy the Temple. John. 2.19.
But he said, destroy ye this Temple, and in the end of three days I will
build it again. Now, he had none other meaning, but that his enemies should
be the destruction of the temple which he spoke of. And when they had crucified
him, might they not the^ have understood yt the thing was already begun to be
accomplished? For they were not ignorant that Jesus Christ showed himself to
be the true Temple of God, as touching his humane body: ^. Tim. 3. 16.
for seeing his Godhead was manifested in the flesh, and his divine being, was
united unto our nature, since I say, all the fullness of the Godhead dwells
in him, it is out of all doubt, that his Body was more worthy to be called a
Temple, then the Temple of Jerusalem, yea, more worthy then all the heavens.
Now, they destroyed it, as much as lay in them, and he built it again in the
end of three days. Neither had they forgotten it: for they knew, Mat. 27.63.
that they had soon after told as much to Pylate. But herein we see, that
when the Devil has taken possession of us, he makes us so blockish, as that
there is no wit in us to discern between good and evil: and we grow so full
of madness, as that we will clearly cast God out at the Carts arse, as we
say, even as though fully, and of set purpose we meant to distrust him. Now,
when we see this, let us be admonished to walk so much the rather in the fear
of God, when we know how he has wrought by his wonderful power, to declare
that Jesus Christ spoke not these words out of his own mouth in vain,
Destroy this Temple, and in three days I will build it again. For, to the
outward show, and according to our reason, we see nothing else in his death,
but shame and confusion: howbeit Jesus Christ amended all in his resurrection.
And therefore, since it is so, our faith ought to be so much the rather
confirmed, and we to set our selves against Satan, and against all that he is
able to imagine and devise for the shaking of our faith, and making of us to
doubt. As concerning that which is said, That they gave our Lord Jesus Christ
vinegar, mingeled with Gall and Myrrh, to drink, It is to be presumed that
they did it, according to the custom that was in those days, to shorten the
life of malefactors. Howbeeit our Lord Jesus, when he had tasted of it,
would not drink it, because he knew that his hour was not yet come. They
had then a custom, that before the malefactors were upon the top of the
Gallows, to give them this drink, that it might trouble the blood, and so
they should yield up the ghost the sooner. For this kind of death was very
cruel, and therefore they had need of these helps. And in deed, we shall
hereafter see, that the thieves had their bones crushed and broken, to the end
they might feel no more pain. But howeuer it was, our Lord Jesus would not
drink this drink, because he would show that he was ready, obediently to
receive the state and condition, which God his Father had committed unto him.
In deed, this was a very sharp kind of death: For (as we have before heard)
over and beside the terriblenesse of it, there were in it spiritual torments,
whereof by Gods leave we will speak to morrow. All which, were to cause our
Lord Jesus to hasten his death as much as was possible: but his will was, to
submit him self, most obediently to abide what punishment soever, until he
were delivered without the help of man. And this is it which here we have to
consider of. But as for the parting of his garments, and the casting of lots on
them, these things were done, Psalm. 22.19.
that the scipture might be fulfilled. For David being a figure of our Lord
Jesus Christ makes the like complaints. True it is that this was spoken but
by way of a similitude, when it is said, that vinegar and gall were mixed
together in his drink, Psalm. 69.22.
and that there was a devise made to spoil him, and that he should be more
and more grieved in his afflictions: even as cruel and savage people will add
more affliction unto miserable souls, when they have done the worst they can.
And this similitude David used, when it is said that he was made a pray, even
for the spoil. For he spoke it in respect of his wife, his house, and of all
his goods and state of life. Howbeit, it must needs be, that this must be
openly seen in the person of our Lord Jesus Christ. And therefore, vinegar and
gall was given him, that it might be known that David was but a figure of him
in deed, and that he was the true Redeemer, promised from the beginning. For,
why was the kingdom advanced in the house of David, except it had been
promised that it should longer continue, then the Sun and Moon? And
therefore it was the everlasting kingdom, which was established in ye person
of the Redeemer. For it was meet, that these things which were shadowed and
figured in the person of David, should be made perfect in Jesus Christ, as here
we see. Moreover, as for that which the Evangelist speaks of, for the thieves
that were with our Lord Jesus Christ, who mocked him, that is set down as a
thing by it self: Luke. 23.39.
as appears by S. Luke, who has declared these things more at large.
Howbeit, this is a common manner of speech: as if a man should say, This is
spoken as if it were to young children, for if there were but one, yet it would
be taken in the plural number. It was meet also that there should be some
women amongst. And yet there was but one. And therefore, after this manner it is
said, yt al men set themselves against him, and mocked and blasphemed him, even
the thieves themselves. For when a man is hanged between two thieves, it is to
the end, the more to aggrauate this shameful death. In deed, this was ye place,
where they were wonted to execute malefactors. And yet they were not contented
that they had put him to this foil: But it must needs be, that he must be
esteemed to be worse then the arrandest and strongest thieves of the world,
when as they were both hanged, one each side one, to the end it might be said,
that he was the master thief amongst them all. And herein (as S. Mark
says) the saying of the Prophet was verified, Mar. 15. 28.
that he was accounted amongst the wicked. Now, and if he had not been thus
accounted of, in what case should we at this day stand before the Lord? For we
could not obtain grace without justice. It is meet that God should hate and
reject us, until such time as we were made righteous, and cleansed of all our
sins and offenses in his sight. And that it might be so, could God deny
himself? Could he be robbed of his holiness, righteousness, and purity? And
therefore whensoever we shall come before him all filthy and besmeared, he must
needs abhor us. How should we then be justified before God, except our Lord
Jesus Christ had been accounted amongst malefactors. Wherefore we are exempt
out of this rank, and God receives us, and takes us as me according unto his
hearts desire, as if we were altogether clean and innocent, because our Lord
Jesus Christ suffered such shame and slander before men. And this is it which in
sum we are to consider of touching thieves. But to make a full conclusion, we
must set down the words of S. Luke, which is, that one of the thieves, rebuked
his companion, when as he see him so obstinate. What says he, it will be hie
time for thee now, or else never, to stoop and humble thy self. For behold, the
condemnation and punishment which thou suffrest for thy misdeeds and faults:
thou art a man plunged over head and ears in all curses: and although thou
have bin so beastly, as to delight thy self all thy life long in thy
wickedness, yet should thou now begin to sigh and groan. For, the most
dissolute man that is, although he wantonly pass his time all his life long
and never thinks to come to a reckoning, and scorneth justice, and sets
himself against it, because he thinks he shall escape unpunished, yet when he
is laid hold on, words will not serve his turn. Behold (says he) in what great
torments thou art: and thou see that both God and men do bring thee to an
account: and thy conscience also tells thee, yt it is for thy sins that thou
suffrest this: and will thou for all this, set thy self against God. Thus we
see, yt this saying very well declares, that this thief was taught by the
spirit of God. And although we shall, out of all cry (as we say) see this very
often: yet may we judge by this saying, what a good schoolmaster ye spirit of
God is, when as he so well instructs those who have erred, and have become
like brute beasts: that they have not only acknowledged their offenses, and
submitted them selves for the obteining of grace: but also have been able
eftsoons to talk like Doctors, and like men which had long time been
acquainted with the holy Scriptures. For, can we make a better and sounder
exhortation to a man that is grown so hard hearted, and which never cease to
storm against God, when as he should yield, and come to repentance, then
such a one, as this wretched thief has here made. But how ever it is, this
kind of admonition did him no good, whom Satan in such sort had possessed, but
to make him without excuse. And although it did him no good to whom it was
made, yet let it avail us at this day. And albeit God spares us, yet let us
learn to fear him: But chiefly and above all, if he scourges us, and will
have us feel that he is angry with us, Let us then be the rather touched to
groan, and constantly and patiently suffer our afflictions, as we see the
poor thief to have done: and not proudly and outragiously lift up our selves
as the other did.

Moreover, we see these two, to be as it were the mirrours of all mankind:
because we see in what miseries we are wrapped. For this life is even an hell
of all miseries, even the very fruit of our sins, because we were deprived
of the blessing of God by the fall of Adam. And yet this is true, that God of
his inestimable goodness has surpassed this curse, when as he continually
has showed him self sundry ways: a Father, making us to feel the
gentleness, and love which he bears us, and the care also which he has
over us. Howbeit we have many signs and tokens of our sins, by which we may
perceive that God curses us both in heaven and in earth: because that death is
common to us all. For when we have languished in this world, and have been
subject to many diseases, to heat and cold, and have been grieved and
tormented diverse manner of ways: to be short, that we have suffered infinite
miseries, what will be the end of all? Surely even this, That we must turn
into rottenness and dust. Now, we see some, whom God so touches, as that the
afflictions which they endure serve them for their benefit, and are good
helps unto them according to that saying of S. Paul. Romans 8.28.
And others we see to wax worse: and in stead of humblinge them selves, and
to be repentaunt, are so much the more infected and poisoned: prouokinge
eftsoons the wrath of God, and driving him into an hot burning flame, to
consume them therein: and all this we see. And therefore let us look upon these
two thieves, as the mirrors of all the world: for from hte highest to the
lowest, we are all gultye before the Lord. Yea and if we all suffered this
together, what is he that might brag of his innocencye: or who is he that
could purchase his pardon? Wherefore seeinge we are over head and ears in
condemnation, we justly suffer for our sins: and yet we will not all alyke
grant it: because there are some (as we have said) which wax rather worse,
and there rebellion against God is openly seen: For they gnashe their teeth,
spewe out their rage and cruelty, and will never agree to this condemnation:
or else they take the bit in their mouths, and show them selves so stubborn,
as that they will not stick to say, that God shall win nothing by it, nor
yet have the masterie of them.

Now, let us conclude, that when miserable sinners acknowledge their sins,
and be humbled, and confess the debt, giuinge glory to God, declaring also
that he handles the^ iustlye and rightlye, and yt it is good reason they
should be so chastised: when I say, wretched sinners be drawn to this reason,
let us understand, that God has put to his hand, and touched them with his
holy spirit, that we may see his wonderful infynit goodness, whe^as he pulls
those out of destruction, and hell, whose case before, was as it were desperate.

In su^me, we see in the person of this miserable thief, so excellent an
example of faith as never was seen. And therefore we should be so much the
rather ravished with such a miracle as the^ God wrought for in what state
stood he? Behold he was nie his death: he suffered horrible torments: he
looked to have his bones to be crushed and broken, and to be dismembered:
which was so sharppe and terrible a torment, as that it was even enough to
have made him have lost both sense and memory: he saw also our Lord Jesus
who most flaunderouslye was to be hanged there, as well as him self: and yet
see what words he used? for he does not only acknowledge his sins for the
humblinge him self before God, he does not only use the office of a teacher
to bring home his companyon, and to set him in the right way, but makes such
a confession as is more worth then all the rest, if we consider well the
circumstances. I beseech thee (says he) remember me whenas thou come
into thy kingdom. How was it possible that he could conceive that Jesus Christ
had a kingdom? for he was hanged on tree, and cursed of God and men. For,
this saying of the law, was spoken by the mouth of God: cursed is he that
hangs on tree. Deuteronomy. 21.23. Galat. 3.13.
Neither did this come to pass by chance (as we commonly say) that God put
his only son to it. And therefore, when he see Jesus Christ to be there
accursed both before God, and men, yea as one thrown down into a desperate
case, as far as man's reason could reach unto, he had not such a stayed
brain to say that Jesus Christ was a King, without he had spoken it in faith
and in spirit. For, he saw such things as might have made him decline from ye
son of God, and to have made him thus conclude, yt it was but an abuse and
mockery to trust in him: and yet he called him king, when he see him ready to
dye. I beseech thee (says he) save me, and grant me life: For it thou will remember me, that, is all the blessedness that I desire.

Now, when we shall well consider of these circumstances, without all doubt,
the faith of this thief was so excellent and great, as that never any man that
ever lived, had the like. And therefore, let not us be a shamed to be his
disciples: for, to say the truth, the death of our Lord Jesus Christ will
never stand us in any stead except we condemn our selves, that we might be
saved through him: neither will God ever pardon us, without we confess our
selves to be most wicked and filthy. Since then it is so that we are guilty
before God, and that our own consciences do judge and condemn us, let us not
be a shamed to follow this thief his steps, seeing he may be a good
Scholemaster unto us. And because our Lord Jesus is ascended now into heaven,
and has taken possession of the glory which God his father has given him,
Phil. 2.10.
to ye end every knee might bow unto him, let us not doubt to put our selves
wholly into his custody, and conclude and say, lo wherein lies our felicity to
wit ye Jesus Christ is mindful of us, and governs us: and because he was
ordained to be our shepherd, he will be watchful over our salvation, yt we
might be safe and sure under his hand and protection.

Moreover, let us learn, patiently to bear the miseries of this present life,
so that it makes not us decline from coming unto our Lord Jesus Christ. For
we see here, that the thief was heard: and yet was he feign to abide and
hard and terrible death. Let us therefore so esteem of the spiritual grace
which is given us by our Lord Jesus Christ, and which is daily offered unto us
by the preaching of the Gospel, as that it may make us overcome all the
anguishes, griefs, domages, troubles and temptations, which any way may come
unto us, so that all our afflictions might be mitigated: because we know that
they shall all turn to our benefit and welfare, through the grace of our Lord
Jesus Christ. And this is it which we are here to observe. And besides, let us
here to join the the answer of our Lord Jesus Christ, when he promised that
he should be that day with him in Paradise. For, although our Lord Jesus was
not as yet risen from death, nor had not accomplished all that was requisite for
our redemption, and salvation, yet had he already powered abroad the power and
fruit of his death and passion. True it is, that the fulfilling of all, rested
in the resurrection: But since it is conjoined with his death and passion, and
that we know he suffered in the weakness of his flesh, even so is he risen
again by the virtue of his spirit: and as he suffered for our sins, that we
might be made free before God: so likewise rose he again for our
justification: Now, when we know all this, I say, let us with so much the
more bold courage, come frankly unto him: and not doubt, but that when he
pleases to remember us, and hide us under ye shadow of his wings, that we may
be able to stand against Satan, death, and al miseries, and glory in our
weakness. And although we be in the sight of the world, but miserable wretched
ca^tifes, yet let us not for all that cease to rejoice in God, by reason of ye
taste which he gives us by faith, of the heavenly glory and enheritance which
he has so dearly purchased for us, from the which we cannot be put if we
hope for it.

Let us now fall down before the majesty of our good God, and acknowledge our
offenses, beseeching him to make us more and more, to feel the greeuousnes of
them, and to be so touched with the^, as that our repentance might continually,
be mightiller confirmed, that we might groan for them and so walk in the fear
of our God, as that, he might be glorified by us: to the end we might show
wherefore he has redeemed us, and learn to consecrate our selves in all
purity to him, and to this great Savior, who has sanctified him self, that
we might also be pertakers of his holiness. And that it would please him to
pour the graces of his holy spirit upon us, that by the same means we
might be cleansed of all the infirmities and corruptions of our flesh. That he
would not only grant us, this grace, but unto all people, etc.

The seventh Sermon of the passion.
Matthew xxvii. 45 ANd from the sixth hour, there was darkness over all the
land, unto the nineth hour.

46 And about the ninth hour, Jesus cried out with a loud voice, saying, Eli,
Eli, Lamasabachthani? That is to say, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken
me?

47 Then, some of them which stood there, when they heard that, said, This man
calls for Elias.

48 And by and by, one of them ran, and took a spoonge, and when he had
filled it full of vinegar, and put it on a reed, he gave him to drink.

49 The rest said, Let be, Let us see whether Elias will come to save him.

50 When Jesus had cried again with a loud voice, he yielded up the Ghost.

51 And behold, the veil of the Temple was rent in two pieces, from the top
to the bottom, and the earth did quake, and the stones rent.

52 And graves were opened, and many bodies of Saints which slept, arose.

53 And after they were come out of the graves after his resurrection, came
into the holy City, and appeared unto many.

54 When the Centurion and they that were with him, who watched Jesus, saw the
Earth quake, and the things that were done, they feared greatly, saying,
Truly, this was the Son of God.


WE saw and heard yesterday, that all the scorners and blasphemers of the
Majesty of God, were no ways able to hinder and let, that the death and
passion of our lord Jesus, should not bring forth and manifest the power and
force thereof, even amiddest the most horrible co^temners and unthankful people
of the world. For, mark and behold, that notwithstanding the hornorablest of
the Jews, chiefliest scorned the son of God: yet had he compassion of the
poor and miserable thief, and granted him everlasting life. And therefore,
no man ought to darken and lessen the glory of the Son of God. Now, if any
man allege and say, that the state of the miserable thief is not to be
compared with the chief Governors of the Church, being the Priestly trybe
whom God had chosen, for the teaching of the law: it is out of all doubt, that
when we speak of the salvation which God of his fre mercy purchased for us, we
must not look for any worthiness that is to be found in us: But rather agree
to that saying of Saint Paul. 1. Tim. 1.13.
That this is a true doctrine, that Jesus Christ came into the world to save
sinners. And therefore, when we consider of the death and passion of our Lord
Jesus Christ, it is meet that all men should yield, and confess them selves
to be most miserable and shameful, to the end God might pour upon them by that
means the treasures of his mercy, without any other regard to help us, save
that he sees us, most miserably to be plunged over head and ears. And because
that this thief was a most abject man, and that God had so sodeinly called him
yet seeing the death and passion of our Lord Jesus Christ, which he suffered
for all mankind, was available unto him, the same should a great deal the
rather confirm us. Wherefore, it is out of all question, that God, here
thrusts out his hand as it were, to all those who think them selves worthy
thereof, and deserve it, or at the least to such as the common people thought
the most excellent. But when he pulls damned souls out of the pyt of hell,
and when he shows himself merciful unto those who were utterly void of all
hope of life, herein shyneth his wonderful goodness. And this is it which gives
us an entrance into salvation: for although hypocrites confess that they are
greatly beholden unto God for his grace and favor, yet shut they the gate upon
them selves, by reason of their arrogance: for their pride is such, as that
they cannot submit them selves unto our Lord Jesus Christ. And therefore, let us
in the first place be fully resolved, that Jesus Christ calls unto him
miserable sinners, which are ashamed of themselves, and stretches out his
arms to receive them. For, if this be not in us, we shall never have the heart
to come unto him. But when we shall be thoroughly persuaded, that he purchased
salvation for those who would acknowledge and submit themselves, to be most
miserable and wretched sinners, and be utterly ashamed, and confess their
giltines, (as in deed they ought) before ye judgment seat of God: let us be
well assured that we shall soon attain to be partakers of the righteousness
which is here offered us, which is, the obteining of favor and grace at the
hands of God. Now, here upon follows, That from the sixth hour unto the
nineth, there was darkness over all the land: He speaks thus clean
contrary to our common manner of speech, for we would say from six hours to
nine hours. But the Evangelist has followed the ordinary manner of speech that
was then used. For when he speaks of the third hour, he means not at
three of the clock: but the fore part of the day. And here in sum, are two
things to be considered of. The one is, that they counted the hours otherwise
then we do at this day: for they reckoned, the day to begin from the Sun
rising, unto the going down, which was twelve hours, where we take the day to
be four and twenty hours, accounting from midnight, until midnight
following. And therefore the clocks were to be set in such sort, as that the
hours in Summer should not be longer then they were in Winter, and as the
days were longer or shorter, even so were the hours longer or shorter. The
other point is this, They divided the day into four parts, and quartered it
from three hours, to three hours, calling every quarter by the beginning of
the first hour. Insomuch, that, ye time which was from the Sun rising, unto
ye second part of ye day, they called the first hour. The second part, which
was from that time unto mydnight, they called the third hour. The third hour,
began after midnight, and lasted three or four hours after. And the fourth
and last part, continued from the Sun setting until night. And see, why one
of the Eua^gelists says, that Jesus Christ was crucified about the third
hour: where it is here said, yt it was about the sixth hour. Mar. 15.25.
Now, our Evangelist says, that there was darkness from the sixth hour unto
the ninth. For our lord Jesus was crucified betwixt the third and sixth hour:
and was condemned by Pylate about the third hour. And S. Mark his meaning is,
that it was in the end of the third hour, and not at the beginning of it,
when as he describes the time that our Lord Jesus was led unto Golgotha. Now,
he was upon the Cross until the ninth hour, even then when as it drew all
to an end. And so it is most like to be true, yt our Lord Jesus hung not on
the Cross above three hours. During which time, it is said, yt there was
darkness over the face of all the whole land of Judea. For it was not a
general Eclipse over the whole world. For, if it had bin so in deed, it
would have blemished the miracle which God meant to show: for then the Eclipse
would have bin said to come by the order of nature. And on the other side, few
me^ would have said, that it had been in other countries: and they also which
make mention thereof, might justly be suspected. But behold, it was the only
country of Judea that was covered with darkness. And what time? forsooth even
about three hours after noone, when as the Sun was nothing near the
setting: But it behooued that it should then be so dark, contrary to all
common order, because it might bring a terror and fear upon all the land. Now,
some think that this was done in token that God abhorred the deed, as if he
meant to cite the Jews, to the end they might have some feeling of this their
horrible crime which they had committed: and as if he would signify unto them
by this visible sign, that all the creatures in the world ought to be ashamed
of so detestable an act, as the putting of our lord Jesus Christ in such sort
to death.

But we have to note, that in respect of the Jews, the death of our Lord
Jesus Christ ought to be taken as it were for a most terrible offense, and
surely God greatly detested their villainous iniquity: because it surpassed
all the rest. And to say the truth, if murder and such like things are to be
hated, what shall we say to the most wicked handeling of the Son of God? As
to see men to be so bewitched, even to make no account of him who was the very
fountain of life: and so to lift up themselves as to abuse the memory of him,
by whom we were created, and by whose power we live and have our being. And yet
the death of our Lord Jesus Christ is become a sweet smelling sacrifice: for
we must have continual recourse to this, Ephe. 5.2.
that it was the reconciliation of the world, as heretofore we have said.
Moreover, darkness was ouerspread, that the Son might be a witness of the
divine and heavenly Majesty of our Lord Jesus. And therefore, although he were
for a short time abased and contemtible: yea (and as S. Paul says) made of no
estimation amongst men: yet did the Son show his reverence to him: and in
token thereof hid himself. Phil. 2. 7.
Since then it is so, Let us understand that God, because he would make the
wicked to be so much the more inexcusable, meant that Jesus Christ should
show him self in his death to be the sovereign King over all creatures: and
that the triumph whereof Saint Paul speaks, Colos. 2.15.
began already, where it is said that Jesus Christ tryumphed upon the
Cross. It is true, that he applied it unto that, that he had cancelled the
Obligation which was against us, and whereof he discharged us before God, by
which mean Satan was overcome: yet notwithstanding this was declared by the
Eclipse of the Sun.

Nevertheless, this convinced the Jews of ignorance, yea, of a malicious and
phrantike ignorance, even as if a man had seen before his eyes that Satan had
possessed them, and were become like monsters against nature. And here we are
in sum to understand what to consider of, when it is said, that darkness
was spread over the face of the earth. In very deed, we are made clear and
bright at this day, by the death and passion of our Lord Jesus Christ. For how
comes it to pass, that the Gospel shows us the way to salvation? And how
are we enlightened to come unto God, were it not that the Son of God with the
fruit and power of his death were offered us in it. And therefore Jesus Christ
is in very deed the Son of righteousness, because he has purchased us
life, by his death: howbeit the Jews are deprived of this benefit. And in
that the Sun became dark, they were convinced as men altogether reprobate,
so that no teaching could serve their turns to be profitable for their
salvation, since by their wickedness they went about to quench and abolishe
whatsoever might put them in any hope: For that hope was only in the Mediator,
whom, they through their wickedness, and unthankfulness, took in hand to
make of no estimation. Wherefore, it was good reason that they should be
utterly void of all soundness of salvation, to the end the wrath of God
might show it self in a visible manner upon them. It follows, that our
Lord Jesus cried out, saying,

My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? Psalm. 22.1.
Saint Matthew, and Saint Mark, recyte the words of our Lord Jesus in the
Syrian tongue, which is taken out of the Psalm. 22. Now the Evangelists do
not so fully and wholly recite the words, as they are set down in the text of
the Psalm: namely in this word, Eli, which is to say, My God, we see that
Saint Mark says, Eloe, But that was by reason of the corruption of the
tongue, as heretofore we have noted: For, the Jews, when they returned from
Babylon, had never so pure and sound a tongue, as they had before. Howbeit
this complaint and cry is taken out of the twentieth and two Psalm, the first
verse. And therefore GOD would namely have this to be recyted in two
languages, thereby to declare that it was a matter of great weight, which we
ought very diligently to mark. And to say the truth, except we would imagine
(as many fantastical people do) that Jesus Christ spoke after the judgment
of men, and not after his own feeling and affection, it would make us all to
wonder, that Jesus Christ complained, that God his Father had forsaken him. For
it were too too blockish and foolish a thing, to say that our Lord Jesus
Christ was not sore tormented and vexed in heart: but that he simply said,
They think that I am forsaken. Now, this declares, that they which seek
after such gloses, are not only ignorant, but also very blockheades and
doltes: and cease not besides, to bark and blaspheme, like Mastife Curres,
against the Majesty of God. And as many as thus say, without doubt, there is
no more religion in them, then in dogs and bruit beasts, for they know not
how dearly the son of God paid for their salvation. And that which is
worse, they mock them selves like villains as they are. Therefore we must
absolutely conclude, that when our Lord Jesus was brought to this extremity,
and torment, he cried out with a loud voice (yea like unto those which are in
most terrible panges) My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? And in deed,
we have before said, that we had but a cold pull (as we say) by the story of
his death, if we considered not of the obedience which he yielded unto God his
Father. Thus we see what the principal point is, that we should look unto,
when as we would be assured of our salvation: which is that if we have
committed many offenses, rebellions, and iniquities against God, that all shall
be buried, because our Lord Jesus has by his obedience justified us, and made
us acceptable with God his Father. Now, wherein consists this obedience, but
that Christ Jesus, although he suffered a cruel and terrible death, yet was
contented to yield himself unto it. For if he had felt no hardness nor
striving in it, his obedience had been nothing: But inasmuch as our Lord Jesus
abhorred death by nature, yea, and that it was a fearful thing to appear
before the judgment seat of God in the behalf of all wretched sinners (for he
stood forth there to bear all our burdens) and yet for all that was
contented to humble himself to be thus condemned for us, Let us acknowledge
his perfect obedience: and therein we have very good matter to glory, Hebr.
5.7. 8.
as the Apostle in the Epistle to the Hebrews says, That the fear of our
Lord Jesus Christ was heard: But howeuer it was, it was meet that he should
suffer and abide so hard and weighty a cause, yea clean against all worldly
affection and desire. And therefore, it behooued that God his Father should so
acquaint him with it, to the end (as he says) his obedience might be known.
We see then that the Apostle namely specifieth, that it must needs be that
our Lord Jesus should be wonderfully afeard: for else we should never have
known what this sacrifice had been worth, Act. 2.24.
by which we are reconcyled. And S. Peter also shows that our lord Jesus
Christ suffered both in body and soul, when as he says, yt he straue a against
the sorrows of death. In very deed the scripture oftentimes tells yt we are
redeemed by the blood of Jesus Christ, because he offered up his body for a
Sacrifice: and we also see why it is said, that his flesh is spiritual meat
and drink: John. 6.55.
but it is so spoken by reason of our grosenesse. And because we are canally
minded, the holy Ghost sends us back unto that that is visibly to be
perceived in the death of Jesus Christ, that by it we might have an assured
pawn of our salvation. And yet this takes not away the thing that is showed
us out of other places: neither does it derogate from this point, that the
death and passion of our Lord Jesus Christ had served to no purpose for the
blotting out of ye iniquities of the world, without he had obeyed, yea even to
the submitting of himself unto so terrible a death, neither obeyed he (as I
have before said) like one that was without feeling and understanding: For
although he was to abide marvelous terrible fears and extremities, yet for all
that, he preferred our salvation before al other respects whatsoever.

Thus we see what it is, that we are to observe in this place, to wit, that
the Son of GOD has not only suffered in body so cruel and tormentrous a
death (as already has been seen) but was also touched to the quick, whenas he
was to abide such horrible assaults, as if God had forsaken him. For, to say
ye truth, as he took upon him our causes (as has been said) it must also
needs be, that he must feel the condemnation which was due for wretched
sinners. For, by our sins, we are as people estranged from God, and therefore
he must needs leave us, that we might understand, that he takes us for
castawayes. Here then we see what the estate and condition of sinners is: And
this is out of all doubt, that GOD the Father never forsook Jesus Christ:
yet notwithstanding it must needs be, that he should suffer those pains,
and that he should valiauntly resist them, to the end, the benefit of the
victory might at this day redounde to us.

We have therefore to understand that when our Lord Jesus was driven to this
extremity, as if GOD his Father had cut all hope of life clean from him,
it was (as we have said) because he suffered the curse of our sins in his
own body, which were the cause that separated us from the Majesty of God.
For wherein have we any felicity except we be quickened by the grace of GOD,
and enlightened with his brightness? For he is the very fountain of all
life and blessedness, and our sins make a great separation between him and
us. And therefore it was meet that Christ Jesus should feel this. Now, let
us come to that that may be said. Is it possible that Jesus Christ should be
so fearfully troubled, seeing he was perfection it self? For this seems to
derogate from the Faith which he ought to have had, and whatsoever we ought to
believe of him: which is, yt he was without spot of sin. Now, this matter is
soon answered. For when Satan tempted him, it must needs fall out that he
should be so taken, as to be set upon the top of a pynacle, and according to
man's nature, Mat. 4.5.
be subject to such an illusion: and yet this no whit empaired his divine
power. But we have rather occasion to magnify his mercy and goodness to us
ward, for so much as he so abased himself to save us. It is eftsoons said that
he cried out, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me. In the first place it
is most certain, yt Jesus Christ, inasmuch as he was God, could have no such
conceit. No: But until such time as it fell out, that his Godhead must give
place to the death which he must suffer. And thus we see that the power of our
Lord Jesus Christ lay as it were hid for a time, until he had made an end of
whatsoever was requisite for our redemption. But now, in as much as he was
man, Let us note that this complaint, feeling, and fear, whereof we now
speak, has no manner of way derogated from the faith of our Lord Jesus
Christ. For, in that he was man, he trusted altogether in God, as we have
already heard, and as was yesterday sufficiently handled. This then was the
very true pattern of a right, perfect, and sound faith. Now, it is here
said, that he was so sore tormented, as that it seemed that God his Father had
forsaken him: and yet had he always a perfect faith, without being
overthrown or shaken any kind of way. Why then says he, Wherefore have
thou forsaken me? This proceeds from a natural man's conceit. Thus we see
that our Lord Jesus Christ, as touching weak flesh, is as a man forsaken of
God, and yet he gives not over his trust that he had in him. Now in deed we
see two points in these words, which at the first sight seem clean contrary
one to the other, and yet they agree very well together. For when he says, My
God, my God, with such a redoubling, he shows therein the constancy of his
faith. He says not, where is God, what? has he forsaken me? But he
continually sticks fast unto him. And therefore it cannot be but that he was
persuaded and fully resolved, that he should have favorable access always
unto God his father. Hereby (I say) we see a certain and undoubted
testimony of the faith of our Lord Jesus Christ, whenas in the midst of
all his extremities and torments he ceased not to call upon God his father,
without hypocrisy: because he was assured that he would be merciful unto him
so long as he called on him. And thus we see, I say, a sufficient declaration
of the faith of our Lord Jesus Christ: and yet for all that he redoubleth
it, because it was an hard and dangerous combat: as if he meant to set
himself against all the temptations wherewith Satan could any way assail
him, and sought to strengthen his faith, to the end he might continually
persevere in calling upon God.

Now he eftsoons says, Why have thou forsaken me: and this he spoke
according to man's reach. For it could not be chosen but that he must grow to
that point (as we have said) and yet not be overcome thereof, according to
that saying of Saint Peter, Acts. 2.24.
that it was impossible for him to be kept under with the sorrows of death,
that is to say, that death had taken hold of him, as of a miserable, wretched,
and oppressed man. But yet it was impossible for him, as says Saint Peter, to
be holden down. And so he wanne the victory even in the midst of the
fight: and this is so much the greater glory unto our Lord Jesus Christ.
David had partly a feeling hereof: for this is most sure that in the midst
of all his greatest afflictions, he perseuered in calling upon God, and
trusted in him: But because he was a weak and frail man, his faith was
oftentimes shaken, as he confesses himself. Howbeit there was a special
matter to be considered of, in our Lord Jesus (whereof we spoke on Sunday
last) and that was this, that al his sufferinges were rightly squared and
ordered, by reason of his integrity and pureness, in whom was no corruption
of nature: But it oftentimes comes to pass that our sorrows, yea our
fears, and cares proceed from a just cause: and yet they shall always be
intermedled with sin, because all our passions are corrupt. But there was no
unquietness nor yet disorder in our Lord Jesus. Whereupon it follows, that
his torments were not such but that he had always a sure and an undoubted
trust in God, and so, firmly and constantly called upon him, because he right
well knew that he would save him even in the greatest extremity. And thervpo^
it is said, That some of those which were about him, mocked him. This man, say
they, calls upon Elias, let us see and if Elias will come and help him. It is
to be thought yt the Soldiers, who knew not the law, might have said so, well
enough: and yet it had been but a foolish kind of speech, for they knew not
what the meaning of Elie was. And it is not like that the Priests who were
acquanited with the law, would speak this blasphemye. What? were they
deceived in the saying of our Lord Jesus? no: for the Prophet Elias was not
named after that sort. The name therefore was not abused: because there could
be no doubt in it, seeing the word of Elias is otherwise pronounced: and the
word Elie, that is to say, my God, was as common as was possible, and to ye
cause could not raise any doubt. And therefore they did this of a malicious
impudencye unto our Lord Jesus Christ, when he said Elie. And if this seem
strange to us, I beseech the Lord, there be not the like examples among us
at this day. For we shall see the Papists even at this day slaunderouslye
backbite and deprave whatsoever we teach, to wit, whatsoever is taken out of
the pure word of God, and do wittinglye and in good earnest blaspheme, to
make our doctrine hateful with poor and simple souls, and such indeed as
never heard us once preach. Yea they falselye deprave whatsoever we say, and
turn it which way they please (as may easily be seen) to color their
leasings with and to entertayne the miserable blind and ignorant souls with
their fond and fantastical lies. We see here, how the enemies of God, whom
Satan possessed, had of a malicious purpose taken exceptions to the words of
our Lord Jesus Christ: and even so at this day (as I began to say) fares it
with the papists. And this is not only seen in popery, but there are also
amongst us certain beggars, which will not stick to say, that we go about to
make them believe that Jesus Christ was in a desperate case and past all hope
whenas we say that he suffered the torments of death, and that he was cast
down, as it were into ye bottom of hell, for so much as he presented himself
there in our behalf, and bear the burden of our sins: howbeit all this is
no whit derogatorye from his constant and vnchaungable faith.

And here these dogs professors of the Gospel, never cease blaspheming,
wherein they show themselves to be far worse, then those, which are in this
place spoken of. Since then we see, that the Devil has at this day whetted
the tongues of his Supporters, and that every of them with a beastly
shamelessenesse vometeth out his poison against the purity of doctrine, let
not us think it strange, seeing our Lord Jesus was thus slaundered, but
patiently bear these blasphemies, and beseech the Lord (as it is said by the
Psalmist,) To cut out their villainous tongues, Psalm. 12.4.
which are so full of vyllanie and cursing, tending to none other end but to
the blaspheming of his name, and darkening of his truth. Now, hereupon the
Evangelist tells, That there was a vessel full of vinegar (yea, as before has
been said mingled with Gall) and that one took a Reed, or (as Saint John
says) a long Isop branch, and tied a sponge at the end thereof, to put it to
the mouth of our Lord Jesus. Now Saint John speaks of this matter more
distinctly, For he says, That Jesus Christ knowing that all things were
ended, said that he was dry, and thereupon said again, It is finished. We
see then what is here for us to note, when this drink was given to the son
of God: to wit, that he desired not to drink because he was dry: for he
refused it as we have heretofore seen, And why did he so? Because forsooth,
this drink was given him to shorten his life. Now our Lord Jesus meaning was,
altogether patiently and quietly to wait upon the leisure of God his Father.
Thus we see what the cause was why he would not hasten his death, but held
himself quiet and obedient until such time as all was finished, although he
had not as yet yielded up the Ghost, nor was risen again: for the meaning was
that he had showed his full obedience hitherto, so that there was no let why he
might not now render up his soul unto God his Father. Here we then see how
this place is to be understood: which is this, that our Lord Jesus declared
that there wanted nothing to the finishing of our redemption, saving his
departure out of the world which he was very ready to do, and to yield his
soul unto God. Wherefore, when he saw that he had discharged the office of
the Mediator, and had done whatsoever was requisite for the appeasing of the
wrath of GOD for our sakes, and satisfied for our sins, he determined to call
for this drink. And here, is a most notable and excellent saying, All is
finished. For this is certain, yt our Lord Jesus spoke not of any trifling or
ordinary thing: but he meant, that in his death, we have all whatsoever that
is to be had for our coming unto God, and ye obteining of his grace. Not that
his resurrection is hereby taken away, but it is as much as if he had said,
that he had faithfully done his duty, and came not like an half Savior, but
performed the charge committed unto him even to the uttermost, leaving nothing
of his fathers will unfulfilled. And since it is so, we are taught, to put our
trust fully and wholly in our Lord Jesus Christ, because we know that every
part and percell of our salvation is finished in that which he has done and
suffered for us. And here we see also why his death is called an everlasting
Sacrifice, by which the faithful and chosen children of God are sanctified?
Will we then be thoroughly assured that God is our father? Would we have free
liberty to call upon him? Would we have peaceable and quiet consciences?
Would we be fully assured that we are reputed for righteous, that we might
be acceptable unto God. Let us then abide in Christ Jesus, and wander neither
to nor fro, and know that in him lies all perfection. They therefore which
seek after other helps, and would be supplied this way, and, that as if there
might be something wanting in the death and passion of our Lord Jesus Christ,
do clearly forsake the power, whereof we now speak. To be short, they
trample the blood of our Lord Jesus Christ under foot: because they dishonor
him. And therefore what other thing is there in all Popery, but an utter
denial of the death and passion of our Lord Jesus Christ? For inasmuche as
they think to do good works, which they call merits, by which they think
to purchase the favor of God, surely, they deny the saying of our Lord Jesus
Christ, All is finished. And this proves it to be so, for when they think
to be saved before God, and would be pardoned of their sins, whether run
they but unto their foolish devotions? For every man will frame unto himself,
some masking mawmetrie at his pleasure, so that all the religions of Popery, is
so many blasphemies, to make this saying of our Lord Jesus Christ of none
effect, All is finished, What shall we then do? Let us understand that there
is not a drop of virtue nor merit in us, without we come unto this
fountain, wherein is all fullness. And thus we see that our faith must be
settled in our Lord Jesus Christ.

Moreover, let us chiefly understand, that when he offered himself for a
Sacrifice, that it was for the pardoning of us for ever, and as the Scripture
says, to sanctify us perpetually. And therefore let us look for none other
sacrifice but him. In very deed this abominable diuelishe Mass, is called in
Popery, a daily sacrifice: and they say, Psalm. 110.4. Heb. 7. 21.
yt Jesus Christ was once for all offered for a Sacrifice for ye obteining of
the forgiveness of our sins, yet nevertheless that he must be daily offered up:
which is manifest blasphemy, because they falsely take upon them the office
which was appointed to our Lord Jesus Christ, whenas he was ordained to be
the only everlasting Priest, yea, and God bound it with an oath, that his
Priesthood should last for ever. And therefore, when mortal men will thrust in
themselves to come before God, and offer up Jesus Christ, do they not rob
him of the honor which he reserved unto himself alone, and which may not be
given to any other creature? Since then it is so, we see that these miserable
blind souls, thinking to make peace with God, provoke his wrath and
vengeance, denying the death and passion of our Lord Jesus Christ, And
therefore ought we, so much the more magnify the grace of God, for that he
has drawn us out of such a bottomless depth, that when we thought to have
come near him, we set our selves openly against him: For we rob him of the
benefit of his death and passion, when we seek after any other Sacrifice
then that which he offered in his own person. Now it is said, That he cried
again with a loud voice, and yielded up the Ghost: and this was it, Into thy
hands I commit my soul or my spirit. And herein we see that our Lord Jesus
so fought against the sorrows of death, as that he became afterward a
Conqueror, and tryumphed, because he had overcome the hardest matter of al. And
this is the thing which belongs to us, to wit, we must apply it unto our own
use. For we are assured that the son of God did not only fight for us, but
also that the victory which he obtained for us apperteineth unto us, and that
we should not at this day be afeard of death, because we know that the curse
of God which was so terrible, is abolished, and that death in steed that it
might have deadly wounded us, serves us now for a medicine, to yield us life.
Now, as he had before said, after the example of David, My God, my God, why
have thou forsaken me? Even so likewise takes he at this present, the prayer
which David made in the one and thirty Psalm, Into thy hands I commend my
spirit. In very deed, David said these words when he was in the midst of
all his dangers: Psalm. 31.6.
as if he should have said, O Lord, I beseech thee receive me into thy
protection: for my soul is as it were in my hands and is there even at randon:
for I see how I am thrust out to all hazardes, and my life hangs as by a
thread: and therefore thou must protect me. We see here then, that David by
this prayer, made God his protector: and yet gave he not over, but still
called on him whenas he was at the point of death, always assuring himself
that God would save his chosen, not only in defending the^ here in this
world, but also when he calls them unto himself. For the chiefest regard
that God has on us, is this, that when he has taken us out of this world,
he hides us under his wings that we might enjoy his presence, 2. Cor. 5.8.
according to the saying of Saint Paul to the Corinthes. For when our Lord
Jesus made this prayer, he shows that he died quietly, whenas he overcame
all the combats which he sustained for us, and triumphs in our behalfes,
both for our profit, and for our salvation. And a none after, he declares by
the same means that God is his Savior, and keeps his soul as a sufficient
pledge For this much his request imported, when he said, My God, thou shall
preserve my soul even when I am dead. When our Lord Jesus speaks after this
sort, it is as much as if he assured us all, that we cannot do amiss in
submitting our selves unto our GOD, seeing that he, for the defending of us,
vouchsafes to take the charge of us, and that we shall never perish under his
hand Now, we have eftsoons to consider, that when Jesus Christ said, Into thy
hands O Lord I commend my spirit, that he obtained this privilege which
Saint Steeuen gave him in the seventh of the Acts, Acts. 7.59.
which is, he was made the preserver of all our souls. For what was it that
S. Steeuen said when he went to his death? Forsooth these were his words,
Into thy hands O Lord I commend my spirit. And here we see, that Saint
Steeuen showed the benefit of the request, which Jesus Christ made: to wit,
that we may now come unto him, and that we ought to do so, declaring that
since God his Father had made him a Shephearde for us, that we should not
doubt but to be at peace, come life, come death, knowing that all shall be
for our profit, and turn to our benefit: and as Saint Paul says, that
when he had Jesus Christ, he had riches enough, Phil. 1.21.
and cared neither for life nor death: for all should be gain unto him.
Wherefore, let us now learn, that when death shall assail us, that Jesus
Christ has broken the sting, which might have stoong us deadly to the heart,
and that death shall no longer hurt us, and that when our Lord Jesus yielded
up his Spirit unto God his Father, it was not only to have it conserved in
his own person, but that he might have this Privilege that ours might be
preserved eftsoons by the power of this request, whenas we shall come unto
him, as unto one under whose protection we cannot peryshe, as he himself
declares. And this is that triumph whereof we have spoken, which already
profits us. For our Lord Jesus shows how precious his death is, when as
he went so freely unto his Father, as that we might be brought unto him, and
to show us the way. But the principal point is this, yt we might understand
what benefit we receive thereby, because he has cancelled the Obligation
that was against us, that he has so purchased full satisfaction for our
sins, as that we may be bold to come before God his Father, so that death
it self is no way able to harm nor hurt us. And although we see many things
in us which might make us afearde, through the feeling of our miseries, let us
not for all that cease to glory in him who so abased himself for us, to the
end he might raise us up with himself. And although there is nothing in us
but shame and rebuke, yet, seeing that Jesus Christ hung upon the Cross, God
would have him by the mouth of Pilate to be called a King. And so, although
the kingdom of our Lord Jesus Christ is nothing esteemed of here in this
world, yet let us account it to be the foundation of all our glory, and let
us also understand that although we be put to shame under his conduct, yet
that we have whereof to rejoice, because our estate shall be always blessed,
for so much as, that whatsoever miseries, afflictions, and rebukes we shall
abide are more honorable and precious before God, then all the Scepters,
pompes, and the most honorable things wherein we take any pleasure and
delight. Thus we see how we must come unto our Lord Jesus Christ, and so
stick unto him, as that we might understand of what valor the riches are which
he brings us, but especially, when he, guides us by his Gospel, let us
forsake all the commodities and pleasures of this world, and also abhor them,
whenas they shall withdraw us from the right way. To be short, let our Lord
Jesus have ye honor which he deserves, and let not us for our parts be like
unto Reeds carried with every wind: but being established in him, let us call
upon God, and we shall have victory over life and death, over which he has
already triumphed. And besides, let us whiles we are yet in this world, yield
him this honor, to wit, even to acknowledge that he is our defender, which he
will do, whenas we truly come unto him, neither will he, I say, do it after an
ordinary manner, but even myraculously: For although death should cast us down
headlong, yet is it his office to draw us out of it, and guide us unto the
heavenly inheritance, which he so dearly has purchased for us.

Let us now fall down before the Majesty of our good God, and acknowledge
our offenses, beseeching him that he will make us feel them otherwise then we
have done, And that we might be so touched with the lothing of them, as that
we might return unto our God with hearty repentance. And not for a day only,
but to continue it with sighing and groaning. And although we shall beheld
within this prison of bondage, yet let us always lift up our hearts unto the
heavens, and come familiarly unto our God, since he is so inclined to mercy,
and calls us of his own accord, without tarrying till we seek him. And
when we see that our Lord Jesus does not only come near us, to the end he
might declare this his love unto us, but would be so abased for a time, as
that he might lift us aloft, so that we through faith should not doubt to
attain thereto, tarrying and waiting until we be al come thither together.
That he will not only grant us this grace, but also all nations, etc.

The eight Sermon of the Passion.
Matthew.xxvii. 55 AND there were many women, beholding him a far of, which
followed Jesus from Galilee, ministering unto him.

56 Among which was Mary Magdalen, and Mary the mother of James, and Ioses, and
the mother of Zebedes children,

57 When evening was come, there came a rich man from the City of Arimathea,
named Joseph, who also had been Jesus Disciple.

58 He went to Pilate, and begged the body of Jesus: then Pilate, commanded
the body to be delivered.

59 And when Joseph had taken the body, he wrapped it in a clean linen cloth.

60 And laid it in his new Tomb, which he had heawen out of the rock, and
when he had rolled a great stone to the door of the Sepulcher, he departed.


WE have heretofore seen, and heard how our Lord Jesus has showed and set
forth the fruit and power of his death in this poor thief, who seemed to be
as a lost and damned soul. Now, if all they that before had been instructed by
the Gospel, had fallen away from it, whenas they see the son of GOD put to
death, a man would think that the preaching thereof had been both vain and
unprofitable. And besides, we know that the Apostles were chosen to this state
of life, to be as ye chief rulers in the Church. wherefore it is not like that
this election of theirs, to this office and estate, was a vain and frivolous
thing. And therefore it is here set down unto us, that although the Apostles
left this estat, wherein they showed a beastly cowardlynes for Saint Peter
himself denied our Lord Jesus, whereby he was as one cut of from all hope of
our salvation, and worthy to be taken as a rotten member, yet would not God
suffer, that the Gospel which they had before received, should be quenched and
utterly abolished. In very deed S. Mat. lyketh rather of the faithful
constancy of the Women then of the men, and it is to this end that we might
learn to magnify the goodness of God so much ye more, who by his power
strengthens our weakness. To this intent and purpose are also the words of
Saint Paul, saying, that God has chose^ ye weak ones of this world, to
confound the mighty and strong, to the end they should not glorifye
themselves. 1. Cor. 1.27.
Since then it was here this spoken of men, and of their great courage, and
which followed our Lord Jesus Christ unto his death, this might be taken to
be as a natural cause: But whenas women being guided by the spirit of God,
were found to be more valyant then those men, who were chosen for the
publishing of ye Gospel throughout the world, let us by this understand that it
was the work of God, and therefore the praise to be given to him. Now it is
namly said, that these women followed our Lord Jesus, to serve or minister
unto him. Which thing, a great deal more declares their affection, in
profyting by the Gospel. For this was no trifling power that was in them
whenas they would leave their own houses to wander up and down hither and
thither, both to their great pain, and shame also. And we know in what state
and condition our Lord Jesus stood, whiles he lived here in this world. For
thus he says, ye Foxes had holes, and the Birds of the air nestes, but that
he, Mat. 8. 20.
had no place wherein to hide his head. Contrariwise, we see, that these women
had wherewith to live quietly and pleasantly. They then which wandered after this
sort and could hardly get any lodging, feeling hunger and thirst, and were also
mightily skorned and laughed at, besides their being chased and troubled every
where, and yet overcame all this gear and bare it patiently, we must needs
judge that God strengthened them. Now, they also declared, even at his death,
the hope which they had had in our Lord Jesus christ. For although their hearts
were dead as it were (as hereafter shall be declared more at full) and that they
thought him to be clean dispatched, yet they might perceive not long after,
that they were deceived. For, he had told them, yt he should restore the
kingdom of God: and he had also spoken unto them of perfect blessedness, and of
the salvation which he must make an end of. And what of all these things?
forsooth, hereby we see, that although these seely women's hearts were sore
troubled, because they knew not what would become of our Lord Jesus, yet did he
strengthen the^ by his mighty power, and in end, brought it to so pass, as
that they might both understand and judge, that he had made them no vain
promise. For, they looked for the promise of his resurrection, which in ye
judgment of the world was not to be hoped of. Notwithstanding, we see how he
exercised their faith, to the end we should not trouble our selves beyond
measure, although to ye outward show it might appear yt God had forsaken us,
and all the promises of the Gospel to be as things abolished, but that we
should nevertheless Stand fast and sure in the^. For if we do not, these women
will bewitnesses against us to our great condemnation, if we fail in these
conflicts. Would we have a grosser trial then that which they abode? And
yet by Faith they obtained victory. And therefore let us arm our selves, when
we are told of the attemps wherewith Satan goes about to assail us, and let
us, I say, be well appointed before the blow come, and show our selves to be so
settled in ye power of our Lord Jesus Christ, that although we cannot at the
first perceive, how the thing which is told us, may come to pass, yet let us
rest in him, and do him this honor, to believe, that he will at last show him
self faithful. And it is very needful yt we should be thus tried even to
the uttermost. For otherwise, we would be to to fine and nice, and lay our
faith to morgage, or else feign us here an earthly paradise, and so our senses
would never be able to raise us as hie as heaven, yt we might forsake this
world. Which thing we may very perfectlye see in the mother of John and James.
For we understand, yt she was before that, so ambitiously carried, as yt she
would have had our Lord Jesus sit in his Kingly throane with all the pomp and
bravery that might be, and her sons to sit by him, as his two Lieftennaunts.
For thus she said unto him, Math. 20.21
I beseech thee Sir command that one of my sons may sit on thy right hand, and
the other on thy left. Here we see a foolish glorious woman, who would feign
have seen her children in some glistringe earthly triumph.

But behold she saw here a far other manner of Schole: for she saw our
Lord Jesus Christ hanging upon the Cross, so shamfully and reprochefully as
that all the world was against him: and there, honge, as if God had cursed and
forsaken him. And thus we see, that when we shall be brought unto such a
shame, as that our minds shall be terrifyed with fear and grief, that God
then takes from us all earthly affections, to the end we might not be
hindered from lifting up our minds unto heaven and to the spiritual life,
whereunto we must attain. Which we shall never be able to come unto, except we
be cleansed of al whatsoever keeps us back, here below. Thus we see what we
are to consider of touching these women. Iho. 19.26.
And yet for all that, the meaning is not but that there were men also (for we
know that our Lord spoke unto John and commended his mother unto him). But the
intent and purpose of the holy ghost was to set here such a mirror or glass
before us, to the end we might understand that it was God who guided these
women by his holy spirit by which he would set forth his power and grace, by
choosinge, in men's judgments such feeble and weak instruments. The like
was also seen in Nicodemus, and in Joseph. Indeed S. Matthew, S. Luke, and S.
Mark, make mention of none but of Joseph, because it was he that came to
Pilat, and thereupon, Nicodemus took heart, when he see himself to have so
good a guide. True it is that Nicodemus was a Doctor of great estimation: and
Joseph of Arimathea was a rich man, and of hie calling, and a Counsailor also
(as here it is said) But yet let us see whether their zeal was such as that
they would give their lives for our Lord Jesus Christ or not, and whether they
had in their life time forsaken their houses to follow him.

No, no, but when it came to that, that they must give their lives, it was God
that stirred them thereto clean contrary to all worldly judgment. Here then
we see, that God has made a strange and wonderful alteration, in giving this
boldness to Joseph and Nycodemus, that they feared not the rage of the
people, when they came to bury our Lord Jesus Christ. Before time, Nycodemus
came in the night for fear of being evil spoken of, and yet when it was
grown even now to the worst, Ioh. 3.2.
he burieth him. And therefore it cannot be chosen but that God gave him a new
heart: for he came before closely, and there was no darkness dark enough,
considering his fearefullnesse and cowardice, if God had not corrected this
fault in him. To be short we see, what good the death of our Lord Jesus
Christ has done, in that he then powered out the graces of his holy spirit,
upon these wretched people, who never before durst declare their faith, nor yet
render a reason thereof. Wherefore, they do not only confess it with their
mouth, but that which they did, shows that they had rather be accounted
cursed before the world, then yt they would not be the disciples of our Lord
Jesus Christ, and so the thing which they had before obtained, to wit, the free
salvation which was set before them. And here we also see, why it is namely
said, that Joseph looked for the kingdom of God. Now by these words we are
told that God has forsaken us, and we are banished his kingdom, until such
time as he gathers us unto himself as his people, in the name of our Lord
Jesus Christ. Wherefore, we see how miserable our estate is, until our Lord
Jesus calls us unto himself, to consecrate us unto God his father. And if
this benefit be taken away from us, cursed and confounded are we.

Now, this then was a wonderful power and strength to wait for the kingdom
of God, because the Jews were made Bastards unto it, and in the opinion of the
world, the occasions thereof were very great. For the Prophets had foretold,
that at the return of the people out of Babylon, Agge. 2.10.
that God would become such a redeemer unto them: that his kingdom should
flourish most honorably and that the temple should be built more gloriously then
ever before it was: that they should enjoy all the pleasures that might be, and
lead a most blessed life, that all men should be in quiet, and no talk be had
but of rejoicing in God, of blessing his name, and of yielding him praise, and
thansgiuing. And this is it which the Prophets promised. But how fared it with
the people? Forsooth their neighbors did eat and drink the^ up, they
grieved, and vexed them, and there was such tyranny used, as yt innocent blood
was spilt throughout al ye town, the book of the law burnt, and every man
forbidden upon pain of death not once to read it, and such cruelties
committed, as were horrible. The temple also was altogether polluted. And what
became of the house of David? Forsooth, it was cut clean down, and at last:
the whole state became worse and worse. And therefore no marvel, although so
rude a people and so given over to all their desires and lusts, had not almost
fallen from the true religion, and been clean out of heart: because we see
that the number of those which patiently suffered, Luke 2.25.36 Mat. 2.19.
and were constant in faith, were very rare and few. And of this number were
Simeon, Anna the Prophetess, and Joseph. But what? The holy Ghost sets
down unto us in so great a multitude, amongst the Jews, and in a country so
notably peopled, four or five, as a thing which was not ordinary, and
witnesses that it were they only who looked for the kingdom of God: and it
was to this end, yt we might learn, that when things were confounded and in a
desperate case, that we should then look steadfastly upon God. And because his
truth is infallible and unchangeable, let us be constant unto the end, and
overcome all troubles, offenses, and griefs of the world, neither let us when
we sigh and groan, cease to go on whither our Lord calls us, which is, let us
patiently abide until his kingdom be established in us, and in the mean
while let it suffice us that he has given us a pawn from his holy Spirit,
by which he witnesses unto us our free adoption. And therefore, when God
shows, that he takes us for his children, and engraueth the same in our
hearts by his holy Spirit: and besides, when we have the doctrine of the
Gospel daily sounding in our ears, Let our faith be confirmed, and let us not
slide, albeit all things were so confounded, as could not be possibly be more
wished. And thus we see what it is that we have to consider of out of this
place. We are also to note the thing that Saint John recites before our Lord
Jesus was taken from the cross: to wit, that he was thrust into the side, to
see whether he had yielded up ye Ghost or not. For they hastened not his death
so fast, as they did the two Thieves: But when they thought him to be dead,
they thrust a Spear into him: and then they knew that he was dead: which
pleased well the soldiers.

Now it is true, that if we should not be able to bring in the law for a
testimony, we should have somewhat a cold pull of it, But S. John gives us a
full proof that our Lord Jesus Christ was the true Paschall Lamb, since he
was, by the wonderful providence and counsel of God, preserved, that there
was not abone of him broken. Exodus 12.46. Number. 9.12.
For it said in Exodus, that the Paschal lamb should be eaten, but there
should not one bone of him be broken. And why were not the bones of Jesus
Christ crushed? since it was the common manner at those days. Surely, their
will was not to spare him, and he was hanged between two Thieves, because
they thought him to be the most vile and detestable person. We see then here,
that this was the work of God, in keeping back the hands of the Soldiers,
and his will also was that his Son should make a speedy dispatch, to the
end he would preserve him, and that it might be an evident sign unto us in
this place, that in him the truth of this ancient figure should be
fulfilled. Here then are we to observe, that the bones of the Son of God
were preserved from breaking, because we might take him for our Paschall Lamb,
who should preserve us from the wrath of God, whenas we are marked with his
blood. And therefore must we come to this point: that since he is our Paschall
Lamb, we must eftsoons be dewed and sprinkled with his blood: for without
that, the shedding of it will do us no good: But when we shall accept him with
this Sacrifice, and seek remission of our sins also thereby, because we know
that until he has washed and cleansed us, we are very filthy, then are we
be dewed with his blood, through the spinckling of the holy ghost upon our
souls, and so are made clean: and God accepts and takes us for his people,
and we are assured that although his wrath and vengeance be over all the
world, yet looks he on us with his eye of mercy and allows us for his
children. We see then in this place, what we are to consider, when it is
said, That the bones of our Lord Jesus were not broken, to the end we might
understand, that the thing which was declared by figure in the law, was
verified in his body. And besides, it is also said, That water and blood
issued out of his side, and he that saw it, bear witness thereof. When we
see that water and blood issued so out, we must remember that it was he, as
Saint John says in his Canonical Epistle, 1. John. 5.6.
who by his sacrifice wrought our purgation and peace, for the blotting out of
all our sins. In very deed, Blood, when one is dead, will wax thick by
nature, and from it will very thin water come, because the color and
thickest of the blood will go from it. But howeuer it is, Saint John says,
that GOD would show for what cause the death of his son profits us, to
wit, Heb. 9.2^.
in the first place, he is at peace with us by reason of the shedding of
blood, for as it is said, There can be no remission of sins without the
effusion of blood. For behold why Sacrifices were used from the beginning of
the world. And God has said, that he would be merciful to all miserable
sinners which put their trust in him: But yet he would have sacrifices to be
offered, as if he should have said, that men should be freely forgiven their
sins, because they can bring nothing of their own with them to obtain it.
But must have a mediator to recompense it. We see then that the blood which
ran down from the side of our Lord Jesus, witnesses unto us, that the
Sacrifice which he offered, was a satisfaction for all our iniquities, so that
we are discharged of them before God. True it is we must continually feel our
selves to be gilty that we might be humbled, and brought to true repentance,
and be clearly void of all presumption. But howeuer it is, we are assured
that God acquitteth and pardons us in the name of his son, when we come to
acknowledge our sins and iniquities. And why so? Because the sacrifice of his
death is sufficient, to blot out the memory of al our transgressions. It is the
water then that cleanses. Wherefore, to the end we might be washed from all
our spots, let us understand, that the meaning of our Lord Jesus Christ was
that water should issue out of his side, to declare that he is in very deed
our purity, and that we must seek for none other remedy to wash us from all
our filthiness. And thus we see how water and blood came from him, by which
mean we are thoroughly saved in him, and therefore must make no wandlesses, to
seek our aid else where. But when we shall consider more nearly of the
matter, we shall see a very notable similitude between the blood and the
water which issued out of the side of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the
Sacraments of the Church, in which the thing that was performed in his death
is allowed and sealed unto us. For after he had suffered whatsoever was
requisite for our salvation, and fully satisfied GOD his Father, by
sanctifiyng, and purchasing us full righteousness, he would that all the
whole matter should be witnessed unto us, in ye two sacraments of his own
institution. I speak of two: because there are no more instituted in his word,
But Baptism, and the Supper. For all the rest is but a vain imagination,
devised by the rash boldness of men. Thus we see that our Lord Jesus
Christ powers out the virtue of his death and passion, as well upon Baptism,
as on the holy Supper. For Baptism is a witness unto us, that he has so
washed and cleansed us from all our filthiness, as that God receives us unto
his favor, as if we came clean and neat before him.

Now, we must understand that the water in Baptism works not this effect.
For how can a corruptible Element wash and cleanse our souls? But the matter
is, because water issued out of the side of our Lord Jesus Christ. And
therefore, when we would that Baptism should do us good, let us go unto
him who was crucified for us, and when we would feel the fruit thereof, let us
run unto our Lord Jesus Christ, who would have us seek for every part and
parcel of our salvation in him, without wandering and wheeling hither and
thither. And besides, we have in the holy Supper a testimony, that Jesus
Christ is our Shepherd, and that under the bread, and wine, he presents
unto us his body and blood. Here then we see the whole perfection of our
salvation, when as we are thus cleansed, and that God accepts us as if we
were pure, and righteous, and are so acquitted before him as giltlesse, because
our Lord Jesus Christ has made full satisfaction for us. Thus we see how we
must profit by the Sacraments, by directing our whole faith unto our Lord
Jesus Christ, and not to incline unto creatures. We see also how we ought to
be confirmed by the suffering of our Lord Jesus Christ, and let it be always
fresh in our minds, when as God shows us even to our faces, of what valor
the issuing out of blood and water from the side of our Lord Jesus Christ, is.
And so, this is in sum the thing which we are to consider of, concerning the
persing of the side of our Lord Jesus Christ. And besides, when it is said,
That the Scripture was accomplished, let us understand, that this was spoken
long before this time, that all was governed by the secret Council of God:
and although the Soldiers knew not what they did, yet God effectually executed
that which he had spoken, as well by Moses, as by his Prophet Zachary. We have
already seen the testimony of Exodus: and Saint John has also put too the
saying of the Prophet Zachary, whose words are these. They shall see him whom
they had perced. In deed God uses in that a similitude: For, Zach. 12.20.
he sets him self against the contemners of his word, whose hearts were
rebelliously and wickedly hardened. Well (says he) they think they make
war against the Preachers of my word, and that they may by this mean stop
them. Notwithstanding, it is against me they fight, and whenever they
contemn and refuse my word after this manner: it is as if they wounded me with
the stabbe of a dagger: and so shall they see him who^ they had persed. But this
was truly accomplished in the person of our Lord Jesus Christ, for they persed
him in his mortal body. And thus we see how he was manifested to be ye living
God, who was in all ages spoken of by his Prophets, since we see that
whatsoever was spoken, was accomplished in his person. Now, it is afterward
said, that when Joseph had obtained of Pilate to take away the body of Jesus
from the Cross, to bury him, that he took a clean linen sheet, and bought
sweet ointments also (which as S. John says, John. 19.39.
cost a great sum of money) of Myrrh and Aloes, and buried him in a new
Tomb, which he had new made and heawen out of a rock. In this Sepulcher or
Tomb, our Lord Jesus Christ first began to show the issue of his death: which
was, that he should very speedely glorify himself in his resurrection, and
it was the will of God eftsoons to manifest it. And here we see an infallible
testimony, that amongst so many confusions which we read in this history, that
might trouble us, and as it were shake our Faith, we may perceive that God had
always care of his only Son, as of the head of his Church, and of his
well-beloved: not to the end only that we should trust in him, but that we
should also by little and little look unto it, that since we are the members of
his body, that the Fatherly care of God will stretch it self not only unto
us, but also to every one else which trust in him. But by the way, this question
might be asked, why our Lord Jesus would be so sumptuously buried. For it
should seem, that it was a superfluous thing, to use the costlinesse of Aloes
and Myrrh, and such like. And to say the truth, what profits this a dead
man, to be washed, and anointed, or to have any other glorious show.

And therefore a man would think, that this agreed not with the doctrine of the
Gospel, where as it is said, that we shall be raised up again at the
latter day, by the wonderful power of our God. Wherefore, it seems that all
those pompes should be naught set by, and be clean forgotten. And heerevpon
it might be thought, that Joseph his religion was but foolish, which should
darken the hope of the resurrection. Howbeit we have here to note, that the
Jews used these kind of Ceremonies, until the time our Lord Jesus Christ had
accomplished all whatsoever was requisite for our salvation. And the buryall at
those days were as the Sacrifices, washinges, and lights of the Temple, and
such like. And because they were rude people, it was meet they should be
handled like young children. In very deed, buryall was taken to be an holy
thing all the world over, and it was the will of God, that it should be engraven
in the hearts of the very paganes, because they might have no excuse, when as
they would be so beastly, as not to hope for a better life. Now, the Paganes
abused the same: But be as be may, it will be cast in their teethes at the
latter day, that they were over curious in the burying of the dead, for there
was not so barbarous a nation in the world, which made not great account
thereof. And yet they knew not why they did so, no more then they knew the
meaning of their sacrifices: howbeit, this is enough to condemn them, insomuch
as they departed from the truth of God, and corrupted the testimony that was
given them, which should have brought them to the belief of the heavenly life.
But howeuer it is, The Burial of it self, was always as a myrror of the
resurrection: For they put the body into the ground, to be kept for a time.
For if there were no resurrection, it were no matter if they had been cast out
of the doors to have bin eaten of Dogs, or wild beasts: But they honorably
buried them, that they might not be pulde in pieces, although they were sure,
they turned to dust. In deed the Jews observed many Ceremonies. And yet the
Egyptians far passed them: But this their great sorrowing, lamenting, and
tearing of their hair, were all but bragges. This then was the manner of the
Egyptians, whom the Devil had bewitched, because they perverted all good
order. But the Burial of the Jews, strengthened their belief of the
resurrection. And so, according to that which I have said, our Lord Jesus
would be buried after the ancient fashion, because he had not as yet, by his
resurrection, fully accomplished our salvation.

This is true, that at his death, the veil of the Temple rent in sunder,
wherein God showed, that that was the end and perfection of all thinges^, and
that the figures and shadows of the law should last no longer. Howbeit the
world see not this, neither was any man able to conceive, that all the figures
of the law, were ended in Jesus Christ. And therefore his will was to be
buried. And thus much for this point. Let us now also understand, that our
Lord Jesus Christ has purchased us life by his resurrection, so that we must
go strait to him, without seeking any other means to direct us, then such as
he has assigned us. We have also already said, that he has ordained two
Sacraments for our better confirmation. If the manner of the Jews burial had
been necessary for us, no doubt, Jesus Christ would have had it continue in
his Church. But he would not that we should stay our selves upon this earthly
and childish Elements. And therefore it is enough for us to use the plain order
of burying, and leave the sweet ointments which figure unto us the
resurrection, and was manifested in our Lord Jesus Christ. Wherefore we should
but separate our selves from him, if we would be thus basely and simply
instructed. For mark what Saint Paul says, Colos. 3.2.
That if our affection be on things above, we must seek it in faith and in
spirit, and be conjoined unto our Lord Jesus Christ: Colos. 12.8.9. and 18.
that we should bend our selves to him, and not be nusseled in any thing which
might withdraw, hinder, or keep us back from being united to him as unto our
head, since his body is said to be the Temple of God. And thus much we are to
consider of for buryall. Howbeit this is also to be remembered, that he was
laid in a new Tomb, which was not made, but by the singular providence of
God: For he might very well have been buried in a Tomb which had served for
that purpose long before. For Joseph of Arimathea had many ancestors, and in
such wealthy men's houses, there was a common Tomb made for the nonce.
Notwithstanding, God had otherwise provided for the matter, and would have our
Lord Jesus Christ to be laid in a new Tomb, wherein never man had been
laid. Neither was it without cause that he was called the first fruits of
the resurrection, and the first borne of the dead: who had been made partakers
of life before our Lord Jesus Christ. For we read that Lazarus rose again. We
see also that Enock and Elie were taken up, and never felt any natural death,
but were gathered together into an incorruptible life: Howbeeit all this hangs
upon the resurrection of our Lord Jesus. And therefore we must take him to be as
the first fruits. In the law, the fruits of the year were consecrated to
GOD, by the only bringing of an ear of Corn, and a bunche of Grapes, to lay
upon the Au^ter. Now when this was offered to God, it was a general
consecrating of al ye fruits of the year. When ye first born also were
consecrated to God, it was a declaration of ye holiness of the tribe of Israel,
and that God accounted it for his inheritance, which he had reserved to
himself, and contented himself with this people, as if a man would be
contented with his Patrimony, Eue^ so, let us understand, yt when we come to
our Lord Jesus Christ, we are al consecrated and offered in his person, to the
end we might at this day, receive life through death, and that it should no
more be deadly as before it was. And thus we see what we are to observe as
concerning the new Tomb: that is, that the burial of our Lord Jesus Christ
must bring us unto his resurrection.

Nevertheless let us look well to our selves: for all whatsoever that must
serve our faith, has been accomplished in the person of the Son of GOD: And
although we have a sure testimony that it is sufficient for us, yet by reason
of our grosenesse and weakness, we are very far from coming unto Lord
Jesus Christ. And therefore let every of us which acknowledge our offenses,
seek remedy for them, and be of good courage. For we see how Joseph and
Nicodemus did. Now, here are two things to be considered of for our example.
The first is, that they had no clear insight in the fruit of the death and
passion of our Lord Jesus Christ. Wherefore their understanding was gross,
and their faith very weak. The other is, that notwithstanding this extremity,
yet fought they against all temptations, and came to look for our Lord Jesus
Christ who was dead, to put him into the Tumbe, protesting that they hoped to
come to the blessed resurrection which was promised them. And although we feel
our selves weak, yet let it not discourage us. It is true indeed, that we are
weak, and God may reject us, when as he shall roughly entreat us. But yet
when we shall feel these wantes, let us understand that he will accept our
desire, although it be imperfect.

Moreover, since at this day, our Lord Jesus is risen in glory, and although
we must here suffer many miseries and calamities, and that a man would think
he were daily crucified in his members, as in deed, the ungodly as much as in
the^ lies do: yet let not us quayle for all this, because we know that we
cannot be put beside that, which is promised us in the doctrine of the Gospel:
and although we must run through a number of afflictions, yet let us always
have an eye unto our head. For Joseph and Nicodemus never had the advantage
that we at this day have, which is, they never beheald the power of the
spirit of God, which is showed in the resurrection of our Lord Jesus Christ,
and yet was not their faith for all this wholly morgaged. And since our Lord
Jesus calls us now unto him, and tells us allowde that he is ascended into
heaven, to the end he might gather us altogether, let us constantly persevere
both to seek him, and follow him, and that it is no hurt for us to die with
him, since we shall be partakers of his glory. And Saint Paul exhorts us to be
like unto Jesus Christ, not only as touching his death, but also as concerning
his burial. For there are some that could be contented to die with our Lord
Jesus Christ for a minute of an hour, but it would grieve them to do it any
longer. And for this cause I have said, that we must not die for a while, but
we must also patiently abide, at last to be buried. I call this dying, whenas
God sees us so suffer for his names sake: for although we be not at the
first, condemned, and brought to the stake, yet when we are afflicted, this is
a kind of death which we must patiently abide. But because we are not by and
by humbled, it is meet we should be longer time scourged, and be
contented, and patiently bear it. For as the Devil never cease to devise
whatsoever may withdraw us, and make us grow worse and worse: Even so must
we al our life long fight against him. And although this be a very hard and
grievous condition, yet let us tarry til the time be come, that God calls us
unto him, and not be weery in confessing our faith, and therein follow
Nicodemus, but not in his temerousnes. For when he first came unto our Lord
Jesus Christ, he kept himself very covert and close, and was afearde to show
himself a true Disciple (for we know that the confession of our faith is
required in us) John. 2. and 2^. 1^.
But when he came to bury him, he declared, and confessed that he was of the
number of the faithful company. Wherefore since he did so, let us at this day
follow his constancy. And although the world hates and detesteth our Lord
Jesus Christ and the doctrine of his Gospel, yet let us stick unto it. Let us
also understand, that the greatest benefit and contentation that we can
continuallye have is this, whenas God accepts and likes of our service, and
besides, although we must suffer and abide troubles here in this world, yet
let us know this yt because he has gloryously ryse^ again, that he did it
not to the end to make a separation between him and us, but that he would
when he see his good time gather us unto him self.

Moreover, let us not marvel although our Lord Jesus rose again the third
day: for it is very good reason that he should have some more privilege then
the common order of the church.

And herein is the saying of the Psalmist fulfilled. Thou shall not suffer
thine holy one to see corruption. Psalm. 16. 10.
And therefore it was meet that the body of our Lord Jesus should remain
vncorrupt until the third day: but it was for that time, so appointed and
established by the counsel of GOD his Father. Howbeit we, have no time
assigned, but the last day. And therefore let us abide troubles and miseries so
long as it pleases GOD, and let us understand that he will in the end, when
he seeeth convenient time, restore us, after we have been cast quite and
clean down, For thereunto Saint Paul exhorts us, 1. Cor. 15.10.
when as he says, that Christ Jesus is the first fruits: which is, to pull
back that fervent zeal wherewith we are often times too too much carried
away: for by our wylles we would fly without wings, and we are grieved
with God for houldinge us so long here in this world, because he will not
bring us to heaven even at the first, 2. Kin. 2. 11.
and carry us up in a fiery Charit as Eilas was: to be short, we would feign
triumph before we have fought a blow.

Now, that we might withstand this desire, and these foolish lusts, Saint Paul
tells us that Jesus Christ is the first fruits, and we must be contented
that by his death we have a sure pawn of the resurrection. Nevertheless,
because he sits at ye right hand of god his Father having all rule and
dominion both in heaven and earth: and although his majesty has not as yet
appeared, and that our life is hid in him, let us become like wretched dead
people, and although we seem to be living here in this world, yet let us be
as men quite forlorn: and abide all this, until the coming of our Lord
Jesus: For even then shall our life be made manifest by him, when as he shall
think it good. And thus we see what it is that we must observe about the
burial of our lord Jesus Christ, until such time, as we attain to the rest,
which will be a declaration, that he has not only made satisfaction for all
our sins, but also has by his victory, obtained all perfect righteousness
for us, by which mean we are become acceptable at this day unto the majesty
of God, both to have free access unto him, and also to call upon his holy
name.

And in this confidence and belief, Let us fall down before his divine
majesty, beseeching him to receive us all to his mercy, and that we may not
cease to have recourse unto his free goodness, how miserable and wretched soever
we be. And although we daily provoke his heavy wrath and indignation against
us, and justly deserve that he should forsake us, Let us patiently wait
until he shows the fruit and power of the death and passion which his only
Son has suffered, by which we are reconciled, and not doubt but that he will
be always our Father, so long as he will grant us this favor, as that we may
be able to show our selves his true children. Let us also beseech him that he
will cause us to declare this by the effect, in such sort, as that we desire
nothing else but to be wholly his: and as he has very dearly bought us, so we
may also of right, fully and wholly agree to serve him. And for so much as our
weakness is such, as that we are not able to discharge the hundredth part of
our duty, without he work it in us by his holy spirit: because the
infirmities of our flesh do always bear such a resisting and striving sway,
as that we do nothing else but even creep, where we should in deed march as
becomes us, Let us beseech him to ryd us of all together, that we might be
united to him by that holy bond which be has ordained, to wit, our Lord
Jesus Christ his only Son. That he will not only grant us this grace, etc.

The ninthe Sermon is of his resurrection, at which time was celebrated, the
holy SVPPER.
Matthew xxviii. 1 IN the latter end of the Sabbath day, which dawneth the
first day of the week, came Mary Magdalene, and the other Mary, to see the
Sepulcher.

2 And behold there was a great earthquake, for the Angel of the Lord
descended from Heaven, and came, and rowlled back the Stone from the Door, and
sat upon it.

3 His countenance was like lightninge, and his raiment white as Snow.

4 And for fear of him the keepers did shake, and became as dead men.

5 The Angel answered and said unto the women, fear ye not: for, I know
ye seek Jesus which was crucified.

6 He is not here, he is risen as he said, come, see the place where that
the Lord was laid.

7 And go quickly and tell his disciples that he is risen from the dead. And
behold, he goes before you into Galile, there shall you see him: lo, I have
told you.

8 And they departed quickly from the Sepulcher, with fear. and great joy,
and did run, to bring his Disciples word.

9 And as they went to tell his Disciples, behold Jesus met them saying, al
hayle: And they came and held him by the feet, and worshipped him.

10 Then said Jesus unto them, be not afraid: go tell my Brethren that they
go into Galile, and there shall they see me.


A Man would at the first sight think it strange, that our Lord Jesus Christ
would show him self after his resurrection, rather to women, then unto his
Disciples. Howbeit we are hereby to consider, that his meaning was to try the
baseness and lowliness of our faith. Because we must not build upon man's
wisdom, but obedientlye receive what soever we know to come from him. Again,
no doubt of it, his meaning was to correct his Disciples, whenas he sent women
to teach them, because yt ye thing which he had taught them served them to no
purpose, when it came to the pinch. For behold all the Disciples were
scattered, they forsook their master, and fear overcame them. For what
learned they for three whole years together, in the school of the Son of
God? And therefore such frewandise deserved great correction, even to have all the knowledge which they had before time received to be clean taken away,
because they had troade it under foot, and buried it. Now it was not the
meaning of our Lord Jesus, to correct them sharply, but to make the^ amend
their fault, by mild and gentle correction, in yt he appointed the^ women to be
their School mistresses. He had before, chosen them to preach the Gospel all
the world over (for they in very deed were the first Doctors of the Church)
But because they were such Trewands and so busy minded, as that their faith
was, as it were, laid asoke or saped, it was good reason they should
understand that they were not worthy any more to hear our Lord Jesus Christ
preach. And here we see the cause why they were sent back to women, until
such time as they had better acknowledged their offenses, and that our Lord
Jesus Christ of his mere favor and grace had set them again in their estate
and degree. And besides (as I have already said) we are all generally
advertised, to receive the testimony which God sends us, and it were by the
mouths of men of slender quality, and of no credit and estimation in the
world, for we indeed see, yt whatsoever he is, yt is chose^ and appointed to
be a register or public person, that the thing which he does, is received for
autenticall. Neither will men say one thing or another against him: because al
men reverence the office which he has. And shall God have less pre-eminence
then earthly princes, shall not he ordain such as pleases him, to be his
witnesses, from whose mouths we should receive whatsoever they shall say
without gainsaying? surely, furely it is good reason it should be so, except we
would become rebels against God himself. Here then we see, what it is that
we must consider of in the first place. Moreover, let us also note and mark
that although our Lord Jesus appeared to ye women, which was a very honorable
thing unto the^ yet himself not long after, sufficiently testified his
resurrection. Insomuch that if we close not up our eyes, stop our ears, and
become maliciously hard hearted, and blockish, 1. Cor. 15.6.
we are fully assured of this Article of our faith, which is of great
importance. For when S. Paul rebuked the infidelity of those that stood as
yet in doubt of the resurrection of Jesus Christ, he brought not in only
women, but also Peter and James and all the twelve Apostles, and five hundredth
Disciples more, unto whom our Lord Jesus Christ appeared Which way then are we
able to excuse our selves of our wickedness and rebellion, if we credit not
above five hundredth witnesses, whom God himself has appointed for the same
purpose. Neither did our Lord Jesus Christ declare unto them only once, Mark.
16.14
yt he was alive, but even many times. And therefore the doubt and increditlity
which was in the Apostles ought to confirm us a great deal the more: Luke
24.25.
for if they at the first had believed that our Lord Jesus Christ was risen
again, it might have been said that they had been ouerlight of credit.

Howbeeit, they were so slow of belief, as that it was meet our Lord Jesus
Christ should find fault with their blockishnes and faithlesnes, and besides,
they were so gross and carnally minded, as that they could understand nothing.
Since the^ ye apostles so hardly could come to this article of our faith ye
same ought ye rather co^firm us: for seeing they were brought to it, as it were
by force, it is very good reason ye we at this present should follow this
saying, Thomas, John. 20.2^.
because thou have seen me thou beleuest: but blessed are they with have not seen
and yet have believed. So the^, when we here it said, yt our Lord Jesus
appeared to 2. women, let us also consider of ye saying of S. Paul in another
place: yt is to say, we must not stay our selves upon men's words and believe
what they say, as they of quality and co^ditio^: 1. These. 2.13.
But we must rather lift up our eyes and minds unto heaven, and submit our
selves unto God, who is worthy of all superiority over us, and be obedient
unto his word. For, if we be not teachable, it is out of al doubt, that we
shall never profyt our selves by the doctrine of the Gospel neither must we
account it, for foolishnes, which we receive from the mouth and testimony of
God. And when we shall learn to profyt by our obedience, in faith, and in his
Schole, we shall understand, that to be subject to him, is the very perfection
of all righteousness.

Let us now come to the story as it is here delivered unto us. It is said,
That Mary Magdalene, and her companion, came the first day of the Sabbath, to
see the sepulcher: to wit the first day in the week. For ye Jews kept the
Sunday, which they called ye sabbath, for the day of rest, as indeed the word
so signifies, and besides, they called all the days of the week following,
the 1. day of ye Sabbath, the 2. day of the sabbath, the 3. day of the sabbath,
etc. Now, because the day began after the Son setting, it is said, yt the
two Mary's bought sweet oyntmetes, after the Sabbath was ended, and prepared
themselves to come the next day in the morning to ye Sepulcher. Howbeit they
were more then two. Nevertheless S. John names Mary Magdalen only: but S.
Matthew. names two of them, and we see that S. Luke faith ye there were a great
number of the^, and yet all this agreeeth well together: for Mary Magdalen led
the way, and the other Mary is eftsoons named, because she followed hard after
Mary Magdalene. But by the way, there were many with came to anoint ye body of
our lord Jesus: nevertheless, it is here namely said, yt it was they which came
to see whether they might enter the Sepulcher or not. We see then why these two
were here specially marked. Howbeit S. Matthew. says that the Angel appeared
unto the^, since there were two of them: but because one of the^ carried word,
therefore it is so especially named. In the end, as they were going thence, they
met with our Lord Jesus, who sent them unto his Disciples, that they might all
meet in Galile, entending to show them that he was risen again: for so much as
the City of Jerusalem had bereft it self of so notable a testimony, by
reason of their horible impiety. And yet for all that, it, still remained the
fountain of life: for out of it was the law, and the word of God taught:
nevertheless, our Lord Jesus Christ would not show him self unto his
Disciples in that City, seeinge the wickedness of it to be as yet so fresh in
memory: and on the other side his meaning was to conform him self unto their
grosnesse: for they were as it were so amazed, as that looks would not have
contented the^, with out he had taken them aside, and in such sort have so
showed himself, as that they might have been fully satisfied. Howbeit we see
that the women which are here named, forgot not to reverence our Lord Jesus
Christ as their master, although they were greatly troubled with his death:
whereupon may consequently be judged, that the word of God was deeply rooted in
their hearts: for although their faith was weak, yet sought they for our Lord
Jesus at the Sepulcher. And as for ignorance, it, could no ways excuse them,
because they should have lifted up their minds into heaven, looking from thens,
the resurrection that was promised them seeing it was appointed out unto them
by name to be the third day. Now, their minds were so occupied, as yt they
could not comprehend the principal matter, to wit, ye our Lord Jesus should
overcome death, yt he might thereby obtain life and salvation for us. I call
it, the principal point, because that without it (as Paul says) the Gospel
should have been in vain, and our faith in vain. 1. Cor. 15.14
Even so although these poor women, had a good mind unto the Son of GOD,
and knew that the Gospel which was preached unto them, was the very truth: yet
were they so troubled, and in such a maze, as that they were not able to reach
unto the depth of his resurrection: and therefore came unto the Sepulcher with
their sweet ointments. Now, this was a falt worthy condemnation: and yet God
accepted of their ministry: for he excused that, their amazedness, until he
had brought them back to the consideration of the matter. Hereby we see, that
when our Lord allows of any thing we do, it is so far of, that we should
make an account, that we have deserved any thing, as that contrariwise, he
of his free mercy and goodness allows the thing, which inverideede was not
worthy to be offered unto him. For God may always have good occasion to
condemn our works, if he would straightly examine them: because they shall
never be found unspotted. Howbeit, God spares us, and is contented to receive
the thing which we offer unto him, be it never so weak and fauty: so that we
deliver it up in an assured and pure faith, and acknowledge, that he accepts
us, for Jesus Christ his sake.

And this is it which we have in this place to observe. But in the mean
while, let us also understand, that it was meet there should in the burial of
our Lord Jesus Christ, be another manner, and a better savor and of greater
force, then all the sweet oyntmentes which are here spoken of. We have
already said, that the Jews customably used to anoint the bodies, for the
confirmation of their hope in the resurrection, and of the heavenly life: which
was a signification that the bodies did not so corrupt, but that they should
be preserved unto the last day, till God had restored them. But the body of our
Lord Jesus Christ was clearly exempt from this corruption. Now, it was not the
sweet baulmes which could do it: Psalm. 16.10.
but because it was said, that God would not suffer his holy one to see
corruption, we see yt our Lord Jesus was by miracle preserved from all
corruption. And because he was exempt from corruption, we are at this present,
certain and assured, of the glory of ye resurrection which we have already seen
in his own person: wherefore, we see the sweet savor of the burial and
resurrection of our Lord Jesus Christ, has so far stretched out it self,
as that we are thereby quickened. What then remains there to be done?
forsooth, let not us seek any longer for the Sepulcher, as these women did,
whose ignorance and weakness has stood us in some stead: but let us look up
into heaven, since he calls us thither unto him: and has showed us the way
thereto, and has beside declared unto us, that he has taken possession of his
heavenly kingdom, to ye end he might make a room and place ready for us, John.
14.2.
when as we shall there seek after him. Howbeit, we must also note the saying
of S. Mat. for, the angel (says he) appeared, who so feared the Soldiers, as
that they be came like dead men. The women also were in the like flight, but ye
Angel forthwith comforted them saying: fear you not, for I know ye seek
Jesus which was crucified, he is risen as he said. We see here how God, so
accepts, of the affection and zeal of these women, as yt he corrects
notwithstanding, the thing which he mislyketh. I mean, he corrects by the
mouth of the Angel whom he appointed there in his turn. We have already
said that it proceeds of the singular mercy and goodness of God, whenas he
receives our imperfect ministry, which he might very well abhor. Howbeit he
receueth of us ye thing which is of no value, even as a father takes of his
children many things in good part, which otherwise were very bables and
trifles, Thus we see how liberally God deals with us, and yet he would not
have us please and flatter our selves in our sins. Let us therefore behold
how the Angel corrects these women's imperfection: and although their drift
was to a good end, yet are they condemned of a particular vice which was in
them. And lo, why S. Luke says that they were most sharplye rebuked: when it
is said, Luke 24.5
wherefore seek you the living among the dead? but we are here to observe,
that the faithless and wicked soldiers, who had no fear either of God, or of
religion, were terrefied, and became like mad men: indeed the women were also
afeard, but they were forthwith comforted. And thus we see how terrible the
majesty of God is to all those unto whom he shows himself, and he does it
because we should feel our fraylnes, whenas God manifests himself unto us:
and where before, we were presumptuosly puffed up, and so imbouldned, as that
we thought our selves too be no mortal men, whenas God showed us any sign of
his presence, therefore it was meet, that of necessity we should be
confounded, and be brought to acknowledge our estate to be but dust and ashes,
and al our virtues to be, but as slitting and vanishing smoke. And this falls
out, both to good and bad. Moreover, when God terrifieth the faithles, he
leueth them as reprobats, because they are no way worthy to taste of his
goodness. We also see, why they fly his presence, why they set them selves
against him, and gnash their teethe, and become so furious as that they are
without all wit and reason, and do become even very brutish. But the faithful
although they be terrified, yet ar they relieved, and take good courage,
because that God comfort and gladdeth them. And therefore, the fear wherewt
the presence of the majesty of God terrifieth the faithful, is but a
preparatiue to humble them, to the end they might reverence and obey him as he
is worthy, and confess themselves to be nothing, that they might look for all
their blessedness in him alone. Here then we see why the Angel said, fear
not. Now, this saying, is worthy the noting: for it is as much as if he had
said, I will clearly give over these faithless and scombe of the world, for
they are not worthy of any mercy, and I direct my speech unto you, and bring
you glad tidinges. Be not you therefore afeard, because ye come to seek Jesus
Christ. Now, when we see this, let us learn to seek our Lord Jesus, but
not (as I have said) thus grosely as these women of whom we have spoken, did
(as indeed there is now no occasion to seek the sepulcher) but let us go
directly and without hipocyisie unto him by faith. And let us understand, that
this message appertains to us, and is spoken to us, that we might bouldly,
and without fear come unto him, and not in contemptuous manner (for we ought to
worship the majesty of GOD in fear and trembling) but how ever it is, let us
not be so sauadge, as though distrust had oppressed us. And therefore let us
understand that the son of God will conform him self like unto us, whenas
we come unto him by faith, yea and we shall be sure to find wherewith to
comfort and glad our selves, because he has purchased the kingdom and
principalytie of everlasting life, for our profit and welfare. And yet
notwithstanding, the women departed quicklye with fear, and great joy. Lo,
how the weakness of their faith appeared. I have said that the thing which
they went about was to a good end, but they kept not the right course: as may
be seen by their fear, for they were not fully resolved and assured of the
resurrection. And yet they had heard it many times spoken of: but their minds
were not so settled as to conclude for a truth, that there was no looking for
our lord Jesus in the sepulcher. We see then from whence this fear came. And
hereby we may perceive that this is a sinful affection. Indeed, we must (as
I have said) fear GOD, reverence his majesty, obey him, and wholly be
humbled, to ye end he might be gloriously exalted, and all mouths be stopped,
and he thereby be known, to be ye only just, wise, and omnipote^t god. But this
fear whereof mention is made in ye 2. place is wicked and damnable: for it
turned to the shame of these seely women, because yt although they both see and
heard the Angel speak, yet they thought it to be but a dream as it were. Now,
by this we are advertised, ye god oftentimes so works in us, as yt we do not
perceue, as a man would say, whether we have profited any whit or not: for we are so ignorant and so fantastical, as yt we are ouershadowed as with clouds,
whereby we are not able to behold the clear light, to be short, all the doctrine
of God seems to us very unprofitable: and yet we find some taste amongst,
which makes us feel yt god has wrought in our hearts. For although there be
but a spark of grace in us, let us not be discouraged: but beseech the Lord to
increase yt little that he has begun, until such time as we be brought to a full
perfection, from the which we are as yet very far of.

And although the fear and joy which these women had, be accomted and
condemned for a falt, yet we see that God continually governed them by his holy
spirit, and that the message which the Angel delivered unto them, was not
altogether unprofitable. We are now to look farther into the matter: and that
is this, that Lord Jesus appeared in the way unto them, and said, fear ye not
but go and tell my Brethren, that they meet altogether in Galile, and there
they shall see me. We see here in this place, a great deal more, how that
the son of God draws us unto him by degrees, until such time as we be
thoroughly confirmed, whereof we have great need. Now, this was sufficient
enough that the women had hard the message delivered by the mouth of the Angel,
and the signs and tokens were such as that they could not choose but think that
he was sent from God, for his face did shine, as it were. In very deed, the
whit garment and such like, was not, lively to express ye majesty of God,
howbeit the women had an assured testimony that it was not a mortal man which
spoke, but an Angel from heaven. And therefore, this was a sufficient testimony
unto the^, but yet they were a great deal the more assured, whenas they had
seen our Lord Jesus, whom they before knew to be the son of God, and his
vnchaungable truth. And this more fully ratified the thing, which they had
before heard by the mouth of the Angel. And thus we see how we may increase in
faith: for at the first, we shall not be able to understand, what power and
effect is in the word of God, but if we be taught well, something we learn by
it, and yet is this little or nothing God wat: howbeit, God by little and little
touches us with his holy spirit, and in the end shows us that it is he
himself which speaks. And then are we fully resolved, insomuch as we have
not only some knowledge, but we are also so persuaded, as yt when the devil
shall go about to devise whatsoever he can possibly, yet shall he never be able
to shake our faith, because we hold this principle, that the son of God is
our teacher, upon whom we stay, because we know him to have all mastership over
us, and is worthy of most excellent authority. And this we see was in these
women. Indeed, God works not alike, in all men. For God will so call some, even
at the first, as yt we shall perceue yt he has powered upon the^ wonderful
extraordinary power, and yet we shall be oftentimes so taught, as yt we may
plainly see our grossenes and weakness, to the end we might thereby so much the
more gloryfy our God, and acknowledge, yt whatsoever we have, comes al from
him Let us now come to ye saying, which has been already spoken of, Go and tell
my Brethren, that they meet all together in Galile. We see then here, that ye
son of God appeared not to Mary, and to the company which were with her only, as
to show himself to seven or eight persons, but his meaning was yt this message
should be published unto the Apostles, and ye it should be at this present
delivered unto us, that we might be partakers thereof. And to say the truth, if
it were not so, what should the story of the resurrection avail us? but when
it is said, yt ye Son of God was so manifested, and would have the benefit
thereof to be communicated unto all the world, we may now the better taste of it.
So then, let us understand, that our Lord Jesus his meaning was, yt we should
be certified of his resurrection, because that when we know in truth, that our
Lord Jesus is risen again, that therein consists all the hope of our
salvation, and righteousness. Not that he has not cleansed al our filthiness
by his death and passion: but because it should not remain and continue still
weak. And therefore, it behooved that he should pour abrod the virtue of his
holy spirit, that he might by his resurrection, Romans 1.4.
be declared to be the son of God: as S. Paul in the Epistle to the
Romans, and in diverse other places, sufficiently declares.

Thus now we see, that we must assure our selves, that our Lord Jesus is risen
again, and leaves the way open unto us, that we might come unto him: and
looks not that we should seek him, but has provided that we might be called
by the preching of ye gospel, and that his message should sound in the mouths
of those his heralts whom he had chosen. Since then it is so, let us
understand, that the righteousness which we at that this day have for the
attaining unto the heavenly Kingdom, we enjoy by the righteousness of our
Lord Jesus Christ, because he will not seperat him self from us. And here we
see why he calls the Disciples his brethren. Indeed, this is an honorable
name: and was reserved for all those whom he accounted as his household
Servants: and this kind of speech no doubt he used, John 20.17.
to show the brotherhood that he would, should between him and them. And so
also is it common to us, as Saint John more plainly declares.

Now, to say truly, Psalm. 22.23.
we must have recourse unto that saying of the Psalm, out of which this place
is taken: I will declare thy name unto my Brethren: which place the Apostle in
the exposition of the person of our Lord Jesus Christ, did not only comprehend
the 12. hebr. 2.11.
Apostles by the name of the Brethren of Jesus Christ, but gives also the same
title generally to as many as follow the son of god and would have us to
enjoy the self same honor. We see also why our Lord Jesus said, I go unto
my God, and to your God, unto my father, and unto your father: now this was not
meant by a few but it was spoken to ye multitude of all the faithful. And
although our Lord Jesus Christ be our eternal God, yet is he contented
notwithstanding even in the person of a mediator, to abase himself and come
near us, and to have all things common with us, in respect of his human
nature. For although he, be the natural Son of God, and we by adoption,
and grace, yet this community remains, that the Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ, is by his mean ours also, in diverse respects. For it is not meet
that we should be exalted as hie as our head and sovereign: and surely this
could not but be a wonderful confusion, if the head of a man's body should not
be above all the rest of the members, for otherwise it would seem a very
monster, and a confused lump: and therefore it is also very good reason, that
our Lord Jesus Christ should keep his chief degree, because he is by nature
the only son of God: and yet this lets not but that we may be joined with
him in Brotherhood, that we might freely and with good assueraunce call upon
God, and be heard, because we have familiar access unto him. We see then
what the meaning of this saying is, when our Lord Jesus calls his Disciples,
Brethren: to wit, he did it to this end, that we at this day should have the
like privilege with them, by the mean of faith. And yet this is nothing
derogatorye from the power and majesty of the Son of God, when he thus
conioyneth himself with such wretched creatures as we are, and be as it were
one of our company. Wherefore we ought to be so much the more in an admiration,
with the matter, whenas we see him use such his goodness toward us: as yt by
his resurrection he has purchased for us ye heavenly glory, for the
purchasing whereof he abased himself, and became of no reputation. Since it is
so, that our Lord Jesus vouchsaueth to allow us for his Brethren, to the end we
might come unto God, let us boldly seek him, and come unto him, whiles he
thus gently inuileth us: neither does he marvelous co^siderately, use his word
only to draw us, but adds withal a visible sacrament also, ye we might be
brought thereto according to our small ability. And to say ye truth, let it be,
that we be never so weak and blockishe, yet shall we not be able to excuse our
slacknes, if we come not unto our lord Jesus Christ: behold ye table whereunto
he has called us: and to what end? forsooth it is not to the end to fill our
bellies: although that therein, God declares himself to have a fatherly care
over us, and our Lord Jesus also shows, that he himself is indeed the life
of the world. Wherefore, when we daily eat and drink, it witnesses thus
much unto us, that our Lord Jesus declares his goodness unto us: But in this
table, there is a special consideration to be had: for it shows us that we
are the brethren of our Lord Jesus Christ: to wit, John 17.21.
that because (as S. John says) he has united us unto himself, he has also
united us unto God his father, and so by little and little tells us, that he
is our meat, and our drink: and we are taken to be of his own substance, that
we might have al our spiritual life in him. And this is more then if he
called us his brethren an hundred times.

Let us therefore understand and know the unity yt we have with our Lord Jesus
Christ: to wit, that he will have his life to be common with us, and his life,
to be our life: yea that he will effectually dwell in us, and not by
imagination: and after an earthly manner, but after a spiritual: and how ever it
is, he so works in us by his holy spirit, as that we are knit faster and
suerer unto him, then the members to the body. And as the root of a tree
thrusts out his substance and strength into all the branches, even so
receive we our substance and life from our Lord Jesus Christ. 1. Cor. 5.7.
And this also is the cause why Saint Paul says, that our paschall Lamb was
crucified, and offered up: and that we should now keep holyday, and be
partakers of the sacrifice. And as in the old law, when any sacrifice was
offered, they did eat and were merry, even so likewise must we now come and
receive our spiritual meat and food, which is here offered unto us in this
sacrifice, for our redemption. In verideed we must not eat Jesus Christ
fleshly, for he is not between our teethes, as the Papists do dream: But
we take Bread, for a sure and undoubted pawn, that we feed on the body of
Jesus Christ spiritually: and we receive a little wine, to show that we are
spiritually sustained by his precious blood. Howbeit let us with all note, the
saying of Saint Paul, that because under the figures of the law, it was not
lawful to eat leauened bread, and that we are now no more under such
shadows, we must cast away the leaven of maliciousness, and wickedness, and
of all our corruptions, and take to us the bread which has no bitterness but
the bread of pureness, and truth. And therefore, when we come unto this holy
Table, wherein the son of God shows us, that he is our meat, and gives him
self unto us for a full and whole repast, and would have us be now partakers
of ye sacrifice which he once offered for our salvation, we ought to look well
unto it, that we come not hither spotted and filed with sin and iniquity,
but utterly to forsake them all and be altogether cleansed of them, to the end
our Lord Jesus might allow us to be the members of his body, and by that
means also be partakers of his life. And thus we see how we must profyt our
selves at this day by this holy supper which is made ready for us: which is
this, that it may lead us unto the death and passion of our Lord Jesus Christ,
and also unto his resurrection: that thereby we may trust to have life and
salvation, because that by his victorious resurrection, we are made righteous,
and the gates of heaven in such sort set open unto us, as that we may bouldly
approach unto our God, and offer our selves before him, since we know that
he will always take us as his children.

Let us now fall down before the majesty of our good God, and acknowledge our
offenses, beseechinge him to have mercy upon us, that we may find favor at
his hands, although we deserve it not. And that he will not pardon only the
sins which we have already committed, but also rid us of all the faults
and miseries of our flesh, until such time as he has clothed us with the
perfection of his holiness, whereunto he dalye exhorts us. And so, let us
all say: O almighty God and heavenly Father. etc.

The first Sermon of the Prophecy of Jesus Christ as concerning his death and
passion taken out of the Prophet Isaiah.
Isaiah. Lij. 13 Behold my servant shall prosper: he shall be exalted, and
extolled, and be very high.

14 As many were astonished at thee. (His visage was so deformed of men, and his
form of the Sons of men) so shall he sprinkle many nations: the kings shall
shut their mouths at him: for that which had not been told them shall they
see, and that which they had not heard shall they understand.

Chap. Liij. 1 Who will believe our report? and to whom is the grace of the
Lord reueiled*
THe Prophet having generally spoken of al ye people of the Jews, comes now
to the head, upon who^ hangs al, that has bin before said. For their
redemption was only grounded in and upon our Lord Jesus Christ, 2. Cor. 1.20.
because in him, are all the promises of God accomplished. Now it is long time
past sithence the redeemer was promised: But when it was thought that the
ligne of David was utterly extinguished, the hope of the faithful might
altogether have bin abolished. For it was said yt God would establish a king
for ever, 2. Kin. 24.15 2. Chro. 36.10
and would set him on David's seat, and notwithstanding that he should have ye
sun and the moon of heaven, yet should this kingdom be maintained and
co^serued: and that although al ye world should perish, yet should this be so
stable and sure, as that it should very well be seen, that this was a kingdom
wholly consecrated unto God. And yet for all yt, it decreased: yea, and soon
after by little and little fell in decay, until such time as the last king save
one, 2. Kin. 15.7. Ierem. 39.6. 32.9.
was carried away captive, and all the kingly ligne translated, and as it were
clean cut of. And ye last king, who was created at the charge of an Infidel,
and an enemy unto al religion, in the end playing the rebel, against him, it
so fell out as that the king was taken, his eyes put out, he was indicted, his
children were slain, he himself was most shamefully condemned: and the
temple, with all his houses were burnt. What was to be thought heervpon?
Forsooth, it must needs be, that the Jews assured themselves by the Prophet,
that God would in ye end, take compassion on them, and bring them out of
captivity: For it was meet he should tell them, that, that which was spoken
to Abraham in the old time was not spoken in vain, That in his seed, all the
nations of the earth should be blessed: and that there should be a king of
the ligne of David established, whose Empire should be everlasting and without
end.

And therefore we see, why Isaiah restrains here his speech unto the person
of our Lord Jesus Christ: to this end and purpose (I say) that the redemption
and return of the people, which before he had spoken of, might be holden to
be most certain and sure. Now we have seen here above, Isaiah. 42.1.
that our Lord Jesus was called The servant of God, for so much as he most
obediently submitted himself for our salvation: yea, being he, who was Lord of
glory, the head of the Angels, and before whom every knee must bow. Wherefore,
since this name of servant is given unto him, let us understand that it is,
because he took upon him our nature, and yt he would not only abase himself
therein, but also be made of no reputation. For it could not be chosen but
that our transgressions and iniquities, must be repaired through his obedience.
And according to that, which he said to John Baptist, Mat. 3.1^.
he must needs fulfill the measure of al righteousness: Thus we see, that
although our Lord Jesus Christ was full of al majesty, and God everlasting, yet
because he took upon him our nature, and became like unto us he thought not
skorne too be of the lowest degree of men which cannot be gainesayd. For
although his divine nature was no whit changed Yet if we consider well of the
matter, it was meet he should abase himself, Galat. 4.4.
as he was a Mediator betwixt God and us: for it is said, that he was made
subject to ye law, although indeed he was no whit indebted to ye same, for it
was he that must rule all, and unto who^ al subjection was due: howebeit he
placed himself in that rank that he might free us from the yoke which we were
not able to bear. For the law was a burden to press us clean down, if so be
our Lord Jesus Christ had not borne it, and had freede us thereof by that
mean. Neither let us think it strange that he was called the servant of
God: seeing he refused not eftsoons to become our servant, which was very
much. For if we consider of our own estate, we see it is but a vain thing,
we are but silly woormes of the earth, and the Devil, and sin have power
over us: and yet behold how the only son of God has abased himself to
become our servant, Romans 15.8
according to the saying of Saint Paul. For he is (I say) the Minister of
Circumcision.

Moreover, the Prophet namely uses the self same words, to the end we
might understand, that whatsoever is here spoken of him, is for the common
benefit and welfare of the whole church. Now, we must consider whereunto it
was, that Jesus Christ was called: to wit, to be the Redeemer of all the
faithful and chosen people of God. And therefore, since this charge was
committed unto him, and that he was so called, let us not stand in doubt, but
that whatsoever is said of his person, is common to us, and that the benefit
thereof shall redound unto us, which hereafter we shall see. And thus much of
the meaning of the Prophet. Now it is said, that Jesus Christ being called:
which was to an office to save those that are his, should floorishe, and be
woonderfully exalted and magnified,

This was spoken to this end, that all the faithful might be armed against
the temptation wherewith they might be attempted before Jesus Christ should
appear in glory and majesty, yt is to say before that he, who was God eternal,
and full of glory, were manifested in the flesh. For when the Jews were
translated into Babylon (as has been before said) then was the dignity of
David his ligne clean scraped out and defaced. Howbeit this is true in deed,
that after the return of a few of them, there was one Zorobabell who was taken
for a Captein and chief: But he ware no Kingly Diadeame or Crown, he had but
a certain title of honor given him: because the people bear always a
reverence unto the house of David. Thus we see (I say) that Zorobabell was
obeyed: yea forsooth, but yet there was no show of government in him. And
therefore it was meet that the faithful should be armed against such a
temptation, and that God should assure them that the Redeemer should come, and
notwithstanding that the earth and all bottomless depthes should open to give
him place to come out, and that he might be advanced aloft, yet for all that,
must this thing needs come to pass. And so, it is not to be doubted, yt the
Prophet makes here a comparison between two contrary things: that is, that
Jesus Christ must be as it were long time hid, yea, and as one plunged over
head and ears in the bottomless depths: and besides, yt when he should come, yt
he should not come in such great glory and pompous show, as yt men should make
any great estimation of him: But contrariwise, yt he should be naught set by,
or else so co^temptible, as yt a man would think, ye salvation of the people,
should never be accomplished, and brought about, by his mean: and yet should
he be exalted. But it is a great deal more plainly expressed, when as the
Prophet says, That he was more disfigured then any man, and no form nor
fashion to beseene in him, as if he were not worthy to come into ye company of
men, but to be taken to be a most detestable fellow, and the very countenance
of him, only to be abhorred. Thus we see ye pretense of the Prophet, in saying
that Jesus Christ was exalted. Here are then two things, which should seem at
the first sight, to be nothing like, nor possible to be reconciled: to wit,
that Jesus Christ was not to be known: to be sought for, and not found: and
when he should be seen, no account to be made of him: last of all: yt there
was nothing to be found in him worthy of reputation, and yet that God would so
lift him up, magnify, and exalt him, as that he should surpass whatsoever we
might any way conceive of his majesty, here in this world. A man might say,
that these two things could no more agree together the^ fire and water: and yet
the Prophet says, that we must believe that God will in such sort work, as that
base beginnings shall be no let to bring things to a perfect end. Mark also why
it is said, that he shall be wonderfully lifted up, exalted, and advanced: For,
this was a temptation hardly to be withstood and overcome. Neither is it also
enough that God declares unto us in a word, what he means to do, but when
we see how his doings are withstood, and that it seems, that, that, which God
has said, is impossible to be brought to pass, yet let us be confirmed and
strengthened, and be able to have wherewith to overcome whatsoever may be laid
before us, to hinder our believing the promises of God. And therefore, this is
even as much as if the Prophet had said, My friends, assure your selves that
God will exalt the Redeemer, yea, he will do it in deed. But if we will reply
and say, you say well sir, but I pray you which way? For we see, that the means
are too too strange. Well have you no doubt thereof: because the power of God
is of so great might as you are not able to understand it: But (howeuer it is)
if you doubt, and waver, and fall to reasoning, and will not be contented with
these words, withstand I say, these fond imaginations, and be strong, set your
selves against your unbelief: and be of this resolute mind, that howeuer it
is, God will work far beyond your expectation, and far beyond your opinion
and reason. Thus we see the pretense of the Prophet by using these three, or
rather four kinds of sayings, which notwithstanding do signify all one
thing. And he declares it very well to be so, by saying, That he was foul and
ill favored, and not worthy to be looked on, because there was neither
beauty nor good countenance in him, but was as one cut off from the company of
all men, and not worthy to be placed amongst mortal men. Now, this, when time
serves, shall be more amply declared: For this very sentence shall be again
rehearsed, for a more large setting forth of the matter. But howeuer it is, the
prophet has already declared, that ye Jews, in looking for their Redeemer,
must close up their eyes against all such things as they have bin wonted to
seek after, and give place unto faith, and so be assured of the goodness of
God, although all were contrary to their opinion. And this is not only spoken
of the person of our Lord Jesus Christ, but also of the whole course of his
Gospel, and of the whole order which he takes for the maintenance and
government of the faithful. And therefore if we would be assured of our
salvation in Jesus Christ, we must in the first place, not be ashamed that he
was so disfigured after the manner of men, and being sent into the world, was
taken to be as one most accursed: and soon after, his Gospel was in such sort
slaundered as we see it to be even at this day. For if we be ashamed to receive
our Lord Jesus Christ crucified, without doubt we are excluded from all hope
of salvation. For, how are we saved by him? How belongs the heavenly
enheritance to us, without he had been made accursed for us, and not only
accursed before me^, but also by the mouth of God his father? Thus we see, that
Jesus Christ, the fountain of all blessing, has nevertheless borne our sins,
and was made like unto the old sacrifices which were called sin offerings, 1.
Cor. 5.^^.
because the wrath of God was showed in the^, and men were freed and pardoned
by them. And how could Jesus Christ be called our life, if he had not
swallowed up death by his death? Either how could we be exalted by him, but
because he went down into the bottom of hell, to wit, he sustained the horrors
that were upon us, and wherewith, by reason of our sin, we were held under?
For it must needs be that God must be our Judge for ever: and this is the most
fearful thing that may be, to have God our enemy. And it behooved yt Jesus
Christ should enter into it, as our pledge, and as one that should make
satisfaction for us, and sustain our condemnation, yt we thereby might be
pardoned. And therefore, let us think it no strange thing to see him thus
disfigured: and if this in our reason, be foolishness, let us understand (as
S. Paul says) that the foolishness of God surpasses all the wisdom of the
world. He calls that, the foolishness of God, in that our Lord Jesus
Christ was so abased, and surely, if we would here set down our judgment, we
would say without doubt, that it were an absurd thing. For, to what purpose
could it be any way possible that he, who was to be worshipped both in heaven
and in earth, should be so shamefully dealt withal? Thus we see how that we
in our arrogancy, and presumption, will, as rashly and boldly as may be,
continually condemn, whatsoever God does for our redemption: howbeit God in
his secret counsel shows, yt he has more wit, the^ we, any way are able to
conceive of. And therefore, let us in the first place hold this for a sure
ground, that seeing our Lord Jesus Christ was not only co^temptible, and
abased, but also made of no reputation for our sakes, not to forget (as S. Paul
says) to give him the honor, belonging unto him: for, his glory was no whit
empaired thereby, although al men knew it not: yet did his gracious goodness shine
so much the more clearly. And besides we ought to tremble, whe^as we see yt ye
son of God, refused not to be as it were disfigured, being ye very image of
God his father: Hebr. 1.3.
For, all this he did, because he would repair this image in us. And this is
certain, we are so spotted, as that when we shall appear before the majesty
of God, it cannot be chosen but that he must reject us, until such time as our
Lord Jesus Christ has set his brand upon us, whereby we might become
acceptable unto God, and find favor at his hands. So, when we hear yt he
was ugly, and ill favored, let us look well to our selves, and understand
that he, must take unto himself, all our spots and blots, to the end we might
be cleansed of them, bringing now with us before the judgment seat of God,
nothing but righteousness and holiness, which we could never have had, except God
had communicated the same unto us in Jesus Christ. And hereupon he says, That
the mouths of Kings shall be stopped, when as he shall have been thus exalted,
and that they should see such a change as never was thought of. Here then,
we are told, that we must not rashly judge, when as we see our lord Jesus
Christ to be thus abased, and naught set by, but we must consider to what end
the Lord has so brought him: which is, that such an excellent name was given
him above all other creatures, as yt every knee should bow before him, as it is
said in the second to the Philippians. Phili. 2.9.
For when S. Paul has exhorted us to modesty, and showed that we should not
esteem of our selves, he sets before us our Lord Jesus Christ, as a glass
and pattern. Who (says he) being the true God, thought it no robbery to be
equal with God, and made him self of no reputation, taking upon him the form of
a servant: yea and became obedient even unto that most slanderous and cursed
death, the death of the cross, and that, before God and men: and all this he
did, to the end he would take upon him whatsoever was dew to us.

Wherefore, says he, God the Father has exalted him, and given him such a
name, as that every knee should bow, of things in earth, and things under
the earth, and that every tongue should confess that the Lord is Jesus
Christ, to the glory of God the Father: and that if we would see what the
majesty of God is, and glorify him as he is worthy, we must needs come
unto our Lord Jesus Christ. And this is in effect the meaning of the Prophet,
That we must not for the baseness of Jesus Christ for a time, but believe in
him, and set our whole heart on him: and also consider to what end he was thus
handled: and that whenever we speak of his death, we must forthwith
remember his resurrection, and join them both together: For these are two
inseparable things, That Jesus Christ would suffer in the weakness of our
flesh, and rise again in the power of his spirit: and that in this last point,
1. Tim. 3.16. 2. Cor. 13. 4. Romans 1.4.
(as S. Paul says) he showed himself to be the true son of God. And we see
also besides, the pretense of the Prophet in this place. We have before said,
that this was not only seen in the person of Jesus Christ, but also in his
Gospel. For, how was Jesus Christ known? and what obedience did the world yield
him, when the Gospel was preached? We see, that they unto who^ the greatest
authority was given, did not only scorn and condemn men, but also beat them,
and scourged them, and in the end put them to most shameful death. And
therefore, since it is so, Let us overcome all such offenses, and being armed,
as the Prophet here speaks of, Let us consider to what end it was, that our
Lord Jesus came to stop the mouths, that is to say, to make men astonished, that
they should not be able to reply, as we see the Ganderlike gagling and
iangling Infidelles and faithless do. Now, it is true, that there is such
dealing, and they cannot come to honor our Lord Jesus Christ, because (as
they think) they have some reason, to say to the contrary. Howbeit, we are
here told, that if we did consider, wherefore it was, that our Lord Jesus
came, and what the end, and fruit, of his death and passion which he
suffered for us, was, that then our mouths should be stopped. For, when the
Scripture speaks after this sort, it brings us to a consideration of the
sure established, and settled works of God. For, so long as our mouths are
open, (as I have already said) we will enter into the cause, and so reason,
as that God shall be shut clean out of the doors, and whatsoever he has
done, shall be naught set by. But when it is said, that every mouth shall
hold it peace, and be silent before the Lord, this shows that all our
reasons should be daunted and emprisoned, yea even to bridle our tongues, that
we might quietly confess, that God is to be glorified in the person of his
only Son. And if this be said of Princes, what shall the common people do?
We are therefore, thoroughly to consider of the order which the Prophet here
sets down: For he gives us this animaduersion or warning, that our Lord
Jesus Christ must be as it were ugly and ill favored, and be refused of the
world. Wherefore, since the holy Ghost thus warns us, Let us not think it
strange, nor yet be careless to embrase him with a lively faith: and
although his Cross (which is a detestable Gallow tree in the sight of men)
might withdraw us, and altogether estraunge us from him, yet let not us be
slack in seeking after our whole glory, to wit, in Jesus Christ crucified.
Moreover, let us not stay our selves upon his suffering, whereby we might
conceive a great shame in him, whereunto he willingly submitted himself for us:
But let us join his resurrection and his death together, and understand that
although he was crucified, yet that he sits as Lieftenant to God his
Father, exercising the most excellent government, having all power given him
as well in heaven, as in earth. And here we see, why it is said that he shall
be exalted. In very deed, that he was lifted up and exalted unto the
gallows, was in the sight of men a shameful thing: howbeit he mocked and
beguiled the Devil, and set himself against all the world, in saying that he
should be lively exalted: and when he was put to this shame, that every man's
tongue walked, and vomited out their blasphemies and villainies against him,
yet sits he in his throne, as we have alredie declared out of the place of
S. Paul. Colos. 2. 15.
And in an other place, he namely says, that the Cross, although it was
before time a Gallows full of shame, was now as it were a Charyot of triumph:
and that Jesus Christ has not only overcome the Devil therein, but also has
showed that we might now glorify our selves, for so much as we are freed from
all condemnation: that sin has no more power over us, and yt all the devils
in hell are altogether cut off, from all kind of pretense whatsoever against
us. We see then in sum, that we must ascend up by faith unto the glory of our
Lord Jesus Christ, to the end we might not be ashamed to seek for our
salvation in his Cross, our blessing in his curse, our life, in his death, our
glory in his shame, and our joy in his anguishes, out of which came water and
blood. And this is the sum which we have to consider of in this place. Luke
22.44.
Now, the Prophet namely says, That he will bedeaw, or sprinkle. In very
deed, this saying, by a similitude, signifies also to speak fair: But when
we shall consider better of the matter, we shall find, that the natural
meaning of the Prophet in these words, That Jesus Christ shall bedeaw all
nations is this: to wit, that although he be a dry and fruitless block, yet
shall all the world be bedeawed through his power and virtue. To be short, he
shows that God will work after an incomprehensible manner, and that the Jews
should not look for any worldly help, but believe that God will surpass all
men's thoughts and imaginations. For, when we are told of miracles, our senses
must needs fail us: and when we are told of mysteries, that is to say,
secrets, we must understand, that we are not sufficient Judges nor Arbiters, or
days men, to say, it must needs be so: But let us worship the thing that
cannot sink into our brain, nor which we cannot find out the reason of. And
thus much we have in sum to consider of. Now, this admonition apperteineth to
us: for, as I have alredie said, we should abide to be bedewed with our Lord
Jesus Christ: and although he has appeared to be as one that were fruitless,
and that there can be nothing found in him, worthy reputation, yet, when he
shall offer himself unto us, and come near us, let us not thrust him back
through misbeliefe, but rather give him free access through faith And this is
in sum, the thing which we are to learn out of this doctrine of the Prophet.
Moreover, he says, that all the world shall be bedeawed with our Lord Jesus
Christ, to wit, by the preaching of the Gospel.

For, they (says he) who never heard any speech of him, shall hear of him:
and they which never understood, shall understand of him.

Here, the Prophet amplifieth his purpose, showing that God the Father would
send our Lord Jesus Christ, not only to be a Savior unto the Jews
(although he was lively promised unto them) but also unto the whole world.
Now, to prove the meaning of the Prophet to be thus, Romans 15.21
S. Paul himself says as much in his Epistle to the Romans, applying this
saying unto his, being sent into strange countries, having traveled here and
there, filling all nations with the Gospel, and in such places as God was
never spoken of, preaching not only unto the Jews, but also unto the Gentiles.

Thus we see the drift of the Prophet: and this place ought to be as a keye,
to open unto us the kingdom God. For if Jesus Christ had not been promised
but only to the ligne of Abraham, what had we been the better for him? For
although he was a Savior and Redeemer, yet is this nothing to us, we have
neither part nor portion herein. But because it was told of so long time,
before he was sent, that he should bedeaw all people: Forsooth, because that
they which never before understood, might understand: and that they to whom it
was never before told, might hear: Let us understand, that our God had
adopted us, when as Jesus Christ came into the world, and that he
accomplished whatsoever was requisite and necessary for our salvation:
insomuch that the Gospel is now as a rain to give us heavenly strength, by
reason we are altogether fruitless, and because we are hunger steruen, and
void of the grace of God, we must be strengthened by the doctrine of the
Gospel, that we might feel what the death of our Redeemer is worth, and
what it avails us, and that his life is the perfection of our joy. Now, it is
most certain, that the Prophet would never have spoken here of the Jews, had
they not bin brought up and acquainted with the law: but would have included
the strange nations, who before had been brought up in all superstition and
idolatry. For all the world cut off the God of Israel, and had him in contempt,
and the Gentiles, made a scorn at the true religion. Now, it is said that they
should hear, and having heard, Romans 10.17.
should also understand. By these words, the Prophet shows, from whence
faith comes, to wit, by hearing of the word of God: But by the way, he also
means that it is not enough to have our ears beaten with the hearing of the
Gospel, without we understand it. Now, this is not given to all men: and
therefore this saying must be restrained unto Gods chosen people, and to such
as are renewed by the holy Ghost: as also it is more lively declared when as he
says, Who will believe our preaching? and to whom shall the arm of the Lord
be revealed?

Here the Prophet pauseth in the midst of his words, and cries out as one
that were merueylously astonished. And this place, is greatly worth the noting.
We have heard, that he exhorts the faithful to magnanimity and constancy,
as if he had said, My good friends, be not abashed although your Redeemer
be of no estimation nor credit, in the world, but is rather spetted upon,
despighted, and also accursed and banned: yet let not us for all this loath
him, because God has so ordained it. But in the end you shall see, that when
he arose again out of the bottomless depth of death, he was so highly
exalted, as that he had al power given him both in heaven and in earth. And
therefore, stick not to worship this Redeemer, who has so abased himself for
your benefit.

Now in very deed, he compares him to rain, and says that God shall bedeaw
or sprinckle those which never understood the truth, but were as a man would
say like unto brute beasts. They, says he, shall be taught, and be made
partakers of the benefit which was purchased, and the Church of God shall be so
spread over the face of ye whole earth, as that they which have blaspemed this
sincere doctrine, shall have their mouths stopped, except they will most
reverently and soberly confess, that there is none but the GOD of Israel that
is to be honored, and that his only Son, the very lively Image of his
glory and Majesty, ought to be received and worshipped. Yea kings themselves
although they be never so proudly bente, shall be enforced to abase themselves,
and most willingly obey. Thus we see how honorable the words of the Prophet
are.

Now, he foreseeth that when the Gospel shall be preached throughout the
face of the whole earth, that some will make a jest at it, some will be mad
at it, some will never find any taste in it, some will be blockishe, other
some will hypocritically lie unto GOD, and make a show that they love and obey
the Gospel, and yet all shall be but plain dissembling. Wherefore, the
Prophet seeing the world to be thus wicked, and foreseeing that God should
not be heard, nor yet his word so reverently received as it ought, wondered,
and cried out saying, Who shall believe our doctrine? As if he should have
said, Alas, I preach here salvation unto the world, but it is all lost
labor without this remedy be had: to wit, that GOD will send his only
son, to fight against the Devil and death, that he might thereby purchase
us righteousness, and life: For this doctrine is it that must bedeawe all the
world over, otherwise we are very fruitless. There is in us nothing but
drynes and wretchedness: and yet God tarrieth not until such time as we
desire him to bedeawe us but comes first to us and franckly offers
himself, presenting unto us his only son with his doctrine: and herein, he
shows himself so loving, as that he ought to be received without
gaynesaying: yea should not every man be so zelously inflamed, as not to make
any reckoning of all the rest whatsoever, for the imbrasing of this Redeemer
which has appeared. Now, this deed is so far of, as that a man shall
hardly find the tenth part of the hearers which shall be earnestly touched.
And in deed, we are taught by experience that some make a test at it, as
commonly all these contemners of God do, in whom there is as much faith and
religion as in a Mastiffe Curre: accounting all whatsoever is preached unto
the^ of everlasting life, but as an old wives tale: Other some there are who
are not contented with this contempt of the word, without they go farther: for
they are stark staryng mad at it.

Moreover, there are some which blaspheme it with open mouth and othersome
desire but to hold themselves unto that which they have conceived in their
fantastical crowing brain. Besides, there are some so blockish, as that they
are neither named nor touched, more then stones, and othersome there are, who
though they have a fair cloak of godliness, yet are they liars and perjured
persons, and nothing in them but deceit and hypocrisy. This, we well enough
see, and although the Prophet had said nothing, yet we will open our eyes, we
shall see it to be so. And is not this a fearful thing, and a monster against
nature? yes no doubt of it.

Now, here might marvelous offenses be taken, to serve as it were for a bar
to keep us from coming to the Gospel, if we should look into the dealings
of the world, so that we might say, what? if the word of God be our most
excellent blessedness and felicity, how falls it out that it is thus
rejected. And besides, what is the cause that God suffers himself thus to
be scorned, and resisted, and that he makes them not to hear him, and to
give him ye credit which apperteineth unto him? So what temptations here are,
to cause us not to believe the Gospel. Surely, here is a great speak, as
though our misbeliefe did derogate from the truth of God, and lessened his
honor. And therefore, it is not without cause, that the Prophet Isaiah has
interlaced this saying. For if he had simply said, as here before we have
seen, that is, that all the world should be bedeawed by our Lord Jesus
Christ, and that the gospel should be spread al over, and kings and princes
should subject themselves unto him: we would at this present say, ho, this was
not spoken by the Prophet Isaiah for our time: For we see al to be clean
contrary, and in steed that the earth should be bedeawed for the obteining of
salvation, we see here to be a deluge or monstrous flood of al iniquity: we
see that we become as it were brutished with an hellish rebellion, even to the
casting of, of God and all godliness. To be short, we see the Gospel to be so
ill entreated, as is horrible. And since it is so, the saying of the Prophet
shall not be as yet verified. Now, this (as I have already said) were even
enough to turn our faith vpside down: but when this saying is joined with
that, that went before: which is, that notwithstanding that God sends rain
to quicken and refresh us, he bestows not this special grace upon all men,
to receive that which is spoken of: But that the greatest number of the
faithless will have their ears stopped, or else will be so hard hearted as
that they will be the more inuenomed to do mischief: and the rest will make
no reckoning of the inestimable benefit which is communicated unto them.
Wherefore, seeing the Prophet has declared all these things, and that we see
it, we must not be abashed thereat: But our faith should rather be strengthened
thereby. Here then we see (in sum) what we have to consider of this. And so,
let us make this reckoning that the world will never be converted unto God in
such sort, but that Satan will have the possession of the greatest number, who
shall continue blockishe, desiring rather to perish, then to receive the
benefit offered. And there are diverse kinds of them, as has been before
said: Some will be blockish, some will have a pride to jest at GOD, and be
so foolish arrogant as to condemn all that is contained in the Gospel: and
other some will be over head and ears in the carckes and cares of this world,
and will be so preuentyng of things by their cunning and deceites, that they
will taste of nothing that is heavenly: and other some will be so brutishe as
that it is impossible for a man to enter into their minds, to show them any
doctrine. And therefore, when we see all this gear, let us make this
reckoning, that although the Gospel be preached, and that the voice of GOD
resoundeth and ringeth throughout the world, yet will a great number of people
be no changelinges out continue as they were, so that all doctrine shall lie
dead to them as it were. And thus much for this point. We see also, that the
believing number is very small. And therefore we are to beware how we become
wanton, but let us rather understand, that whatsoever god has spoken, he will
perform. And in ye mean time, we should be the carefuller to shroude our
selves under his wings, by reason that the world at this day is full of
wickedness and rebellion In very deed, we ought to stand in fear, and walk
more carefully. For, if all men were well given to serve God, we should have
good examples on every side, which should sufficiently stir us up, very
valiantly for our parts, to bestow our selves, but when it is said, that the
greatest number of those which come to hear the Gospel preached, shall live
like Devils, and nothing else to be found amongst them but dissoluteness and
wantonness, so that a man would think that the world had conspired to
estrange us quite and clean from God, then had we most need to walk in
trembling and in fear, For, if God myraculously preserved us not, what would
become of it? And therefore, let all such as mean to stand to the gospel,
prepare themselves to withstand the like occasions: although we see that other
men do not their duties as they ought, yet let us take heed that we turn not
aside: But let us when we see the whole world tread the word of God under
foot, stick to it, and not that only, but let us so much the more duetifully
submit our selves unto our God, whenas we see that offenses and evil
examples, might give us occasion to slide away from him, and continue in the
Gospel whereunto God has called us. Thus we see what it is that we have to
consider of the Prophets crying out, when he says, who will believe our
doctrine? For, he presupposes that the number of the^ will be thin sown:
and whenas the Gospel shall be published over the face of the whole earth, if
we look what great effect it has wrought, we shall find, that it has taken
deep root but in a very few, for the reformation and bettering of their
life, forsaking the^ selves, and consecrating them wholly unto God: we shall
see, I say, very few such. But he sets down by the way, the cause which
at this present we cannot handle: to wit, that in it we should also note
that faith is an especial gift of God, and that to have our ears beaten with
the doctrine is not al, that is required: but God must also touch us, and so
work in us by his secret power, as that we may be drawn to him, and be
edified by the preaching which is delivered unto us. Howbeit because we cannot
go forward with it at this present, therefore we will reserve it until
another time.

Now let us fall down before the Majesty of our good God, and acknowledge
our offenses, beseeching him to make us more and more to feel them: that we
may come unto him so repentant as that we never cease all our life long to
labor for it, until such time as all our corruptions, vices, and wicked
lusts be abolished and we be delivered of them by his holy spirit looking
after nothing else but the glorifiyng of our God. And because he would have all
praise rendered unto him in the person and mediation of his only Son, let us
beseech him, that we may all most humbly embrace this Redeemer which is
offered us: and in the mean while be so mortified, as that we may be exalted
to that Majesty which he has given us, for the partaking of the life
purchased by him for us. That it would please him to bestow this grace not
only upon us, but upon all people and nations of the earth. etc.

The second Sermon of the Prophecy of Christ.
Isaiah. liii. 1 WHO will believe our report? And to whom is the grace of the
Lord reueiled? But he shall grow up before him as a branch, and as a root
out of a dry ground.

2 He has neither form nor beauty: When we shall see him, there shall be
in no form that we should desire him.

3 He is despised and rejected of men: He is a man full of sorrows, and has
experience of infirmities: We hyd as it were our faces from him: he was
despised, and we esteemed him not.

4 Surely, he has borne our infirmities, and carried our sorrows: yet we did
judge him as plagued and smitten of God, and humbled.


WE have already begun to treatise and say, that although the Gospel should
be published throughout the face of the whole earth, yet, yt it should be very
hardly received, and entreated, by the greatest number: which thing the Prophet
has also so declared, to the end the children of God might not be abashed,
whenas they see the faithlesnesse of such as have had their ears beaten with
the doctrine of salvation, and yet have cared no whit at all for the same. And
is not this a strange kind of dealing, that when God as much as is possible
calls us unto himself, and labors so gently and graciously to win us,
that we should peruersly draw our heads out of the collor as we say, and
even for the very nonce refuse to receive the benefit thus offered unto us? A
man would think, that this were an impossible thing: and yet we daily see it
by experience. Lo here why it is that the Prophet cries out, whenas God, as
it were, by the sound of a trumpet would publish his Gospel, and yet yt there
should be notwithstanding so few believers, he adds the reason, that it was
very meet that God should show forth his power, to grant faith unto those
which naturally would be faithless. What is the cause that we see so many
people reject, loath, and conceive so great an hatred against the Gospel, and
had rather be like unto them which so set themselves against God, then quiethly
come near him? What is the cause, I say? Forsooth, nothing else but yt we
imagine we have faith tied to our gyrdels. Howbeit, the Prophet tells us
another manner of thing, for he says, that although god commanded that his
word should be published to all both good and bad, yet works he such a
secret effect in his chosen, as if he made the^ feel his arm and power. And
therefore let this be our observation, that whenever the Gospel is
preached, it will be but as an unprofitable sound, until such time as our
Lord shows that it is he him self which speaks: neither bestows he
this benefit upon all men.

Thus we see, the power of GOD to be hid from the reprobate and therefore,
that this privilege belongs but to a few, who^ he has chosen and adopted to
attain to everlasting life, whenas he tells them that the Gospel is the
doctrine of salvation: and a most infallible truth, whereto they must stick.
Thus we see in sum, the meaning of the Prophet in this place. Now we must
heereupo^, be fensed and armed against this object which the devil sets
before our eyes, whe^as we see such a mighty number of people withstand the
Gospel, even of the greatest and highest in calling: for the^ we think it, as a
man would say, not to be ye word of God. And why so? verily, because we depend
too too much upon me^, thus we see how weak and unstable our faith is. And
therefore let us overcome the world, and let us understand that when God
speaks, we must submit our selves unto him: and although none will accompany
us herein, but be all against us, yet let us for all that, be contented to
receive with a pure and clean faith, whatsoever God speaks unto us.

Moreover, to the end we might not be abashed to see men so wickedly bent as to
fight against their God, yea even their Creator, and Redeemer, let us therefore
understand, that faith is not given to all men, but is a singular gift which
God has reserved as a precious Jewel for his elect and chosen: and although
we understand that our duty is to cleave unto him, yet let us,
notwithstanding know, that every of us has not faith of our own proper
motion, but that God has enlightened us, and made us see by his holy spirit
and in thus doing has showed his power: that is to say, has given us such a
lively feeling thereof in our hearts, as that we may very well know yt the
Gospel is not of men, but from him. And this is the effect which we are to
consider of out of this place. To be short, let us boldly set our selves
against the faithlesnes and stubbornes of all such as are the enemies of God,
and let us march on, whither soever he calls us, and receive the benefit
which he offers us, to ye end we may be found blameles of this unthankfulness,
whereof the Prophet accuses and conde^neth here, all such as would not obey
the doctrine of the Gospel. Now hereupon he shows that they vouchsafed not
to believe Jesus Christ, because they see him as a forlorn and co^temptible
man. R^m. 9.32. 1. Pet. 2.8.
We know that our Lord Jesus Christ is called the stone of offense and
stumbling block, because the word stumbled at him. And yet God his father
gave him to us for another use: which is, that we might be grounded upon his
favor and grace, and as a stone upon which we might all stand: because
there is none other sure stay, but he. And therefore we stand all in reeling
manner, and Hell mouth is wide open to swallowe us up. Thus we see that our
salvation has no sure ground work in this world, and therefore must we stay
our selves upon our Lord Jesus Christ. Isaiah. 8. 14
Wherefore, see why it is said, That he should be placed as a precious stone,
upon which the Temple of God should be built, and such a sure stone as
should be able to bear the whole building, the Prophet also further says,
that he should be a stumbling stone unto the kingdom of Judah, and to the
house of Israel. And according heereunto: it is now said that he shall be as A
small twigge, and as a root coming out of a dry and barren ground: And that
when he should be seen, no man should once vouchsafe to look on him: but
that every man should turn away his face from him, and abhor him. We see
now, that there are but a few which will believe the Gospel: for we seek
continually to make a goodly outward show, and would gladly that all should
be seen and come to light.

Now, the dealing of the Lord God was after another manner, when he meant to
redeem us: For, (as Saint Paul says) because the world would not benefit
it self by the wisdom of God, whenas he in such sort showed himself the
Creator, as that the very beholding of the heaven and the earth might have
sufficiently made it to have come unto him, 1. Cor. 1.21.
he then made an alteration in the world, and has used as it were, a
certain kind of foolishenesse to teach us For, (as I have said) we should
have been taught by the wonderful wisdom of God, which appeared both in the
heavens and in the earth unto the whole world, but we have been over
blockishe theerein. And therefore God has used a kind of foolishness, when
as he sent his only son, who submitted himself to all our infirmities, whom
the world refused, and being borne in a Stable, lead all the days of his life
like a miserable poor handicraftes man: and at last, we see that all men set
themselves against him: and so raged, as that they detested and hated him, and
to make few words, and well crucified him.

Now, this was a death which God cursed: and he was not only disfigured with
buffetting, spitting on, and crowned with thorn but also was accursed, being
hanged between two thieves, as if he had been the most horrible villain
that ever was known or heard of. And this was a terrible kind of death,
because it was accursed by the law. We see how foully he was disfigured: which
was the very mean why he became a stumbling block unto the world. And
therefore, the Prophet namely says that they would not believe the Gospel:
because the world could not conceive it to be a reasonable thing, neither yet
^llow, that the only Son of God, the very glory of the Lord, should be put
to such shame and rebuke: This eternal counsel of God, which was from the
beginning, could never sink into their brain. And thus we see the meaning
of the Prophet. Now it is hereupo^ said notwithstanding That he shall be exalted.
Although at the first there is no show of it, yet God will increase him: and
they shall see, says he, even before their faces, that although he was
miserable and bare, and a poor twigge, yet that this was no let unto his
advancement, nor to his glorious floorishing: because that God would put his
hand and bring it to pass. And besides, he brings us back to our sins,
that he might take away our conceived offense, by reason of the ouerthwartnes
of our understanding. Wherefore, to the end we should not refuse to come unto
our Lord Jesus Christ, by seeing him thus disfigured, the Prophet shows us
the cause why. For, to say truly, if we come once to the acknowledging of our
sins, and forthwith conceive of the wrath of god for the same, then shall we
come to our Lord Jesus Christ, and desire him to help us, and be so much the
more earnest to receive his death and passion: for we must understand, that it
is the most necessary remedy that may be, for the evil that is in us, Thus in
sum we see here the proceeding of ye Prophet. Now, when he makes comparison
between our Lord Jesus Christ, and a small twigge or branch and a root in a
dry and barren ground it is to show, that the beginnings should be base and of
no valor, so that all the world should scoff and laugh at them. In the
eleventh Chapter he compares him unto a sorry twigge or branch saying that he
should come of the stock of Isai David his father. And therefore, because the
kingly house was then base, and of no honor, he said it should be as
sometimes it had been, that Isai was a country man, and his children Neat
heardes, and Shepheardes. This house in those days was nothing, and of no
reputation: and besides, was like unto the body of a tree lying on the ground,
which men troode upon, and of no estimation. Jesus Christ then was like unto a
silly twigge or branche: But it is said soon after, that he should so
wonderfully grow, as that he should ouershadowe the whole world. Here, the
Prophet also shows, that it must needs be that our Lord Jesus should be
thus contemptible at the first. For if this had not been namely declared, they
might very well have been offended, whenas they see our Lord Jesus Christ to be
thus contemptible as touching the world. For it was said, that one should
continually sit upon the seat of David, and that this kingdom should flourish,
although he held the Sun and Moon. And now behold, that this princely house
was as it were razed and utterly defaced: and who would think that the promise
should be accomplished in the person of our Lord Jesus? For, there was no
likelihood, that he should have been restored to ye princely estate, but when
it is said yt this house should as it were come to naught, and he of no more
estimation, nor have no more rule, and pre-eminence, and that it should be
ashame, as a man would say, to see such a destruction and confusion: when the
Prophets, I say, have told this much, then have we a very good entree, to
wit, Jesus Christ. Neither must we be abashed, as at a strange and unknown
thing, although our Lord Jesus Christ showed himself, in so base a state and
condition. For, to say the truth, it is not in this place alone, that the holy
Ghost has thus said. We see also what the Prophet Amos says, That God will
raise this seat, Amos. 9.11 Acts. 15.16.
which before was overthrown: And this place is also set down in the Acts of
the Apostles, to declare that our Lord Jesus Christ shall begin to reign,
when it shall please God to repare the things that were confounded. And namely
it was said, that this kingdom, with the kingly crown, should be trod under
foot as it were, and have no head, until such time as the Redeemer were come
into the world. And therefore all these things should confirm and strengthen
us, to the end these base beginnings of our Lord Jesus Christ might not seem
strange unto us. Moreover, by this saying of a desert or barre^ land, the
Prophet means, that it should seem, that our Lord Jesus should no more
increase or grow up, then a tree in the desert, where is neither moystnesse nor
any goodness. Behold then he is like unto a disfigured or ill favored tree,
which wants nourishmente, and the substance and moisture of the earth.

Now, it is said that Jesus Christ shall be so from the beginning, expressing
thereby that there should be no means here on earth to make him flourish, but
that he should be increased from heaven, and that by the secret power of God
his Father: and not be aided by the world, because it is altogether barren and
fruitless. And this was not only said of his birth, but is also to be referred
to the whole course of the Gospel. In deed, this was a sign that Jesus
Christ was but a poor twig, whenas he could not get a place to be lodged
amongst men, but was like one that was banished and excluded from all company,
and so poorly brought up as ever was man. And this was to prepare the hearts
of the faithful to understand that Jesus Christ should be rejected and
conte^ned as touching the world: but the principal matter for the^ to
understand was, when he should come to preach the Gospel, and execute the
charge committed unto him by God his father. For then they began to say, Is not
this the Carpe^ters son, do not we know his bringing up? And in what school
he has learned to be so great a Doctor? Mat. 15.55
And his kindred seeing him to be so extreemely hated, would have made him
believe yt he had been mad, and that he must be tied, and kept from doing his
duty, for fear the people would have stoned the^ all to death: for they saw
well enough that this malice would stretch it self forth to the whole family
and kindred, And at last, behold Jesus Christ was crucified. So that the^ a man
would have thought the gospel had been clearly buried with him, and the
remembrance thereof quite put out. Who would have said that the Apostles had
ever been able thus to have set forth the doctrine of the Gospel: For, mark
what simple men they were, such as never knew what learning meant, altogether
unacquainted with the holy scripture, and utterly without skill and ability:
and besides, a refuse people, who^ no man would vouchsafe to hear, although in
very deed they had spoken with ye tongues of Angels. And what is to be seen
herein, but eue^ a very wilderness? where are ye honorable shows, and
preparatio^s, yt should make kings and princes to stoop to ye gospel. For
sooth, here are none at al. But on the contrary part, behold naked swords,
fire and faggot, to stop the course thereof. Wherefore, we right well see yt it
was like unto a small graffe planted in a barre^ land. And who would say yt it
should grow to be a tree to ouershadow all the world, under ye which every man
might shroud himself? who was ever able to immagine this, seeing so unlikely
beginnings. Therefore it is not without cause yt the prophet Isaiah declares, yt
the world wc is too too much addicted to glory, will never vouchsafe to look
upon our Lord Jesus Christ, but rather despise him, because he is like unto a
little twigge and science of a tree taken out of a barren land, where was
neither water, moisture, substance, or yet strength.

Now, this is namely laid before us, to the end we might not be drawn away
through any such offense, but be able redily to come unto our Lord Jesus
Christ. And therefore, when we hear after what sort the Gospel shall be
preached unto the world, and that we see the like of it at this day: to wit,
that the church shall be as a small handful of rascal people, and that we
shall be abhorred of all those that bear the greatest sway in the world, let
not us for all that be faint hearted. For we see how our Lord Jesus Christ
appeared at ye first, and although his meaning is that his kingdom should be
conserved after this manner at this day, yet let not that stay us from yielding
our obedience unto him. 1. Cor. 1.25.
And since we know (as S. Paul says) yt the foolishness of God has
surpassed the wisdom of man, let not us be so arrogantly minded as to set our
selves against it: But let us understand that as God his meaning was to make
his son of no reputation, so likewise intended he to exalt him above the
heavens: and let not us find fault with that which he has ordained in his
secret counsel, but therein rest our selves.

Moreover, let us well consider of these words, That he shall sprout up before
him. For, if we, through our pride and disdain, think to tread Jesus Christ
underfoot, and keep him under, we deceive our selves: because he shall grow up
in despite of man's incredulity, malice, unthankfulness, and enmity, but it
shall be, before God. It is true also, that he grows up as well before the
faithful: because they must obediently worship him, and acknowledge that the
excellent name which god has given him, is worthy to have every knee bow unto
it. But the Prophet has namely said, that he shall grow up before God,
setting here a balance as it were between such me^ as go about to overthrow
and suppress the glory of our Lord Jesus Christ: and besides, God his father
who will give him his hand, will bring it so to pass, as yt nothing shall be able
to keep him from attaining unto the fruit of his glory and Majesty,
whereunto he is called. Thus we see the very natural and true meaning of
these words, That to the outward show, our Lord Jesus is but as a twigge, in
a dry or barren ground, because there is no means in this world to make him
grow up: and yet be as be may, he shall grow up. But how? Forsooth, even
before God.

And therefore, let it not dismay us, when we shall see men make a jest at the
Gospel, and to become as a flaunderous and shameful thing, by reason of the
pride of the faithless: But when we shall see the enemies of the truth ware
to arrogant, and lift up their horns against our Lord Jesus Christ, and
furiously fight against him, let us turn away our faces from it: and not be so
foolish as to set light by the son of God, because it is not the blind, and
such as Satan possesses, and who are altogether bewitched, that do praise and
magnify him and his worthiness: but let us rather look unto God, and then
shall we be thoroughly instructed in our faith. For since Jesus Christ so
grows up before God his Father, it is good reason that we for our parts
should magnify him, and yield him the honor that belongs unto him: To be
short, let us learn to stay our selves wholly upon god, and the^ we may boldly
and freely stand against all the world. And although there be no reckoning
made of the word of God, yet let us yield our obedience unto it as it were unto
himself. And why so? Forsooth because that God should be far dearer unto us
then an infinite number of those gainesayers which would withdraw us from
coming unto our Lord Jesus Christ. And this is a very necessary point for us
even at this day: For (as we have said) we see that the mightiest and wisest
men of this world, fight notwithstanding against the Gospel, yea even they
which are not contented to be called Christians only, but which also will be
above all others, in the highest degrees, and yet are these men, I say, but
Satan's supporters to abolish the truth of God, and such as set themselves
against our Lord Jesus Christ and his word. If this, I say, fear us let us
consider well of ye which is here said, That if we see men so obstinate and
hard hearted, as that they will not receive the son of God when he offers
himself unto them, we ought to set our selves against even the mightiest of
the^: because then are but doung in respect of God. In very deed, as for the
present time, they are of so great Majesty as that to our seeming all the
world should bow and tremble before the^: But if we would lift up our minds
unto God, and look unto him, without doubt we would care no more for all these
fray baggles, then for a rush. Thus we see how we should lift up our faith to
the end yt nothing which is here below, might be any let why Jesus Christ
should not rule over us. And this is it which we have to consider of in this
place. But because God works after a strange and incomprehensible manner, it
should confirm us a great deal the more. For if the Gospel were preached by
men of great estimation, so that kings and princes, and al honorable estates
every where submitted themselves unto it, and that it might be thus concluded
whereunto we must stick, This is the heavenly truth which we must agree unto?
And every man is to favor it, and to put to all his force and substance. Now,
this were like unto a far ground well tylled, planted with trees and vines, and
sown with wheat, which at the world helps, and spares for no cost. When
land, then, is this tilled, and has rain in due season: and should continue
so, ever after: and to be short, no cost to be spared: Why? Surely this were
the very natural and kindly handeling of ground: and therefore a man would
think, that God had not put his hand hereunto. But when we see what
disputations and resistances are at this day to oppress the gospel, and what a
number of hired tongues for the same purpose (for not only the popish
hypocrites at this day, let out their tongues like common harlots to blaspheme
God and his word, but also a many of curres even amongst us) yet shall we
besides likewise see what cruelty they use against the poor children of God,
laying continually strange platfourmes to the devising of Edict, upon Edict, to
bring this doctrine utterly to naught. We shall also see at this day what vile
and scornful speeches profane men will have, because they would abolish al
religion. And therefore when we look upon al these things we must needs
conclude that God is above them al, and the doctrine victorious, and proceeds
from him* Wherefore, this ought to confirm us, yt although we see there is
nothing in the world to advance ye dominion of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the
doctrine of his gospel, but yt al things rather hinder it: yet notwithstanding,
that it finds an entrance and keeps his course. In the mean while we are
convinced of unthankfulness, if we take any offense thereat, seeing God calls
us unto himself, and shows us, that it is his ha^dy work: and therefore we
must necessarily conclude, that it is miraculous, to see the gospel thus
prosper. Thus we see in sum, how we must put in practice this doctrine in
these days. Yet there is something more, and that is this, that Jesus Christ
must be disfigured. The Prophet has already said, That he should be like
unto a small twigge: But that which is more, he should be contemned, refused,
and not once vouchsafed to be looked on, neither should there be any thing in
him, that were to be desired. And this is to declare, that our Lord Jesus
Christ should, as we have already said, be vily esteemed of the world, and
suffer al reproach and shame, as if men had not only forsaken him, but God
also. Now to seek our salvation, which is a thing so greatly to be desired, in
him, in whom is no kind of likelihood, this should seem to be a great abuse.
And therefore, if we will come to Jesus Christ, we must overcome this
te^ptatio^. Now, this is a very necessary point, first, because the Jews
looked for an earthly kingdom: for this was so covetous and proud a nation as
yt they thought god could not show himself merciful unto the^ except he heaped
on the^ great riches of ye world, yt they might live gloriously, and in all
pleasure: thus we see, what a redemer it was yt they looked for: and yet had
God thoroughly advertised the^, that the redemer should be like unto a little
twig who^ ye world should refuse. And this admonition was not only necessary for
the^, but also as necessary for us eue^ at this day: for this offense remained
after ye resurrection of our Lord Jesus Christ, for S. Luke says, yt the
Gentiles made a mock as it were, at Jesus Christ, and the Jews were
venimously and maliciously armed against him, and stumbled at him as at a
stu^bling stone. And of these examples, we have enough even at this day with
us. We are therefore to consider so much the more of this doctrine, that is,
that it must needs be that the son of God must be thus mishappen, and ill
favored, and that there should be nothing in him worthy commendation, in
the sight of the world: for by the way, we must always have this note which
S. John speaks of, that the glory of the son of God appeared in him:
howbeit there were many blind fools which never understood thus much. Now, when
the Prophet Isaiah says, that Jesus Christ shall be like a mishappen and
forlorn man, and full of deformity, he signifies hereby that it was
impossible for a natural man to understand that he was sent to save them,
and that he should have all power both of life and death, and that the fulness
of al righteousness, wisdom, and holiness should be in him no man, I say,
was able to conceive this in his head. Thus we see how this place is to be
taken: For although our Lord Jesus Christ had done many notable miracles which
testified his heavenly power, yet for all that, he remained still disfigured and
the faithless perceived it never a whit.

And therefore this place of the Prophet has fully been accomplished, Psalm.
45.3.
that there was no gloriousnes in Jesus Christ to draw me^ to like of him. It
is very rightly said of the Psalmist, that he should be gloriously and
beautifully lifted up above al mankind: But this is a spiritual beautifulness,
accordingly as we have already said, That the glory of the son of God
appeared in him: even unto al those that had had their eyes, and were able to
see him. Lo then how our Lord Jesus Christ has surpassed all men in beauty:
because God had given him infallible marks and tokens, whereby he might be
known that he was in very deed, the lively image of God his father. John. 1.14.
We have then sufficient reason enough to magnify our Lord Jesus Christ:
Howbeit the world knew it not. And so, we must come back again unto the
saying of the Prophet, that every man has turned his back, and closed up his
eyes, as against a most horrible and detestable thing. What? to seek for life
in death? to trust to him that could not help himself? to seek strength and
power in him, that was so weak? what a thing were this? To be short, we al
know, and have had too too much experience in our selves, yt as our Lord Jesus
Christ was abased in his death eue^ so will our faith he cast down headlong, if
it be not vpholden from elsewhere. When there is any question of the settling our
selves upon our Lord Jesus Christ, in running, and trusting fully and wholly to
him, then this consideration comes into our minds, what, how be this? why he
was so abased in his death, as yt a man would think al were marred, and clean
lost. The^ must we have recourse to this saying of the Prophet: that although
he was abased in his death, yet ye God exalted him above all the rest of his
creatures. And thus must we lift up our faith unto the heavens. But, he as be
may, let us learn not to take any offense, at the crucifiyng of the son of
God neither yet at the shames and slanders which he suffered in his own
person, nor at the disdaining of his members at this day, and at all the
reproaches which are done unto them in the whole world: let not al these
doings, I say, withdraw us from continually remaining firm and constant in ye
faith of the Gospel, Now, because this co^bate or conflict is hardly to be
performed, mark why ye prophet brings us back to ye reason, why our Lord
Jesus suffered: for, to say truly, it is impossible for us to trust unto ye
son of god, until such time as we are surely and certainly persuaded of the
fruit and benefit which comes unto us by his death and passion. And why so?
forsooth, because at ye first sight (as I have already said) a man would
condemn it to be a foolish thing, yt a mortal man should be the Author of
life: that he should die no simple death, but such a slanderous death, as God
cursed, even to be hanged as a thief upon the Gallow tree. Now when we should
see all this gear, no doubt of it, we should be brought into such a
marvelous hatred of the matter, as that we should never be able to come unto
Jesus Christ, but here is the rightest remedy that we have, that we
understand why he died, how his death has profited us, and what benefit we
have received by it: and then we shall avoid all offenses. As for example, if
grief and sorrow oppress my heart, and do behold the only Son of God
to be, as it were, troade under foot, and abhorred of all men, I must needs
enter into a consideration with my self: For if I look but only into Jesus
Christ, I shall pass it over, and make no reckoning of it: but if in the first
place I look unto my self, and afterward come unto him, then shall I find a
good savor and taste in his suffering. And how so? Forsooth if I consider with
my self that I am a miserable sinner, and have so provoked the wrath of God
against me, as that he is become mine enemy, and my Judge: if then I think of
my sins, and thereupon do conceive what an horrible and terrible thing the
wrath of God is, and that he is my judge to cast me into the bottomless
pit of hell, then will I begin to say, Go to now, what mean have thou to
make an atonement between God and thee? Art thou able any way to satisfy him,
only for the least offense that thou have committed against him? Alas no, thou
art no way able. Can I with traveling by Sea and land all the world over,
be able to make recompense? Can the Angels of heaven help me? No surely. Why
then it is Jesus Christ alone that must appear for me in my name, and he must
be my pledge and warrant. Thus we see that the death and passion of our Lord
Jesus Christ shall be no more any foolishness unto us: but we shall think
that because we were thus accursed, and had no remedy to find favor at the
hands of GOD, since we had so provoked him to be our enemy, it could not be
chosen but that we must needs be eftsoons subject to Satan and unto his
tyranny, until such time as Jesus Christ had delivered and quited us of the^,
Thus we see how we should begin to magnifye the infinite goodness of this our
God, which is an abhorring our sins, and by being a shamed of them as much as
is possible. We also see how this imaginatiue offense and fond device of the
death and passion of our Lord Jesus Christ, shall be blotted out, to wit when
we shall enter into the consideration of our selves, and truly try our sins,
and acknowledge that we are so detestable unto God, as that he him self must
needs come in the person of his son to make satisfaction for them, and to
repair our iniquities, to the end we might be reconciled unto him. And this
is here the order of the Prophet On the one side he says, that Jesus Christ
shall have nether form nor fashion, and that nothing shall be found in him
worthy to be desired. And that which is more, to see him a far of, would
make a man's heart yarne. Howbeit, when he had said all this, he adds, Now, it
was for our sins, that he was afflicted. As if he had said, Ah miserable blind
souls, you make no reckoning of the son of God: yea and every of you through
your unthankfulness shuts the gate so hard upon him-as that you are no way
able to come near him, to obtain the salvation which he brings you. And
what should be the cause? truly, for that you have not known your sins, that
you might be humbled, and because you are drowsy and blockish, and feed your
selves with your vain flatteries: but look into your miseries and
corruptions, and then will you be ashamed of your state and condition, and
acknowledge that you have none other mean, but Jesus Christ alone to be your
mediator, who takes upon his own person, the thing which made you the enemies
of God, who becomes your pleadge, and makes him self as a poor sinner, to
lay upon his own shoulders ye burden of your sins. Now, when you shall think
upon all these things, the^ will you find some good savor to submit your selves
unto ye son of God: and not cleave any more to your vain fantasies, nether
yet be offended that Jesus Christ was thus bacely accounted of, whenas you
shall understand in what condemnation you have deserved, and the recompense
and satisfaction due for ye same. Moreover, ye Prophet namly says, we have
seen him, and disdained him, thereby to declare, yt our Lord Jesus should not
only be conte^ned and rejected of the smalest number of people, but even of the
gretest number of his peculier people. for when ye prophet sets hi^ in ye
rank of those which had refused our Lord Jesus, he had a regard unto ye people
of the Jews, whereof he came: and he meant also, over and besides this, to
show that this was the common opinion as a man would say, that Jesus Christ
was rejected in all places. And therefore we are so much the more surely armed,
not to tie our selves to men's fantasies, when as we shall not only see in this
behalf hundreths of infidels, but also great troops, and mighty armies, yea
Myllions, that a man shall hardly find three or four amongst an hundredth,
which will quietly submit them selves unto our Lord Jesus Christ: and albeit
we see it to be thus, yet let us for all that cleave fast unto him. Thus we see
in sum, what we have to consider of, in this place. For, if we should at this
day come to voices, and a few weak people should behold it, what? would they
say, There is but a small handful of men which believe the Gospel: howbeit,
if they were the greater number, I could be well contented to go that way:
but for me, to thrust my self into so small a company, and forsake the
greater multitude, what a folly were that? Now, the Prophet, to the end he
might cut the throat of these objections, says, that there would not be
above four or ten at the most, but that all men for the more part, would
refuse to obey our Lord Jesus Christ. And no doubt of it, his meaning was to
find fault perticulerly with the Jews: For we have alredie alleged out of
the eight Chapter, that he should be a stumbling block to these two houses,
to wit, to the trybe of Abraham. We see then, that a man would have thought
that the people whom God had specially chosen to him self, must needs have
known their Redeemer. For, to whom was Jesus Christ promised? Forsooth, even
to the Jews: For it is said, that he was the Minister of the Circumcision, to
the end he might accomplish the promises made unto the Fathers. Romans 11.8*
Psalm. 118.22
And therefore the Jews must needs be acquainted with Jesus Christ before he
appeared unto the world, and with ease receive him: Now, it is said, that
the principal and chief builders refused him, to wit, the Princes and heads
of the people. And even so fares it at this day: For, not only Turks, and
Infidelles refuse Jesus Christ, but also very many false Christians in name:
yea, and we shall have numbers that profess the Gospel, who many times,
become profane, and villainous scorners of God, and would gladly that all the
doctrine of salvation were clearly abolished: for the show that they make of
it, is only for the shame of men. But howeuer it is, we are sure of this, that
Jesus Christ shall be refused and contemned: and if it had not been so foretold
of, our faith might very well have bin shaken. But this saying of Isaiah is a
very good staff for us to lean unto, even as unto a sure rock, when as we
see all the world thus stumble at him, as to see some, to set them selves
furiously against him and his doctrine, some to scorn him, and put out their
tongues to speak evil of all religion. But yet let us notwithstanding,
constantly persevere in our Faith. Surely, it is greatly to be wished for, that
we might see Jesus Christ a far off, and submit our selves unto him, because
he is the true Glass and pattern of al holiness. Howbeit, the more we see the
world refuse him, the greater ought our faith to be. For how is it possible
for us to discern, that Jesus Christ is the Redeemer of the world? Forsooth,
let us consider what all the Prophets have said of him. For, to say truly,
this is the only Glass, wherein we must behold the only Son of God: For,
behold the true testimonies which God has sent down from heaven to set a sure
mark of him, that should be the Redeemer, to wit, that all the world should
forsake him, and every man lift him self up against him. And therefore since
it is so, let us receive him with this condition, and not doubt, that although
it seems to us, that we should be utterly overthrown, and troad under foot
through the boldness and pride of the ungodly, yet that God will magnify our
Lord Jesus Christ, and so strengthen our faith by his holy spirit, as that it
shall have victory unto the end: and that as our Lord Jesus has overcome the
Devil, as in the end, both he, and all his Supporters, must be made his
footestoole: even so likewise, will he cause us to triumph with him to march
upon all those which persecute, and lift them selves up so furiously against
us, and against all those which contemn, and despite him.

Now, let us fall down before the Majesty of our good God, and acknowledge
our offenses, beseeching him to cause us so to feel them, as that we may groan
and sigh for them, so that we being after, truly humbled, may come to our
Lord Jesus Christ, knowing that in him must be all our help and comfort. And
for so much as, it pleased God his Father to punish him for our sins, Let us
set all our affection upon him: and be so willingly grieved for our provoking
of our God unto anger, as that we may have, both our selves, and our sins, in
detestation and hatred, until such time as we be thoroughly cleansed of them.
And that it would please him in the mean time so to assist us, as that we never
dout, but that he will be always merciful unto us, because that Jesus Christ
has not once only suffered to abolish our sins, but also, daily offreth us
forgiveness of the same, when as we seek that, at his hands, which is
wanting in us. So let us beseech him, that he will not only grant us, this
grace, but unto all people and nations of the world, etc.

The third Sermon of the Prophecy of Christ.
Isaiah. liii. 4 SVrely, he has borne our infirmities, and carried our
sorrows: yet we did judge him as plagued and smitten of God, and humbled.

5 But he was wounded for our transgressions, he was broken for our
iniquities: the chastisement of our peace was upon him, and with his stripes we
are healed.

6 All we like sheep have gone astray: we have turned every one to his own
way, and the Lord has laid upon him the iniquity of us all.


WHen we behold all the works of GOD here in this world, we are taught
to praise him according to his excellency and highness: But when we look upon
the person of our Lord Jesus Christ, we are then to magnify him in his
lowliness and humility. Here then are two manner of ways set down unto us
how to praise God, The one is, Because he shows us his infinite goodness,
righteousness and power, in the creation and framing of all things, and in the
ordering and disposing of the same, therefore we ought also to honor and exalt
him, not that we are able, to make him honorable: But the scripture uses this
kind of speech, to the end we might lift up our minds unto heaven, above all
worldly things, when as we would glorify our God according unto his worthiness.
The other is, that because our Lord Jesus Christ, in whom dwells the
fullness of ye Godhead, was not only abased for our salvation, but also would
be made of no reputation, no not refusing to suffer the sharp anguishes of
death, as if he had entered into hell: for this cause therefore, I say, is God
more to be glorified, then for all the mighty gloriousness that is to be
seen in all the world besides. And of this we spoke somewhat yesterday: But
because the Prophet goes on with the matter, we are to aim continually at
this mark, that where the faythlesse are abashed, when as they see how God ye
father, has after this sort afflicted and tormented his son Jesus Christ,
and do take occasion of offense to estrange themselves far from him, we, ought
so much the rather to be stirred up to seek after him, and to be farther in
love with him, since he spared not himself to take upon him our whole burden,
that we might be eased thereof. And therefore, when as we see that our Lord
Jesus Christ has made such an ^xchange for us, and taken upon him to pay all
our debtes, to the end to discharge us, and would be condemned in our
behalfes, and in our person, that we thereby might be pardoned, see what a
merueilous occasion he has offered us to draw near unto him, yea, to be
altogether earnestly in love with him, because in him, rests all our
quietness. Now, it is said,

That he was afflicted by the hand of God: but it was for our transgressio^s.
For if we look into the judgment of God, the death and passion of our Lord
Jesus Christ shall be to us as an unprofitable thing, neither shall we receive
any fruit or benefit thereby. For the principal point is, that we might be at
an atonement with God, who is our enemy, until such time as our offenses are
buried, because that he who is the fountain of righteousness, cannot abide to
love iniquity. And therefore, so long as he imputes unto us our sins, and
sees what we are, he must needs be our judge: But when as Jesus Christ comes
between us and him, and speaks for us, we are then acceptable in the sight
of God, because he has made satisfaction for all our iniquities. For, the
condemnation which our Lord Jesus Christ suffered, cannot be vain. Now, he, in
very deed had committed no fault, neither was he guilty in any thing. And
therefore he was condemned, that we might be pardoned: 1. Pet. 1.19.
for the which cause he is called the immaculate Lamb, which shows, that he
bear our burden. And for this cause also is it said, that his blood, is our
washing: For we are abominable filthy and foul, until such time as the blood
of our lord Jesus Christ cleanses us. Wherefore, it is not for naught, that the
Prophet brings us back to the consideration of Gods judgment, saying, That
Jesus Christ was afflicted, that he might bear our condemnation. To be short,
so often as we think for what cause it is, yt the death and passion of our Lord
Jesus Christ has done us good, let every of us put himself over unto the
judgment seat of God: and there we shall find that we are worthy of death.
Now, what is the rigor of Gods judgment, and how horrible is his vengeance?
Surely, it is even to swallow us up, and to cast us all down headlong into the
bottomless pit of hell. Howbeit, because God spared not our Lord Jesus Christ,
but laid the rigor of his judgment on him, and that he became our pledge,
we may now be assured, that God will no longer pursue us, nor call us to any
further reckoning, neither yet punish us according to our deserts and offenses.
And why so? Forsooth, because Jesus Christ has clearly discharged us of them
all. Now, this is true, that God was never otherwise affected toward his
only Son, then as he had pronounced, when as he said, Mat. 3.17. and
17.5. Ephe. 1.6.
This is my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased, hear him. God then had
long before said, that Jesus Christ contented him very well, and that in him
was his whole delight. And in deed (as S. Paul to the Ephesians says) it
were impossible for us to be acceptable before the lord God, in the name of his
only son, without in the first place he were the best beloved, and in the
highest degree.

Notwithstanding, this was no let to our discharge, because God had laid his
rigor upon our Lord Jesus Christ: For, although he loved him, yet would he
afflict him for our offenses. For he had no regard to the righteousness,
sincerity, and perfection that was in him: But rather took him as one that
bear the person of all sinners upon him.

Thus we see how Jesus Christ was charged with all our sins and iniquities: not
yt he was any way guilty of the^, but would have the^ all to be imputed unto
him, and take the reckoning upon him, and the payment. We see then how the
words of the Prophet are to be understood, when he says that Jesus Christ
was not crucified only by the hands of men, but that he also stood forth
before the judgment seat of God, answered for us, and submitted him self to
bear the burden which we were worthy to have borne. Mark also why he
says,

1. Pet. 2. 24.
That he bear all our sins and transgressions, for so are also the words
of Saint Peter, who naming the Cross, meant to signify, Deu. 21.23.
that, that kind of death which the son of God suffered, was a visible and
open testimony, that our iniquities were laid upon him: because it was said
in the law, cursed be he that hangs on tree. Jesus Christ was hanged
thereon, to the end we might understand and know, Gala. 3.13.
that he was as one accursed in our behalf, according to the saying of Saint
Paul to the Galathians. For he there tells us, that therein we are to
consider of the wonderful goodness of God, and of the infinite love of our
Lord Jesus Christ to us ward, when as he was not only contented to dye for
us, but suffered also a most cursed death, to the end we might be blessed of
God. And although our sins and iniquities have terrefied us (for it could not
be chosen but that we must be afeard of the judgment of God, when as we hear
the things that are here set down: to wit, that we are abominable by
reason of our thus offending our good God, and that our conscience so tells
us) yet let us be assured that he will forgive us our sins, and receive us
as his best beloved children: yea, even as just and righteous people, because
our curse was abolished by this Gallow tree, whereon our Lord Jesus Christ was
hanged. Lo, here the meaning of the Prophets speech, for the more lively
setting forth of the matter.

Now, he eftsoons sets down, That he was afflicted, because the
correction, or chastisement of our peace was laid upon him, he set down no
strange thing, but declared him self more familiarly, that he might show
how the thing was to be understood, and taken: which was, that our Lord
Jesus Christ was beaten and smitten by the hand of God, to the end we might
be discharged. And therefore he bear the correction of peace which was due to
us. In deed some men understand it, that it was meet that our Lord Jesus
Christ should be thus punished for our sakes, because we were stubborn, and
that none of us thought once to humble our selves before God, but were
altogether blinded in our offenses. Howbeit we see that this is the natural
meaning of the Prophet, that for the obtaining of peace at the hands of God,
it must needs be that we were to be reconciled by an other mean. I have
alredie said, that God being the judge of the world, could not choose but of
very right, hate and detest us: for (as shall be soon after declared) what
have we brought out from the womb of the sea, and what treasure have we
gathered together all our life long? Surely, we do nothing else but provoke
the wrath of God, as if we had made a league with Satan, continually to
increase, more and more, his fury. See now, in what sort we have deserved to
be hated and rejected at the hands of God: Behold how his wrath is kindled
against us? and it is impossible but that he must needs be our enemy, because
we fight against him, and with might and main make such wars, as that we
vyolate and break all order of justice. And therefore (I say) must God, in
this respect, rise up in judgment against us: because, we know it to be his
very office, to maintain and defend equity and right. Wherefore since it is
so, that he sees us to be full of iniquity and corruption, and altogether
rebellious, it is meet he should stretch forth his arm, and show, that
because we are his enemies, he will render us the like.

And therefore we had need to have peace, and our consciences will always
witness against us: and although we go about carelessly to sleep in our
flatteryes, yet will GOD so prick and spur us, and make us feel in despite
of our teeth, that we are altogether malicious and unthankful. Wherefore it
is impossible that GOD should be merciful unto us, and we to be assured to
find favor with him, until such time as we feel his correction. Not that
GOD is desirous of revenge as men are.

For, a man when he is in an heat, would have the fault that is committed to
be amended, and some redress and punishment to be made, and had, that he
might be revenged. Howbeit there are no such passions in God. But how ever the
case stands, God will have his justice and judgment to be known and feared,
to the end we might the rather be afearde of our sins, and learn to
abhor and detest them. For if GOD would have forgiven us, except Jesus
Christ had made intercession, and pawned him self for us, we would have made
no account of the matter: and every of us would have smoothed him self, and
would have taken also a greater occasion of lycense to sin. But when we see
that God has not spared, so rigorously and extremely to handle his only
Son, as that he did not only cause him to suffer the most grievous torments
in body that might be, but also, so extremely afflicted his soul, as that he
made him to cry out and say, My God, My God, why haste thou forsaken me? Mat.
27.46.
When we see all these things, I say, it is impossible (except our hearts
be harder then flynt stones) but that we must be grieved, and conceive such
a fear, as that it must utterly confound us: and neither will nor choose but
detest our sins and iniquities, since they so provoke the heavy wrath of God
against us.

Thus we see why it was requisite that our whole correction of peace should
be laid upon Jesus Christ, to the end we might find favor before God his
Father: that is to say, that we might be at such a league with him, as that we
might at this day be bold, and free, to call upon God as our Father, although
of very right he is our enemy, and hates us, as we are in our own nature.

We see then at this present, what the Prophet his meaning is, when he
says, that our Lord Jesus Christ was afflicted by the hand of God,
disfigured, and forsaken of all men, and that no man once vouchsafed to look
upon him, by reason of his merueylous deformity. Howbeit, he says, that it
was because God had kindled his wrath against us, and was armed and bent to
co^founde and throw us down headlong into the pit of hell, until such time
as that atonement was made. And which way came it to pass? Forsooth, God of
his mere mercy and goodness, freely forgiueth us our sins: howbeit, the
price of our redemption was in the person of his only Son.

Now we have here to note that by reason of the condemnation of our Lord Jesus
Christ, we are pardoned, and al our sins buried, and shall never again rise up
against us before the majesty of God: when we speak of ye forgiveness of our
sins, it is not spoken as though God had so discharged us, as if we, had
thoroughly contented and paid him: but we are acquitted by his mere liberality.
And although we are guilty before him, yet forgets he al, and receives us
to mercy, Mat. 7.19.
because, as the prophet says, he casts our sins into the bottom of the
sea: but by the way we have also here to note, yt this was no free forgiveness
unto ye person of our lord Jesus Christ, for it cost him the setting on, as we
say. Now if we consider, what a grievous, cruel, and slanderous death this was
which he abode: and besides, what anguishes his soul endured, when he was
called before the judgment seat of God his father to abide our comdemnation:
if we consider well, of all this gear I say, we shall find yt our Lord Jesus
Christ has made a woonderful payment for the discharging of our sins. Lo
here, how we at this day are freed of the^. And heerof, we are thoroughly to
consider: for the devil has continually gone about to darke^ this doctrine,
because it is the chiefest article of our faith. In the beginning of the world,
God would have sacrifices offered unto him, for the forgiveness of sins. And
why was that? Forsooth, it was to this end and purpose, that men should not
trust unto him, but by the mean of a sacrifice and the shedding of blood. And
therefore, they all protested in their sacrifices yt they were not able to come
near unto god, except they had been redeemed, by the purging of their sins
and iniquities, which was to be done, by our Lord Jesus Christ. And yet by the
way, neither Jew nor Gentile but trusted to their own merits, and thought
themselves able to make satisfaction unto God by the^. Here then we see, yt ye
devil eue^ at ye time wtdrew miserable sinners from our lord Jesus Christ, and
from ye payment which he had made by his death and passion. And yet now, see in
what case the papists are For they will confess that we have full remission of
our sins by the death and passion of our Lord Jesus Christ, yea, but that is
as they think only before baptism. For thus they reason: little children,
say they, receive the grace of God, and are pardoned of Original sin in
baptism, by the power of ye death and passion of our Lord Jesus Christ: But
say they, when we are once baptized and then sin Jesus Christ alone, is not
sufficient to make us acceptable unto the Lord and to blot out the remembrance
of our sins, but we our selves also must make recompense. And this is the cause
of the devising of their works of superogation: as to wander up and down like
Rogs a Pilgrimage, to have many trentals of Masses, and such like devilish
inventions. So, that if a man ask the Papists why the roge up and down a
pilgrimage as they do, to see their mowing apes and marmesets, why they fast
such and such a day, why they build Churches, and why they cause masses to be
song: forsooth will they say, even to redeem our selves before the Lord our
God: for, it is very meet that when we have understood of our sins, that we
should make satisfaction for the^, to ye end God might acquit and discharge us
of the same. See here, how they make ye death and passion of our lord Jesus
Christ of none effect: and so ye papists are not able to go on, one foot
forward to do their deuotio^s, but yt they blaspheme God openly deny the death
and passion of our Lord Jesus Christ, and cast themselves down into hell mouth:
thus we see, whether their devilish devotions (which they call good) lead the^.
And therefore we are to observe the words of the Prophet when he says, that the
correction of our peace, was laid upon our Lord Jesus Christ, because yt by his
mean God is appeased and set at one with us for he bears all the sins and
iniquities of the world upon him. So the^, let us here note, that when we see
what manner ones we are, we should always stand in fear, because God is our
enemy, and our judge. And besides, we must in the second place conclude, that
there is no other mean either in heaven or yet in the earth to make us at one
with God, but by the price which our lord Jesus has paid and satisfied, eue^
by his death and passion. Have we this? let us then with bold cheer, and
countenance, come before our God: and yet not so but that we must always
humble our selves, and be ashamed of our sins: Howbeit, that will be no let
unto us, but that we may frankly call upon our God as upon our father, neither
could we glorify our selves, without he reputed us to be just, and al our debts
paid, because we are pardoned by the power of the condemnation which Jesus
Christ suffered. Thus we see, how this place must be practiced of us, Mark also
why he says, That we are healed by his wounds. In very deed, we shall
never be able to see thoroughly into our sins, because hypocrisy
blindfoldeth our eyes, and pride has always mighty rule over us: and therefore
we greatly deceive our selves, and make our selves believe that God is highly
beholden unto us: or else, we are so blockish, as that we never think to come
to a reckoning. Now, it falls out here, that the Prophet shows, that we
are but dead, if it were not for the wounds of our Lord Jesus Christ, and
therefore that we must needs seek to be healed by him. When then we would
feel the benefit which comes unto us by the death and passion of the Son
of God, Let us note, that look how many sins as are rooted in our nature,
although they appear not, are even so many deadly wounds and diseases. I
beseech you, if there shall be an Apostume about the stomach of a man, or in
his bowels, should it be ever a whit the worse for the man if it were seen,
that it might be launced: If a man then thinks him self to be whole and
sound, because he will not see his disease, surely, he must needs be void of
all wit and reason. And therefore our diseases must be so much the more
deadly, when as they are secret and not known. And, over and besides the
sins which we bear about with us (the roots of which are hid in us) there
are sins in us which we commit daily, which sufficiently declares, that our
nature is froward and cursed, and that we are altogether perverted. Wherefore
since we are wholly infected with spiritual leprosy, and that our iniquity
is rotten in us, what shall we do in this case? and what remedy is to be
had? Shall we seek for help at the Angels in heaven? Alas, they can do no
good: and therefore we must go unto our Lord Jesus Christ, because he would
be disfigured even from the crown of the head, unto the soale of the foot,
would be al to wounded, scourged and buffeted with one blow upon an other,
crowned with thorns, tied and fast nailed to the Cross, and at last persed
through the side with a spear. And here we see how we are healed, here is the
right medicine for our disease, wherewith we must be contented, and whereunto
also we must apply our whole affection, knowing that we are never able to be at
quiet with our selves but that we must still be extremely tormented and vexed,
were it not that Jesus Christ comforted us, and appeased the wrath of God for
us. Now, when we are sure of this, it gives us occasion to sing praises unto
his holy name, where before, we could do nothing else, but groan, and be
utterly confounded. And this is in sum the thing which we are to learn out
of the words of ye Prophet. Now S. Matthew, alleges this place, Mat. 8.17.
when he makes mention of all the diseases which our Lord Jesus Christ healed,
how he made the blind to see, the lame to go, the deaf to hear, set a foot
such as were half dead, and sick of the palsy, and cast devils out of men's
bodies. This (says he) declares, that it was not for naught that the Prophet
Isaiah said, that he bear our infirmities, and sustained our griefs. Without
doubt, the Prophet speaks not here of bodily diseases. Wherefore, it seems
that the Evangelist has applied this testimony but ill. But he, in declaring
that our Lord Jesus Christ healed outward diseases, means to bring us to an
higher consideration, because he would have us to behold as it were in a
figure, the reason of his coming into the world. And therefore, when we hear,
that our Lord Jesus Christ healed the sick of the palsy, but especially raised
the dead, and that he also healed al manner of diseases, let us understand eue^
in the view of the eye, according to our gross and weak capacities, that he
has told us that he is our spiritual Phisitio^: and let us also learn (as I
have already said) that all the vices whereunto we are inclined, are so many
corruptions in our souls. And as there are many evil humors in the body, eue^
so likewise are there many other like things: To be short, there are many
secret diseases and even so fares it with our souls: and because they are full
of vices before the lord God, they had also need of a phisitio^. And who shall
he be? we shall not find him either in heaven or in earth, except it be he
who^ the heavenly father has given us: to wit, our Lord Jesus Christ. And
therefore if we can reach to ye understanding how our Lord Jesus Christ has
brought health to our souls, let us come to figure out ye which is here showed
us, when he made the blind to see: for, this is out of al doubt, yt our souls
are both blind and beastly. Besides, Jesus Christ, made the dumb to speak.
Now, we give our tongues to nothing else but to wickedness, until such time as
Jesus Christ has given it the right use. And we are more then deaf, because
the word of God can have no entrance into us, and therefore it is our Lord
Jesus Christ that must give us also our hearing. To be short, when we shall
join the words of S. Matthew, with the meaning of the Prophet Isaiah: to wit,
that we for our parts are full of corruption, and villainy and that there is
no health in us, and our souls full of all deadly sins: But that our Lord
Jesus Christ has ryd us of them all, and that in coming to him, we shall
find health: when I say, we shall thus join one with an other, then shall we
understand, that except we have recourse unto this Redeemer, we must needs
always lie stone still in our sins and miseries, and rot altogether in the^.
And thereupon he goes on farther, and says, That we have all declined and gone
astray. Here, the Prophet means, better and more lively to tell (as yesterday
we handled it) that we cannot in good earnest feel our necessity to be
healed by our Lord Jesus Christ, until such time as every of us has truly
examined his own estate, and knows what is within him. For, what is the
reason why we are so cold and slack, when we are told of coming unto our Lord
Jesus Christ? Truly, it is because we have no capacity, but are like very
blockheads. For, we shall see how these common drunkardes are knoden together
in their intemperancy, and will never give over, until such time as they gnashe
their teeth, and are able to do no more. If a man speak to them of physic
and Physicians, he shall be but scorned for his labor: they will wagge the
head, yea, and despise all helps. Now, there is not a worse kind of
drunkenness, then this blockishnes wherein all miserable sinners are
overwhelmed, until such time as they feel what it is to have God their
enemy. So then, every man will give him self over to all kind of lewdness,
and by that mean, the death and passion of our Lord Jesus Christ shall be
contemned, and no account made of it. And therefore it is not without cause
that the Prophet for the awaking of us, and for the bestowing, of the most
desired benefit that may be, which is brought unto us by our Lord Jesus
Christ, shows that we have all erred and gone out of the way. Now, over and
besides that I have said, that as there are profane contemners of the
judgment of God, even so also are there foolish presumptuous and arrogant men.
Wherefore there are two sorts of people which cannot do them selves any good
by this infinite grace and favor which the Son of God has purchased for us:
because the one sort of them think them selves to be righteous, and have
works and merits able to answer the justice of God. As we see these Popish
hypocrites, who do not only think themselves, to be discharged before God,
but do also sell some part of their merits, as if they had a superfluity of
them: and that man or woman is well at ease and happy, that may be partaker of
their perfection and holiness, because they are in an Angellike estate.

Now, these men think that they have no need of the death and passion of
Jesus Christ: but they will partly confess that they have need: and yet we
see it clean otherwise: because they keep faires and merkets of their
merits, and have of them to sell and resell, to the end they would have
others to settle them selves and trust upon such profanation. Moreover,
for so much as there is in Popery, both men and women hypocrites, they are even
so many horns or powers set up against God: For this pride is always in them,
to say, what good Sir? I beseech you if I deserve not, to what purpose were it
for me to have so many good devotions, to cause so many Masses to be soonge,
to have chaunted so much, to have run so many times from one Altar to an
other, to have prayed to such a Saint, and to have made such and such a feast:
To be short, they have always this cursed and hellish opinion with them, that
God is bound, and greatly beholde^ unto them. Thus we see how Satan so
deceives them with such illusions, as yt they cannot possibly feel to what
end the death and passion of our lord Jesus Christ serves them. The other
sort, trust not to their merittes, for drunkardes, whoremongers, and wanton
people will not say, we are like unto little Angels, we have lived well, we
have been earnest in our devotions: But will sport them selves (as I have
alredie said) and think to escape the hand of God by mocking and scorning. And
for this cause, the Prophet calls us all here, and says, Consider ye poor
souls in what case you stand, until such time as God has showed you his
compassion in our Lord Jesus Christ his Son: For you have al erred, and are
al like lost sheep. Mark his meaning: for he says, We all, because he puts
in himself. Yea verily, for we have alredie seen, yt the Jews were included
within this general curse of men, because they thought that they should have
bin exempt out of it: For they were ever thus foolish arroga^t, as to think yt
because God had adopted and chosen the^, yt they were a great deal more worthy
then the rest. Now, the Prophet foldeth them up here in everlasting death,
until such time as they seek for the remedy of their deliverance in Jesus
Christ. We are then all included within this condemnation: and he puts in
this word, All, to the end there should be no exception of any: as if he should
have said. And therefore let no man brag of himself, no not an inch, to be
just before God, and to over slipped ye remedy whereof I eue^ now spoke: for he yt
is ye perfectest in ye judgment of men, shall be found guilty before the
majesty of god, We see here then the meaning of the Prophet: howbeit he is
not for all that, thus contented, but says, That every man is declined from his
way. But why repeateth he the saying, of al, to every one. Forsooth, I will
tell you, because, when as we are generally condemned, we are not so lively
moved and touched as we ought to be. In deed, this must needs be a plain
condemnation, whenas it is said, that there is not amongst the children of
men, one just man: Psalm. 14.2.
and is also said, in another place of the Psalmist, That God looked down from
heaven, and saw not one man that was not corrupt in his sins. He speaks
also there as well of the godly who were in great estimation and dignity, as
also of the wicked. It is said that all men have gone astray, and that there
could not be found one who was not corrupt before the Lord: and of this
doctrine, the holy Scripture is full: Romans 3.9.
Saint Paul also shows this very sufficiently in his Epistle to the Romans,
whenas he brings in the sayings of the Psalmist and of the Prophets, where
any thing is spoken of infamous men, saying, That there is nothing but malice
and treason in them, full of cruelty, poison, violence, deceit and robbery,
and their throat an open Sepulcher. When all these things are spoken of, Saint
Paul says, that all men are herein comprehended without exception, until
such time as GOD has changed and renewed them by his holy Spirit.

Now, let this doctrine be preached, and we must needs all stoop and
yield: for, shame and fear will not suffer us to reply against our God. And
to say the truth, what shall we get by our reasoning and disputing? For, we
must feel, in despite of our teethes, that we are not condemned in vain,
since it is God that judges us. And yet notwithstanding every of us will return
home to his house, and be no whit moved thereat: and the thing that has been
told us will not touch us at all. We will well enough agree that we are all
sinners, and that every man is guilty before the Lord: But do we in the
mean while feel the burden of our sins, and be displeased with them, and
besides, are we stirred up to seek for the favor of our Lord Jesus Christ,
and deny our selves? No, no: and yet we think we are sufficiently discharged,
if we say that we are sinners. And that which is worse we shall oftentimes
see men bouldly cover and cloak their sins when they are accused and
convinced of them. Ho good Sir, will they say, It is very true yt al me^ are
sinners. Surely, if a man exhort a wicked blasphemer of the name of God, or
some such one as has committed a cursed and horrible deed, he will deny it
at the first chop: and never confess it but by constraint. But what if he see
him self to be convicted? In very deed Sir, will he the^ say, we are all
sinners. And that is as much to say, that thou art a wicked hypocrite that thus
scornest God. Thus we see that under these general words, there are very many
which will find out this excuse, to the end they would not have their
filthiness known as it ought to be And for this cause, after the Prophet had
said, That all have erred, he adds, Every one, every one, as if he should
have said, look not general what mankind is, but let every man sift
himself a part, and consider and way well with your selves what you are. For,
the way to cause us to be touched with the judgments of God, and to be brought
to true humility is, whenas we are brought to repent us of our wickedness,
and that every man in this sort shall as it were, have secretly examined his
own conscience. Thus we see the meaning of the Prophet. Moreover, when he
says, That every man has departed from his way, he declares in the first
place that he speaks of those me^, who are governed by their lusts, and
according to their own reason and wisdom. And this is a point to be thoroughly
marked of us, because we see the folly of some to be such, as that all the
persuasions in the world cannot withdraw them from running into destruction,
by doing of that which seems best in their own eyes: The other sort, do so
beastly follow their desires, as that they understand not that they plunge
themselves wittingly into the bottom of Hell, except god restrained them. For
we see how the Papists at this day deal, whenas they are found fault with, by
the word of God, and are convinced thereby. I beseech you sir, will they say, let
me alone, for be as be may, I will be sure to go on that course which I have
begun. And will thou so? why then thou surely go the direct way to hell:
for this is thy way, if thou follow yt thy course. Ho, tush, why man, I have
such a good devotion, as yt it is impossible for God to reject it. Well sir, but
the Prophet Isaiah speaks also here of the devotion, which every man makes
to himself: and think thou that the holy ghost who spoke in those days by
his mouth, knew not that thou would be an hypocrite, full of poison and
pride: that thou would be ruled as thou lustest: yt thou would devise a
service of god at thy own pleasure: yt thou would worship idols, and think
thou did well: and that therein should stand thy religion, has the holy
ghost understood all thy villainies? Then look thou to that which he has
spoken, Every man has walked in his own way, to wit, every man has gone the
strait way to hell. Every man has run into destruction, by taking his own
course. Here then we see what the ways are that we take. And so, we are
taught by this place to cast of all fond arrogancy, and to understand, that
when we do that which seems good in our own eyes, and which we think to be
very reasonable, it is as if we had made a league with Satan to catch us in his
snares. And therefore this doctrine serves for the correction of all
presumption, to the end we might be contented to be ruled only by spirit of
God, and by his word: and let us also in like manner observe, that the Prophet
Isaiah has declared by these words, that although we know the thing yt is
good, yet will we not leave from doing the thing yt is wicked and naught. And
why so? Forsooth, because al our affections are enemies to God: and although we
see that we must refuse the evil yet will we be carried away therewith, and that
not forcibly, but even very wittingly wickedly, and it is so hid in us, as that
the fruit must needs show what the roots are. And therefore, let us in the
first place understand, yt we know not how to walk a right, and there is but
one only way which God allows of, and which will bring us to salvation: to
wit, whenas our Lord Jesus shall take us into his protection. and be the sheep
of his flock, and follow him as our shepherd, let us also further understand,
yt all the affections are corrupt, and will hunt after evil in steed of good,
until such time as our Lord Jesus Christ has corrected and reformed us, and
put into us a right affection to obey him. And this is it which the Prophet
means to declare. Now, let us conclude, that all such as toss to and fro,
do depart from our Lord Jesus. For the Prophet says, That all the Patriarchs
and Prophets and every one of the holy Fathers and Martyrs, have needed to be
reconciled unto God, through the death and Passion of our Lord Jesus Christ.
For, if Abraham the father of the faithful, If David the mirror of al
righteousness, and if others such like, as Job and Daniell, who are called as
it were, the myrrours of all holiness and perfection: If these, I say, were
poor strayed and lost sheep, until such time as they were reconciled by our
Lord Jesus Christ, Alas, what shall become of us? And therefore when we shall
seek after our Mediators, and think by their means to escape the destruction
wherein we are, do we not show our selves too too unthankful unto our Lord
Jesus Christ? And are not we in the mean while too too void of sense and
reason, to crave any thing at their hands, who also have need to run for
help to the death and passion of our Lord Jesus Christ? For, if necessity
inforceth us to seek for remedy, we must go unto him, unto whom all the
faithful in every age had recourse: For neither Saint Peter, nor yet Saint
Paul, ne the virgin Mary, nor any whatsoever, yt are exempt from it. And
therefore let us learn to go to the spring head and fountain, and draw cut
of that which is wanting unto us. For our Lord Jesus has wherewith to
satisfy us all: and we must not fear that the fullness of his grace, can any
way be drawn dry: but be assured, yt he will give to every one his part and
portion thereof, which will come to seek for it. Wherefore, let us come unto
our Lord Jesus Christ, and he will satisfy us all: But whosoever declineth
from him either one way or other, such a one cannot be helped with that
remedy which is offered unto him, but refuses it as much as in him lies: so
that his unthankfulness is a let for the inioying of the grace that is
presented unto him. And so much the more shall we be inexcusable, since this
is daily preached unto us. For, God was not contented to have sent his Son
for a time, to thrust him out to be slain, and to beat him in his wrath,
although he loved him as his only son (for, notwithstanding he would cast
him down to the outward show and used all the rigor that was possible against
him, yet was he always his best beloved son, as already has been said:
howbeit all was to the end that we might be pardoned) yet was he not I say,
contented with this: but daily delivers unto us this treasure, to the end we
might enjoy it: he declares unto us that Jesus Christ who was thrust into
the side, has at this day his heart as it were wide open, that we might be
assured of the love he bears us, and that as his arms were tied fast to the
cross, even so has he now stretched them out to imbrase us and pull us unto
him: and would have all these things to do us good: and as he has shed his
blood, so would he that we should at this day be plunged therein. Wherefore,
when God so neatly inuiteth us, and that Jesus Christ also sees before us the
benefit of his death and passion, and tells us that his blood is always
fresh (according to the saying of the Apostle to the Hebrews) that it is not
like dry blood, which becomes nothing: Heb. 10.2^.
but because it is sanctified by his heavenly power, therefore this blood is
continually fresh: for the Apostle has used this speech, that we might
understand, that his power is not lessened, but has continually his full and
whole strength, such as it had from the beginning, to the end we might all
come and submit our selves unto our Lord Jesus Christ. And after we have
confessed our sins, and be ashamed of them, let us not doubt, but yt he is
sufficient to give us such remedy, as that we may conclude that God has
received and allowed us, as his own children, and accounts us as righteous
and perfect, where before we were abominable in his sight. Thus we see what
we have to learn out of this doctrine. And because we see that at this day
some jest and mock, and other some wax proud and presumptuous, and think by
their righteousness to satisfy God, let us deny all such blasphemies, and in
true faith and repentance seek for our Lord Jesus Christ, and with all our
affections submit our selves to him, whenas we shall feel our selves thus
charged with so insupportable a burden.

Let us now fall down before the Majesty of our good God, and acknowledge
our offenses, beseeching him to cause us so to feel them, as that we may
groan for them all our life long, and be moved to have recourse unto him: and
not to wander and roile in our foolish, wicked, and devilish opinions: But in
understanding that al our blessedness, and whatsoever else belongs to our
salvation, is in our Lord Jesus Christ, that it would please this our good God,
to make us come wholly unto him, and so keep our faith, as that we never be
turned away from it And that it would please him also, by his holy spirit so
to work in our hearts, that we knowing our selves to be freely forgiven of
our sins, might also acknowledge, what a great price it cost, and how dear
and precious it was unto his only Son, that thereby we might be so much
the more styrred up to magnify him. And forasmuch as we must be healed by
him, that it would please him to cleanse us daily of all our faults and
sins, until such time as he has brought us unto that perfection, whereunto
we ought to grow al our life long: that it would please him not only to show
us this favor, but also unto all people and nations of the earth, etc.

The fourth Sermon of the Prophecy of Christ.
Isaiah. liii. 7 HE was oppressed and afflicted, yet did he not open his
mouth: he is brought as a sheep to the slaughter, and as sheep before her
sherer, is dumb, so he opens not his mouth.

8 He was taken out from prison and from judgment, and who shall declare his
age? for he was cut from out of the land of the living, for the transgression
of my people was he plagued.


WHen the Prophet had showed that every of us was to look into himself and
unto his own sins, if we would receive any benefit by the death and passion
of our Lord Jesus Christ, he now says, that he suffered not co^strainedly,
but willingly: for, if he had not done so, we should never have been justified,
neither yet should any atonement have been made between God and us: to wit,
if Jesus had not repared our transgressions through his obedience. And therefore
if ye death of the son of God had been constrained, and that he had not
submitted himself willingly, it had not been a Sacrifice to have blotted out
our sins: Romans 4.9.
for S. Paul also brings us back to this consideration, whenas he says
that our transgressions were taken away by the obedience of one man. What was
the cause that made God become our enemy, and yet is, but, for that we never
leave offending of him? He created us that he might peaceably and quietlye
enjoy us: but when we refuse to bear his yoke, he is of very right to detest
us, and not to allow us for his creatures.

We see then why it is said, yt our Lord Jesus was not only chastised for our
sins and transgressio^s, but also, that he did not once open his mouth, nor yet
gave any foul language: but because he knew that he was appointed for yt
purpose, and yt it was the eternal decree of god his father, he showed
himself obedient even unto the death. And therefore when we would have a more
feeling of the power of the death and passion of the son of god, let every
man consider with him self, how many sundry ways he has withstood the will and
justice of God. Surely if we do so, we shall find that we do nothing else
but make war against him, and as if we would willingly and wittingly dispite
him. Wherefore we need never be abashed, to have the want of such a remedy: to
wit, that for the burying of the remembrance of all our iniquities, the son
of GOD must obey in our behalf.

It is true indeed that our Lord Jesus spoke before Pylate his Judge: but he
did it not to escape death, Luke 23.3.
but rather offered himself unto it: neither would he accept of any occasion,
to be pardoned, because it was very meet that he should be condemned in our
name. Wherefore it is not for naught that the Prophet says, that he was like a
dumb man: and compares him unto a sheep, or unto A Lamb: having regard
unto the figure of the ancient sacrifices: for, when we here the death and
passion of our Lord Jesus spoken of, we must take it to be a sacrifice,
wherewith God the father was appealed, because that sins (as we have
heertofore declared) could not be taken away, to please God, but by that mean.
And to say the truth, whenas in the time of the law, men would crave pardon for
their sins, there must of necessity be sacrifices done. For they were never
able to make any recompense: and therefore God told them, that it was
sufficient that they builded upon the promise made unto them in the redeemer.
Wherefore, to the end the Jews might understand, that Jesus Christ should
fulfill whatsoever was then figured in ye law, this name of a lamb was namly
given unto him, and under one kind, the Prophet has comprehended all: as if
he should have said, that Jesus Christ, in his death and passion, should first
take away all our iniquities, because he should submit himself unto the will
of God his father* and besides, that in the second place, he should be
sacrificed as a Lamb, to the end that by the shedding of his blood, all our
spots should be washed and made clean. Wherefore, when we shall be rebuked
for a great number of falts which we commit, and can neither will nor choose but
feel ye wrath of God, let us have recourse unto that which is here set before
us. to wit, that it was not for naught that our Lord Jesus would not answer
again, although his afflictions were very extreme, and although God powered
upon him his whole rigor, yet did he quietly suffer all, to the end we, by
that his obedience might be reconciled. And by the way, we are also exhorted
to fashion our selves after his example: not that we are able, thoroughly and
perfectly to humble our selves before GOD, but yet we must strive to do it.

This then, I say, that when it shall please his majesty to make us feel his
most heavy hand, so that we think that we are very hardly dealt withal, yet
let us hold our peace, and confess that God is just, and full of equity, and
not be heard once to grudge: but rather gloryfie God by holding our peace,
like miserable sinners, that are convinced of their transgressions, and have
not a word to say to the contrary.

Pet. 1.3.18.
Lo then how Saint Peter applies this place: That is, that when we are
afflicted by the hand of God, yea and persecuted by men, let us patiently bear
the injuries done unto us, because we know yt it is the mind of God to prove
and try us, or rather to punish us for our sins: and let us beware we make no
vain excuses as many men do, who allege their infirmity and over great
weakness, so that they cannot be quiet, so long as GOD presses them greuosly.
Howbeit we must frame our selves like unto the son of God: for, he is our
glass and pattern, not that (as I have said) there is in us the like power,
but yet although we cannot come near him, let us notwithstanding strive to
come as near him as we may. Psalm. 38.14. and 39.10.
Moreover, we see that David being a frail man, as we are, did yet put in
practice this doctrine: as he says in one place, O Lord because I knew yt it
was thy heavy hand that was upon me, therefore I held my peace. And in another
place he says, since thou O Lord have slaked the raynes of mine enemies, I
have patiently suffered the wrongs and outrages that they have done unto me.
here then we see what we have to learn out of these words: to wit, that as
the Son of God was mute, because he would glorify God, and would not replye
in all his afflictions; even so likewise let us suffer God to chastise us when
he thinks good: or else to try our obedience, in letting lose the raines to
the ungodly, to persecut us.

Now, it is impossible for us to reach to it, until such time as we be fully
resolved of this doctrine, that our Lord by holding his peace both before God
his father and also before men, has repaired all our sins and iniquities.
Moreover, when we are told, that by the holding of his peace he purchased us
righteousness, we see that this silence, bred us eftsoons this benefit, that
he did it to defend our cause, and is now become our mediator unto God,
having his mouth always wide open: to wit, being ever ready to make
intercession, for the helping of all the offenses, which we have committed.
For, in as much as he abode extreme persecution, and never gave any words, he
attained to this office, that if we be convinced in conscience before God, and
are to be condemned, for want of ability to say any thing for our excuse, yet
will he defend us, and God will also adiudge us for innocents, because our
sins were thus repaired.

Thus we see at what end we must begin, and then shall we have greater courage,
and be much better disposed to keep our tongues, whenas we shall be any way
afflicted by the hand of God. And heerevpon the Prophet says, that he was
lifted out of anguishe, or out of prison (for the word imports thus much) and
of judgment. There are some which expound it, as if Jesus Christ had been put
to death by some sudden violence: but we are rather told that death overcame
him not, but was raised up again by the power of God his father.

Now, it is not enough for us that we understand, that our Lord Jesus has
suffered for our salvation, and when we have examined our life, we shall feel
yt without this help, we were al damned and utterly lost, and if there were
nothing else spoken of, but of the death and passion of the son of God, we
should always stand in doubt, for how can it be possible that we should hope
for life at his hands, seeing he himself was hedlong cast down into death?
surely we should never perceive any divine nor heavenly power, without the
which we can no way conceive to put our trust in him: because we should see
nothing but weakness, which would fear us. And as the Prophet has
heretofore spoken of the fruit which we receive by the death and passion of
our Lord Jesus Christ, even so does he now say, that it is because he shall be
lyfted up by the power of god his father, he was lifted up (says he) out of
anguish and judgment. And although he was condemned yet did not God leave
puttinge to his helping hand, but exalted him, that he might have ye chief
dominion, and rule over all creatures.

Romans 1*4.
This is it which S. Paul sets forth in the Epistle to the Romans, where
he says, that he showed himself to be the son of god by his rising again.
For if we do but only look into the life of Jesus Christ, as he lived here
amongst men, and also into his death, we should never find that in him, which
is requisite for our salvation. In very deed, the miracles which he did, ye
doctrine which he preached, and the rest of the signs which he showed, was
sufficient to declare him to be the son of god, without our faith were to to
weak. And yet should we remain always in shame and doubt to see Jesus Christ
offer himself, as a common and contemptible man: and besides, it would make
us more ashamed and grieved, whenas we should see him in the end subject to so
cursed and shameful a death. But when we pass from his death, unto his
resurrection, then we know, that our Lord Jesus Christ got the victory for us.
And to the same purpose is that saying of S. Paul to the Corin. that although
he was crucified in weakness, 2. Cor. 13.4.
yet rose he again by the power of God his Father. So then, the order which
the prophet here keeps, tends to the same end, that we should not stand
in doubt, but yt our Lord Jesus Christ had life in his hand, and was Lord and
master thereof. because it was seen in his own person. And therefore let us
understand, yt the son of God was made of no reputation for our sakes:
because we know eftsoons, that he was not spoiled of his power: and although
he kept it close for a time, yet have we such a sure testimony thereof in his
resurrection, as that we shall not need to make any excuse, but fully and
wholly believe in him: and bouldly set our selves against hell, and sin: seeing
Jesus Christ has triumphed over them, and the hand of God sustained him to be
exempt of all anguishes: and was exalted by himself to be God his Fathers
lieutennaunt: and (as I have already said) to have the chiefest government in
the world. This then is the effect of ye which we are to learn, whenas it is
said. that he was lifted from out of prison, and judgment. Now, it must
needs fall out, yt our Lord Jesus should descend into ye bottomless depthes,
before such time as he should be exalted into the glory of heaven: for if he
had appeared only in majesty, how is it possible for us at this day to be
assured, that our sins are forgiven us. Surely, we might see the son of
God the fountain of life, but we should see him as one divided from us, and
we should have nothing that is common to him, nor yet once come near him.

Moreover, we should have always matter enough to despair on, because we are
guilty of an infinite number of sins And therefore, if our Lord Jesus Christ
had gone down into the bottomless depthes and had not been afterward exalted
into heaven, what had we ben the better? truly, no whit, but always remain
like miserable caytiues, out of all measure disquieted, and horrybly tormented,
by seeing the wrath of God continuallye upon us. But when it is said in the
first place, that he was condemned, and suffered most fearful panges, to the
end we might be freed from them, and be at peace with God (as yesterday was
told you) we now know, that he loves and favors us, and receives us to
mercy: and therefore when we understand that Jesus Christ was thereupon
exalted: we may also very well conclude that it was to draw us unto him, to
the end we might be partakers of the glory which was given unto him by God his
father.

Moreover, we are also to note the words of the Prophet which follows, Who
is he that is able to number his years. For, by these words he means to
show, that the effect and power of the resurrection of our Lord Jesus was for
ever, and that it is no temporal thing which many times melts and vanishes
away. And this is a very necessary point: for, some have taken this age, for
the eternal generation of our Lord Jesus Christ, because he was begotten by
God his father from all eternity. Some other have strayned the words of the
Prophet this way and that: but when we shall look more narrowly into the
matter, there is no doubt, but that he meant to show, that the honor which
was given to Jesus Christ, was not for him self, and his own person, and for
a day only, but that he purchased us everlasting life, for as Saint Paul
says, That inasmuch as he dyed, he dyed once for sin, Romans 6.10.
But in yt he now lives, he lives unto God, and shall never die again.

By this he declares, that the sacrifice which our Lord Jesus Christ
offered, is sufficient for us, because he has most perfectlye sanctified us
by that mean. And therefore it was not needful that the Son of God should
suffer any more then once: Heb. 7.27.
but because this power was in him, to blot out all our iniquities at once, let
us bouldly run unto his death and passion, and not doubt but that it will
always have this strength in it, as to reconcile us unto God.

Now, the life wherinto our Lord Jesus Christ entered, is heavenly: for it was
such a perfect condition, as could not be amended. And when S. Paul says,
that he lives unto God, it is as much as that he is now clean exempt from
all our miseries, and from the condition that he had before taken, which was
to become a mortal man. Wherefore, Jesus Christ has discharged all this gear,
and is now rid of all human frailenesse, to the end that we which are his
members, might hope for the like in our selves. And so let us in the first
place note, yt the Prophet has here declared, that our Lord Jesus Christ
rose not again, to be any more subject to death, but has purchased
everlasting life. In the 2 place we have to learn, yt this was not done only
for himself, but also for all his whole Church. For, when it said by the
Psalmist, that God was exalted, and took the spoil of his enemies: this is to
show, that when our Lord Jesus christ was lifted up after his death, that it
all turned to the common benefit and welfare of his Church. Psalm. 68.19.
The ouercomming then of Satan and of sin, was to this end, that we might be
delivered of them, and enjoy the fruit of such a conquest, and therein triumph.
This then is the very effect of that which we have to learn out of this
place. Now, the whole substance of ye matter is this, that we might
understand, how to apply it rightly unto our own use. And therefore, when it is
said, yt the son of God was, lifted up from out of anguish and condemnation,
let us learn, that when we are moved to become desperate, to set Jesus Christ
before our eyes, since we know that he has passed ye course: and that God his
father stretched out his hand unto him, that he might not be oppressed, all
which was done for our sakes. Wherefore, we have a very good way to come out of
our angushes and pains, so long as we have Jesus Christ for our Captain, and
follow his steps, because, yt whatsoever was accomplished in him, as being our
head, belongs to us, and the effect thereof will appear in every faithful
man. And when his age is spoken off, it is to this end, that we might
understand, that he will be of power able to defend his Church even unto
the end: for he will not be divided from his body. In very deed, our estate
and condition differs greatly from his, until such time as we be taken out
of this world: but in that he is the first borne of the dead, he is also the
first fruits of all those which shall rise again. Let us then understand, 1.
Cor. 15.20. Coll. 1.18.
that because the Son of God, is not only in his own essence or being, and
in his divine majesty immortal, but also in his flesh, and human nature,
that it is to this end, that his church might be always preserved in this
world, and never ^ecay. True it is, we shall see great troubles, and indeed a
man would think many times, that the church of God, should utterly perish: for,
if there arise never so small a tempest, ye surges will by and by, be so
mighty and horrible, as that a man would say, all were lost, and clean dashed.
And this is so common a thing as may be. For, what outward show of
maintenance can there be to the church of God, whe^as it is assailed thus on
al hands? must it not needs be thought, that it cannot be but utterly
overthrown, whenas it is thus wonderfully assaulted? howbeit, this is the
truth of it, we must be feign to resort to our head. Wherefore, since the age of
our Lord Jesus is without end, and yt all the changes in the world cannot stay
him from having a very good eye unto his church, although the temptations were
far greater, and more violent then they are, yet let not us shrink at the
matter. And this is not to be applied only to the whole company of the
faithful, but also to every one of us. And therefore let us understand and be
thoroughly persuaded, that although our Life be but a blast, and we ready every
minute to vanish away, yet notwithstanding that we have a life which lasts
for ever, because we are the members of our Lord Jesus Christ. Moreover, let
us eftsoons learn, to walk through this world, since this is not our life,
which we here presently enjoy, but a pilgrimage which we must pass on
quickly, until such time as we have come unto our quiet enheritance. Thus we
see, yt in hoping for everlasting life, we must forsake all this, which is but
a shadow: and not suffer our senses to be e^folded in that which we openly see,
and may occasion us to tarry still here in this world: for surely, as many as
have their minds set here on this life, without doubt do thereby separate
themselves from the son of God, and are unworthy to have any part or portion
with him in his everlasting kingdom. And therefore, let us forsake this world,
if we will join our selves unto ye son of god. Furthermore, because this
doctrine might take ye better hold of us, ye prophet cries out he says not
that the age of our Lord Jesus Christ shall be only everlasting, but casts
it out as a man meruelously abashed, saying, Who shall be able to number his
years. Wherefore we are admonished to strive against all temptations: and
although we be some times hindered this way and that: and be as it were cast
down without moving, yet let us resist, and with much to do enforce us, until
such time as we have attained unto this which is here showed us: to wit, ye
man's reason is not able to understand, nor yet any mouth able to express the
age of our Lord Jesus. And for the bringing of this matter about we must be
also very well advertised to surmou^t all our thoughts, whe^as we fall in
reasoning of putting our trust in our lord Jesus Christ, and follow him, for the
partaking of the heavenly enheritaunce, which he has purchased for us. Neither
must we stick to our own opinion and fantasy, whenas this doctrine shall be well
treated of, as if it were to be debated by words. But let us know this, that
although our faith hangs upon hearing, yet shall it never have through
assurance, except it receive such a testimony from God and from his holy
spirit, as surpasses whatsoever the tongue of man is able to express. For this
cause, must we not dwell in our own understandings, and judge as we think
best, but let us know that it is a wonderful and an in comprehensible secret,
ye the son of God became a mortal man, and subject to death, that we might
be exempt from it, and that now, in the midst of al our weakness, we should
have nevertheless life everlasting which must be obtained by faith, until such
time as it be thoroughly manifested unto us at his coming, in the last day. And
this is the effect of that which we are to learn out of this place. Now the
Prophet goes on further, and says, That he was cut of from out of the land
of the living, and receued the wounds which were due to his people. This is a
confirmation of that which we lately handeled: to wit, that the age of our
Lord Jesus Christ should not serve for himself alone, but also for the whole
body of his Church, whereunto he is united, and bound as it were with an
inseparable bond. For the Prophet shows, that without it, it might be said
that the death and passion of our Lord Jesus Christ should be unprofitable. Now
this were a blasphemy not to be borne, to think that ye son of God came down
into ye world, to abide so cruel a death, and to have the judgment of God fall
so on his head, as that he bear the punishment for our sins, and was taken
to be the greatest malefactor in ye world: and yet all this not to profit his
faithful servants any thing at all, yt might well enough be said, yt this
were, as a man would say, a very jest. Wherefore, ye prophet brings us back to
this consideration, yt we should well understand, for what end and purpose our
Lord Jesus was thus scourged and beaten. And this came not by fortune, as has been before declared. Nether must we look only unto that which men did, and to
those which unjustly slew him, but we must lift up the eyes of our faith unto
the counsel of God, by which he had ordained yt Jesus Christ should be
sacrificed, to the end he might purchase remission of our sins for us.
Wherefore, since it is so, we are always to conclude, that Jesus Christ
suffered not for himself, but received the wounds which were due to us, we
are here in this first place exhorted to enter into the knowledge and
examination of our sins, whenas the death and passion of our Lord Jesus Christ
is set before us. It is very true ye God therein powers out the infinite
treasures of his goodness: for, indeed, when S. Paul has said that we are
justified by our lord Jesus, and yt in staying our selves upon his death and
passion, we may boldly present our selves before god, and be glad that he will
always except of us. After Saint Paul, I say, has handled this doctrine, that
although we be miserable sinners, yet will not God cast us off, but uphold us,
because he receives us in the name of his only son, he goes on farther, and
says, I beseech you Brethren even in the bowels of the goodness and mercy of
God. Wherein he shows, that in the suffering of Jesus Christ, we have a
testimony of the infinite love of god: as if he would lay open his heart, and show
us his bowels to testefye unto us how dear and precious we and our souls are
unto him.

Howbeit this is not set down, to the end we should sleep and take
pleasure in our sins: For the more that God shows himself lyberal in the
person of our Lord Jesus Christ, so much the more ought we to feel, what a
grievous thing it is for us to become his enemies, and fight against his
justice, and cause him to set himself against us: for, the grace which God
shows us in our Lord Jesus Christ, ought to draw us continually to
repentance. Now, the papists at this day, go about falsely to accuse us of
the doctrine which we preach, which is this, that we must be saved by the free
mercy of God, have our whole recourse unto Jesus Christ, because we know that
therein we have all our perfection of righteousness. Now forsooth Sir, say
they, you have made a great speak, for, then every man may live as he lust,
and they need never care any more for the offending of God.

Indeed, these dogs may bark thus, because they never knew what it is to taste
of the forgiveness of sins. For these hipocrites make a skorne at God, and
at all religion, and have never learned, what it is to transgres the law of
God. And we also see, how iollily they think themselves discharged, if they
have once song a Mass, bleated, and masked, and they think that God is as well
pleased with this, as a young Child is pleased with a pudding.

Thus we see how these skorners of God, can blaspheme ye gospel, but when we
have come once to the acknowledgment of our sins, and know to what end the
inestimable grace of God is preached unto us, without doubt we should be
touched with repentance, and be mortally wounded with the horror of anguishe
and pain, when we see God to be our enemy, because we have provoked him to
wrath. And this is here the meaning of the prophet, that Jesus Christ has
sustained ye wonds which were due to us. Wherein he shows yt we can never
lively feel, what good the death and passion of our Lord Jesus Christ has
done us, except we be inwardly thoroughly touched with the offending of our God,
whereby we have made him to become as our Judge and enemy, until such time as
we be reconciled unto him by his mere goodness and mercy.

Now, this is sufficiently declared to us in the holy Scripture: but herein
rests the whole matter, that we apply our wit and study thereto. Math.
11.28
Nevertheless, be as be may, we see that our Lord Jesus Christ calls none
but such as do labor, and are heavy laden.

By this he excludes all such as sleep in their iniquities, and flatter them
selves in them, or else which give them selves to al lycenciousnesse, without
any fear of God. And therefore, they which are thus given over to all
wickedness, cannot possibly come near unto our Lord Jesus Christ, for who
shall give us an entrance unto him, but the voice which calls us? Even so
fares it with them, who are so proud and presumptiouslye blind, as that they
make them selves believe that they are righteous through their own deserts,
and surely, he shuts the gate against all such kind of people, so that they
can have no hope that our Lord Jesus christ brings them any comfort or
solace. And why so? forsooth, because he thus says, come unto me, who are
they? All the world. Indeed, this is true that he calls all the world,
howbeit he makes a distinction of it, for thus he says, all ye that labor
and are heavy laden. For, after he had called all such as had need of his
help, he shows that none can be partakers thereof but such as do labor and
are heavy laden.

And therefore, when we shall feel our burden, and so groan under it, as that
we are able to bear no more, see what a way is laid open unto us, to come
unto our Lord Jesus Christ, because he has stretched out his arms to embrace
us. For, we shall see hereafter, yt he was sent unto those whose hearts were
abased and cast down. Wherefore, we must be sacrificed after this manner, that
we might be made like unto our Lord Jesus Christ.

In very deed, the sacrifice which he offered, is our full hope and
assurance: to wit, we must not presume to add any thing unto our Lord Jesus
Christ: because he has purchased full salvation, by his sacrificing of him
self unto God his father: but by the way, it is meet that we should be
threatened by the judgments of God, to the end we might understand, how
greeuos a thing it is, that we being poor worms of the earth, should lift
our selves up against the majesty of our creator, and violate his justice,
considering that we are placed here in this world to serve and honor him. And
therefore let us have a lively feeling of this, that we might come unto our
Lord Jesus Christ.

Now it should seem here at the first sight that the Prophet had set down a
strange reason, when he says, because he was cut of from the land of the
living. For, in as much as Jesus Christ was exalted, and has now the rule both
in heaven and in earth, it should seem yt this was no fit mean, without he had
first been as one cut of: For this glory, wherein now he is, he always had,
John. 17.5.
before the world was made according to the saying of S. John. And therefore
Jesus Christ as touching his divine essence or being, obtained unto himself no
strange thing.

Now, to be cast down into the bottomless pit of death as it were, was not
the way to come unto heavenly glory: and to be condemned by a mortal man, is
not like that he should be made judge of the whole world. Howbeit, the meaning
of God was such, as yt he would work beyond man's reason: neither must we
bring our counsel hither with us, and think that we are able to amend this
counsel, which we know, to be the cause and springhead of our salvation: but
let us most humbly gloryfy God, because he would have his son to be thus
cut off from the land of the living. Now the Prophet namely speaks after
this manner, as though Jesus Christ had been utterly abolished: and would not
make mention only of a common death, but even of such a death as should
utterly root him out, as if the remembrance of him had been cleerelye abolished
and defaced. For although of necessity, all men must dye, and thereby are cut
of from the land of the living, yet has this ben specially seen in our Lord
Jesus Christ, that his death was to have shut him quite out from the company of
men. For (as we have already said) it was a most shameful death, and curssed
of God: and besides, it was almost even the very gulf of hell: yet not yt
Jesus christ was swalowed up of it: howbeit he straue mightily against the
angushes of death. And therefore it is not for naught that ye prophet sets
him down here as one that had been abolished from amongst me^. Nevertheless how
ever it is he obtained by this menes such majesty in this nature of ours, as
yt at this day he being our brother, Ephesians. 2.8.
yet cease not also to become our judge. And mark what S. Paul says of it,
that he rendered himself obedient unto death, yea even to the most curssed death
of the Cross, in saying that he rendered himself obedient, he notes unto us
that which we have already declared out of the prophet, to wit, that, that
which our Lord Jesus Christ suffered, was willingly done. But because we are
guilty before god, and are his enemies, it is said yt Jesus Christ submitted
himself: for as S. Paul says, he who had all power and authority, took upon
him the form of a servant, and the state of those yt were under ye yoke. Thus
we see how obedient he was all his life long, and would be under the law. And
not only in this, but although he felt ye horrible panges of death, which made
him sweat water and blood, and drove him to say, O father, if it be possible, I
beseech thee, Mark. 14.36
let this so sower a cup pass over me: nevertheless he restrains himself
and says: yet not my will, but thine be done. Now hereupon S. Paul says yt
God his father, for this cause, exalted him, and gave him a name above all
other names, yt every knee at this day might bow unto. Wherefore, let us
understand that Jesus Christ himself, has even in our nature, an excellent
majesty, to ye end we might come to him in full assurance: for, upon what
condition is he made judge over all the world? forsooth, it is because yt he is
not only made our Brother, but also for yt he offered himself to be our pledge
and borrow and has borne al our sins. He was scourged and beaten by the hand
of god, yt we might be healed of ye wounds which we deserved to have and for
this cause is he now exalted, to ye end we might bouldlye draw near unto him.
Now this is very true, yt the wicked ones, and the devils, must in despite of
their teethes, feel that the son of God is far above them, for he must tread
all his enemies under his feet. Psalm. 110.1^
Howbeit, we for our parts ar to do him honor willingly, to submit our selves
quietly unto him, and acknowledge the, majesty that was given unto him in his
humane nature, to the end we might have wherewith to glory and triumph against
sin. Now, yt this is meant by the person of our Lord Jesus Christ, sufficiently
appears, by ye words of S. Luke, for when the Eunuke was come to worship at
the temple of Jerusalem, he read this place, Luke 8.^2.
and it was expounded unto him by Philip, whom God had sent by the liuelye
ministry of an Angel, to the end he might come to this poor blind and
ignorant man which sought after God, having as yet no knowledge of him. Howbeit
this place was in such sort expounded unto him, as that with once preaching he
was converted unto our lord Jesus Christ, craving and requ^ering that he might
be baptized in his name.

And this is a thing that should greatly touch us: for in the first place we
are admonished, that although we are not able at the first chop to have the
sound understanding of the doctrine of our Lord Jesus Christ, and what fruit we
gather out of that which is daily preached unto us, yet must we not despair
for all that, but search out of ye Scripture that thing which we know not, and
then, God having pity on us, will give us his hand, and set us in the right
way. And since this poor and ignorant man, who gave himself to read in ye
bible, and knew not what it meant, was thus converted unto our Lord Jesus
Christ: let us take good heed how we play the sluggards: but rather follow
the Counsel of the Psalmist, who says: To day if ye hear his voice harden
not your hearts. Psalm. 95.8.
And therefore, let us take such a taste of the doctrine which is here preached
unto us, as that we may be brought unto our Lord Jesus Christ, and so accept
of him, as that we may cleave unto him with a sure and constant faith: that we
may profit thereby, and be strengthened even to the end: so that after we are
truly humbled, we may come and offer our selves unto our God, and beseech him
of pardon and forgiveness: and although we are unworthy, yet let us not leave
lifting up of our heads unto heaven, and fully assure our selves, that God
will accept of us in the name of this great and mighty Redemer. And although he
was for a little while cast down, yet let us come back to this point, that he
was notwithstanding exalted above the heavens, that (as S. John says) he might
draw us unto himself, John. 22.32.
for thus it is said, when I shall be exalted out of this world, I will draw al
things unto my self.

Let us now fall down before the majesty of our good God, and acknowledge our
offenses beseeching him to make us otherwise feel them, then heretofore we
have done, and that it would please him to open our eyes, and (...) touch our
hearts, as that we may submit our selves wholly unto him, and hold the mean
which is set down unto us in his word, that is, to hate our selves, and
detest al our sins, so that we may be able to receive ye grace which he has
once showed us in our Lord Jesus Christ, and which he would have us now enjoy
by the mean of the Gospel. And so let us all most humbly say, O almighty GOD
and heavenly Father, thou have promised to here all our requests. etc.

The fifth Sermon of the Prophecy of Jesus Christ.
Isaiah. L.iij 9 And he made his grave with the wicked, and with the rich in
his death though he had done no wickedness, neither was any deceit in his
mouth.

10 Yet would the Lord break him, and make him subject to infirmities, when he
shall make his Soul an offering for sin, he shall see his Seed and prolong
his days, and the will of the LORD shall prosper in his hands.


THe Prophet continues here the doctrine before specified: to wit, that
there was such inimity between God and us, as that the wrath of God could by
no means be appeased, but by Jesus Christ his answering of the same, even to
the uttermost. For, by how much the more the suffering of the son of god was,
by so much ye more may we gather, how grievous our sins are, and how
wonderfully God abhors them: considering (as we have heretofore said, and
as hereafter shall be more at large spoken) that there is no superfluous nor
unprofitable thing in the death and passion of our Lord Jesus Christ. And
therefore, for so much as he was terribly tormented, he has on the one side
witnessed unto us his infinite goodness and love, and we, on the other side
are to look what it is that our iniquities have deserved before the majesty
of our good God.

Now, it is here said, that over and besides that, which has been already
recited, that our Lord Jesus Christ was put to be skorned and shamed of the
ungodly, that they might even glory and triumph over him: for there is no
doubt, but that the Prophet by this word Grave, meant to express, that Jesus
Christ was subject to all rebuke and shame, and that God would forsake him as
it were for a season, to the end the world might make no reckoning of him:
accordingly as it is set down unto us in the Gospel. For they did not only
crucify Jesus Christ, but they also put out their tongues at him: railing and
scoffing, and as much as in them lay, went about to make him desperate. Which
thing was very well foretold by the Psalmist, to wit, that the most wicked
and ungodly, should put out their tongues at him. For this was the speech they
had, he has saved others, say they and therefore let him now save him self if
he can. Why calls not he upon his God? Psalm. 22.8. Mat. 27.42.
we shall see whether he so greatly loves him or no. We see then how the
wicked wounded our Lord Jesus Christ, and how furiously men outraged against
him: and it was to this end and purpose, that we might find so much favor at
the hands of God, as to have our sins covered: and although Satan has
wherefore to accuse us, yet shall all the shame whereunto he is any way able to
put us, be clearly buried. Wherefore since our Lord Jesus Christ would needs
bear all our blame and shame, it was to this end that all our filthiness
might be covered before the Lord our God, so that they should never be able to
come in mind any more.

And when the prophet speaks here of the Rich, it is as much as if he had
said, the most outrageous kind of people. For we know, that when men are rich
and in authority, they go about to make them selves to be feared, always
abusing their power and credit. And this also we see, that very few or none of
these men keep any temperatnesse and measure, either yet become gentle and
mild, when they may hurt. But as for the poor souls, although indeed they
are fearce and cruel enough, yet are they kept back from doing any harm,
even by maine force, and thereby the mischief which they would gladly do, is
not seen. Howbeit as for the rich and mighty ones, they are without all
order, and think whatsoever they do is lawful. To be short, the Prophet his
meaning is, that our Lord Jesus Christ was thrust into the hands of men, to the
end he might be so vilainously handled, as that he was not worthy to be
accounted amongst the contemptible and petie companions: but to be taken as a
worm of the earth, and to have all the mocks and skornes that might be, to be
laid upon him. Thus we see the sum and effect of this first part. Now, he by
and by after says, That he had for all this done no wickedness, whereby he meant
to show, that that ye son of God, as touching himself being innocent, would
take upon him all our burdens, wherewith we were ouercharged: for there was no
mortal creature that was able to bear and suffer that which our Lord Jesus
Christ did. And so by that mean, the prophet again declares unto us, that it
was not for his own deserts, neither yet was he guilty of any thing whenas
they thus cruelly and tirrannously used him: but abod all this gear for our
sakes. And to say the truth, if we look well into the life of our Lord Jesus,
John. 18.3^.
we shall find that never any man had just occasion to attempt any thing
against him. In very deed the priests told Pylate, that they would never have
brought him before his worship without he had been a malefactor. Mat. 11.5.
John. 6.11.
Now it is so far of that Jesus Christ did any shrewd turns, if the matter
be throwly examined, as that he did none other hurt, but make the blind to
see, the lame to go, heal the sick and diseased, raise the dead, and fill ye
hungry and needy: to be short, all the riches, of the goodness, and mercy of
God, yt were to be seen, were powered out upon him. What was the reason then,
yt me^ thus persecuted him? surely it must needs be, yt this proceeded from
some other cause. Here therefore we see why ye prophet brings us back to ye
remembrance of our sins and iniquities, whe^as he speaks of ye pureness of our
lord Jesus Nether must we think that ye prophet meant here, simply to justify
the son of God. For this were a very bare kind of speech to say, lo I
beseech you, he was guilty in nothing, but so behaved himself, as yt al ye
world was to love and honor him. All this is true indeed, howbeit, this were
over cold a kind of doctrine to be taught, yt our lord Jesus had need to be
excused, and exempt, from all blame. And therefore the prophet had a farther
consideration with him: and ioineth these 2 points together which are here set
down: to wit, ye god had put his only son to al horrible rebuke and shame, and
yet was innocent and guiltles. Now, if men should lift up themselves against
him, and it not done by the providence and counsel of god, it might be said yt
they were furiously bent, and yet knew not any cause why: nevertheless, it is
said yt it was done by ye hand of God. For, although the priests, and all the
Jews in general and the Soldiers, were stirred up by the Devil, to vomit out
these blasphemies, which we read of in the Gospel, against our Lord Jesus,
yet, Isaiah says, that they had never bin able to have done it, with out the
appointment of the Lord, and therefore we must not fix our eyes only upon
men, to say, that this or that they have done: but it is as if God had set him
self down in his judgment seat, to have fully determined to send his only
son into the hands of such wicked and cruel tirauntes, as that no shame and
villanye that was possibly to be devised should not light upon him. And
therefore, when it is not only said that men, but ye God his father also spared
him not: John. 3 16.
who gave him to death for our redemption (whereof Saint John also speaks,
that God so loved the world, as that he would show it in the person of his
Son, because he gave him over to so bitter a death for us) if we so lift up
our eyes, as to acknowledge that nothing came unto the person of our Lord
Jesus Christ, but by the determination of God, we must conclude, that since
Jesus Christ was innocent (as indeed he was) that therein, manifestly appeared,
our sins and iniquities, so that all the shames and reproaches which lighted
upon him, should have been upon us. And therefore let us understand, that it
is meet that all the Creatures in the world should arm them selves to cry
for vengeance upon us: yea and although they have neither mouth nor tongue,
yet might they be there so, to discover all our shames and vices, as that both
heaven and earth might be ashamed of us.

We see now what we are to consider of in this first place: For either God
must at pleasure have thus afflicted his only son, or else have showed us
what we deserved for ye greeuosnes of our sins: to wit, that we are blame
worthy of al hands. In very deed we cannot a way with the least punishment
that may be: and besides, we are so effeminate and impacient, as that if our
credit be touched, we will eftsoons, wonderfully storm: and all this is
because we know not what we are, neither judge we whether we be rightfully
or wrongfully blamed.

Wherefore, let us well consider, that although the rebuke and shame which we
deserve, are abolished in the person of our Lord Jesus Christ, yet is it meet
that God should move and stir us to repentance: and although we would not by
our wills enter into the trial and examination of our shame, yet rayseth he
up men to awake us: and the more that we would go about to hyde our faults
by vain excuses, the more lays he our shame open before us, to the end it
might be known, Saint Paul amongst the fruits of repentance, sets down
this, 1. Cor. 14.25 2. Cor. 7.11.
That when we think of our wicked life past, we should close our eyes, groan
before the Lord God, and be ashamed of our selves. But what is he that does it
so perfectly, as it ought to be done. Nay we rather seek after an
hipocritical manner to forget our sins and iniquities: and GOD means to
remember us and to call us to an account, whenas he sees us so slightly and
cunningly hide them. But by the way, let us consider, that we may now present
our selves before God and his Angels, and be assured that our sins shall not
be laid unto our charge, neither yet our uncleanness be discovered, and
that because our Lord Jesus has borne such blame: neither was this by chance
as we commonly say, neither yet did men falsely take this matter upon them
against him, without the good will and pleasure of God: But because God had
thus established the matter by his heavenly judgment. Now forsomuche as our
Lord Jesus was just and righteous, it was also very meet that he should
bear our burden upon him, being in this sort afflicted. And therefore, let us
in the first place understand, that we deserve to have all rebuke and shame to
be laid upon us: and yet for all this, that we are pardoned of the same,
because he has discharged us thereof, and has made satisfaction for it in his
own person. Thus we see why, and to what purpose the innocence and purity
of the Son of God is here spoken of. For it is not set down to the end to
excuse him, but for this cause, that we might feel what we are, and whether
we must needs be brought, except we were redeemed and bought from it.

Moreover, the Prophet meaning to express such a full perfection as could not
be amended, says, That there was no deceit found in his mouth. Now Saint
James says, James. 3.2.
That he must needs be a very perfect man, out of whose mouth escapes not an
ill word, because the tongue is the weakest thing that maybe. And although we
be too too much inclined to al kind of wickedness, yet, that man that can
refrain his hands and feet, and in such sort lead the whole course of this
life, as that he is seen to live virtuously and in the fear of God, yet is
he never able to refrain his tongue, but that there will appear some light,
inconsiderate, lying or dissembling speech in him. To be short, it is said
that there was no deceit to be found in our Lord Jesus Christ, to show,
that in all his words and deeds, he was a myrrour of all holiness.

Now, it is most certain that all the miseries which we feel are the very
fruits of our sins. For, had we aboade in the same purity wherein God set
our father Adam, our punishments should cease and be abolished in the world.
And therefore the fruit of our sins is the cause of our punishments. So then,
we are to conclude, that for so much as there was not found the least blot that
might be in our Lord Jesus Christ, he therefore bear the punishment, which
we were worthy of, and deserved. And mark besides, why the Prophet adds,
that God would make him subject to infirmities. This word Infirmity, has a
large scope in the Scriptures, for it imports all the things which make men
contemptible, as we see in many places thereof. For, poverty, sickness,
grief of mind, or contemptiblenesse, and a man that has no good grace either
to speak or do well, neither yet good gesture or behavior, nor habiltie of
wit and discretion, are al called in the Scripture infirmities. To be short,
this is to bring us back to the thing which the Prophet has already touched:
to wit, that our Lord Jesus Christ was like a deformed Creature, and such a
one as in whom was no show of reputation and credit amongst men. And yet not
such a one neither, but that there appeared in him, sure and certain marks
and tokens, that he was to be honored as the only Son of God: John. 1.14.
But it was in such sort darkened by his sufferings, and his infirmity such,
as that there was no power or virtue seen in him, and it seemed that there was
no grace nor favor in him why he should be esteemed and had in honor. We
must also call to mind the thing that has been before recited, to wit, that
he was beaten and scourged by the hand of God, suffered the horrible anguishes
of his judgment, and in his body bear the fearefullest torments that might
be: and over and besides all this, he was so vily thought of, as that he was
not esteemed to be placed amongst the most wicked and slauishe company. Thus
we see how the Son of God was punished. Wherefore, since the case thus
stands, let us understand, that forsomuche as God spared not him, that we
for our parts shall not be spared: and yet notwithstanding he has given us
occasion to humble our selves, to the end we should not wax proud, and
take in hand to justify our selves, or else not cast our sins behind our
backs, but daily think upon them and be ashamed, whenas we see how dear a
recompense was made for them. For, is this such a triflyng matter? If a
miserable and wretched thief shall have committed many theftes and robberies,
and after that his wicked deeds were known, the son of a King should be
brought to be arrained and condemned for the same, and so bear the punishment
thereof, and the thief to be discharged and pardoned, should he rejoice and
make a scofe at him, whenas he see the son of a King to be put to death, and
suffer the punishment that he deserved? Even so at this present fares it with
us. For, behold how Jesus Christ the only son of God is imprisoned, and
we delivered, he condemned, and we pardoned: he put to all shame, and we
received to honor, at last he descended into the bottomeles pit of Hell, and
the kingdom of heaven is set open for us to enter into. And therefore when we
here al these things, is it for us to be drowsy headed and live securely, and
to delight and flatter our selves in our sins and iniquities? Wherefore, let
us well consider of the meaning of the holy Ghost, and always weigh these
words, That it was the will of God to have him thus afflicted: as if he
should have said, Acts. 2.23. and 4.28.
That it is not for us to think that our Lord Jesus was forsaken, as that the
wicked ones might torment him at their will and pleasure: For, as Saint Peter
says in the Acts of the Apostles, They could do nothing against him
otherwise then had been determined before by the secret counsel of God. And
therefore it is not for naught that the Prophet brings us always back to
this, that we must lift our minds unto God, and acknowledge yt he being judge
of the world, would be satisfied for our sins and offenses even in the person
of our Lord Jesus Christ his only son, to the end we might be discharged of
the^ and that it was not without cause yt Jesus Christ was so rudely:
ha^deled, yt we might look up ye cherefullier: and yt we might understand that
God would not remember our faults, with made us to be as it were detestable in
his sight. Wherefore, when we shall have known all this, we shall have
greatly profited not only for a day, but also all the days of our life. For
to say the truth, it is a doctrine wherewith we must so acquaint our selves,
as that although we think we know it well enough, yet yt we must not cease more
and more to conform our selves thereto. And for yt more lively expressing
here of, see why the prophet goes on further and says, That he will make
his soul an offering for sin: to wit, that Jesus Christ will forget his own
life for the redeeming of our lives, and the price of our sins and
iniquities. Here the Prophet again sets before us the willing obedience of
the Son of God: For, as he has said, that as it was the will of the father
he should be afflicted, even so likewise he now says, that the Son
yielded himself willingly thereto, thrusting himself forward to become a
Sacrifice without force or constraint. For, the common manner of offering up of
Sacrifices unto the Lord God, was always done of a francke will and devotion.
And therefore it must necessarily fall out that our Lord Jesus Christ should
yield and offer up himself to the death, which he suffered. For, without
that, (as yesterday was declared) our rebellions had never been repared before
God: But when he offered up his soul, to wit, that he was pressed and ready to
suffer the condemnation that we deserved, in this we may see, that we have by
his death full assurance of salvation. And this he himself says in the
Gospel after Saint John, No man, John. 16.18.
says he, shall take away my life, but I will freely offer it up my self. In
deed, his life was taken from him when he was crucified, and we see also how
ungently and furiously they dealt with him that crucified him. Howbeit they
could never have done any thing against him, do the best they had could,
without it had been so before ordained by the sacred decree and appointment of
God the father, as has been already alleged out of the Acts, Acts. 2. 23. and
4.28.
where it is said. That they did nothing but that which the hand and counsel
of God had ordained. But over and besides all this, our Lord Jesus Christ was
contented and well pleased with the sentence and judgment yt was given upon
him for our sakes. Now the prophet sets it namely down yt it was, for sin.
For, all sacrifices were called sin offerings, because yt he who had committed
an offense, when he came to ask pardon, brought his sacrifice with him, and
thereupon was discharged: as if he should have said, Alas my good God, behold
I stand here before thee as a guilty and condemned person: and it is
impossible for me to bear the punishment yt I have deserved for it: but
should rather be a burden utterly to cast me down into the pit of hell:
Howebeit for remedy hereof, I crave pardon at thy majesty's hand by mean of
the sacrifice which here is offered up unto thee. Here we see why they were
called sin offeringes: to wit, because the curse which we deserved, and under
the which we were altogether cast down, was as it were discharged, and laid
upon a bullock or sheep, or upon some such like thing that was offered. Now,
all this was done in the law under a figure. So then, our Lord Jesus was
called sin, because he bare our curse, that God his Father might bless us.
Neither let us think that this is any whit derogatory from his Majesty, but
that we ought rather so much the more to magnify him: For as S. Paul says
in his Epistle to the Corinthes, That he who knew not what sin meant, 2. Cor.
5.21.
was made sin for us, that we might be ye righteousness of God in him. There
is no doubt but that Saint Paul meant to set forth unto us the fruit, and
benefit of the death and passion of our Lord Jesus Christ, even as the Prophet
here sets it down unto us. We see then that Jesus Christ was innocent,
without spot or wrinkle. And therefore since it is so, he was meetest to bear
the charge of others. Now he in such sort bear it, as that he was made
sin: to wit, he sustained our curse. And how so? Forsooth, to the end that
we now might have righteousness to answer the Majesty of God. For the
obedience of our Lord Jesus Christ is as a cloak to cover al our iniquities:
and besides, his blood is as a thing to cleanse us, when we are washed
therein, and as Saint Peter says, Bedeawed and begot therewith by his holy
Spirit. Here then we see the meaning of this place, 1. Pet. 1.2.
Mark also here again, that to the end we might detest and abhor both
our sins and our selves, we must consider of the wonderful sufferings of the
son of God: because it is so strange a thing, as yt it ought to put us in a
marvelous admiration: that he who is the fountain of all righteousness, was
made sin: that he who is blessed, and sanctifies all things, yea even the
very Angels of heaven, became accursed. Now, when we hear all these things
spoken of, and see them to be very strange, yet have we not the wit and
understanding, to apply them to our edifying. For since the Son of God was
brought to this point, is it possible for us to find any remedy else where? No
surely: for we may soon judge, that neither men, Angels, nor nothing else
whatsoever, was able to do us any good, but yt we must needs have our help at
ye hands of the son of God. And therefore this Devil Seruetus (which was here
executed) is so much the more accursed and damnable: because he has falsified
and stained the holy Bible, in saying that all this was prophesied of Cyrus an
Heathen Idolater: and robbed our Lord Jesus Christ of the thing which so
properly belonged unto him, as that when Isaiah had fastened this as it were
unto a lively Table, that even the^ Jesus Christ was crucified, the things
could not be made more manifest and plain. And yet this Devil brought with
him such an horrible wickedness, as that he has spoiled our Lord Jesus
Christ both of his dignity and office, and says, That it was an Heathen man
that suffered for the people, whenas in deed what by reason of his ambition
and covetousness he would needs shed the blood of a man, and therefore
received his just reward for the same. Howbeit this is a fearful falsifiyng
of this godly Prophecy, and to say truly, never man alive ever once thought
of any such meaning, as this cursed fellow has devised. For, although a great
number of shameless Heretics have perverted the doctrine of the holy
Scripture, yet never did any of them come thus far. And therefore, it cannot
be chosen but that all the signs and tokens of a reprobate appeared in this
cursed man. Wherefore, we are here so much the rather to note, that when the
Prophet brings us back to the consideration of our Lord Jesus Christ, that
(in the first place) it is to this end that we might be ashamed of our
selves: and besides, that we might magnify the inestimable goodness of our
God, because he would have his only Son to become sin for us: and that
our Lord Jesus Christ himself refused it not, but as one forgetting himself
had such care of our salvation, as that he descended into the bottomeles
depthes of horror, to the end he would bear our curse. And therefore we are
here also to consider of this point, that there is none other mean for us to
be discharged before God, but to set before us the satisfaction of the
Sacrifice which was offered up for us once for all. Indeed this is very true,
that the world always has a meaning to devise some one thing or an other, I
know not what, wherewith to pay God (as has heretofore been said) and for
example, we see what store of pretty fond triflyng bables many Papists use
wherewith to appease ye wrath of god For in deed, they tell us that it is
impossible for us to be forgiven, without we make satisfaction: for, say they,
although God of his free mercy and goodness forgiueth us the fault, yet he
reserueth always the punishment, until such time as every of us has
discharged himself before him. And hereupon we see from whence comes the
foundation of Purgatory: For, because we cannot whiles we live here make
satisfaction, but that there must remain always some remnant and arrerages,
we must therefore, say they, bear the punishment out of this world, and that
is it that must pay god. Lo here how the miserable world has been deceived
and blinly lead with the leasinges and doting dreams of Satan. And therefore
we are so much the rather to make an observation of this doctrine: That as God
has not set down in the Law, and said, You shall not serve me this way, and
that, as pleases you: But placed and ordained the sacrifices, and Ceremonies
contained in the Law, and thereon stay them selves without devising any new
and strange kind of Service and mean to obtain favor and grace: Even so
likewise must we at this day be contented with the death and passion of our
Lord Jesus Christ, because we know that that is the only mean by which God
will be merciful and favorable unto us, and by which also he will receive and
adopt us unto himself. Thus we namely see what it is that the Prophet means
to offer here unto us. Now, it is moreover said, That he will prolong his
days, and that he shall see his seed to be permanent, and that the will (or
pleasure) of the Lord shall prosper in his hands. Here, he brings us yet
once again back unto the consideration of the glory and excellency of our
Lord Jesus Christ, to the end we might be so much the more assured yt we may
come unto him: for if he had removed in death as a vanquished person, it had
been impossible for us to have been ever justified and quickened by his grace.
For how could death a lone have brought righteousness and life with it, as of it
self: but because of ye sacrifice of his death he rose again, therein rests
our full and whole co^fide^ce. Thus we see yt we have obtained victory over sin,
to ye end we might be taken to be righteous: and death is abolished in us, yt
we might have life: In deed, this in the first place, has relation unto the
person of the Son of God, For, as we have already said he dyed according to
the infirmity of his flesh, 2. Cor. 13. 4.
howbeit, the heavenly power of his holy Spirit was showed in his
resurrection: and hereof he gave this testimony, for these were his words,
destroy ye this Temple, and within three days I will raise it up again.
John. 2.19.
Lo here how the Son of God, as touching his person did see a great age:
For he rose not again to show himself unto the world for a while, and then
dye again: But after he had showed himself unto his Disciples, and made them
witnesses of his resurrection, he ascended into heaven, and so exempted
himself from all humane frailty. This then it is whereon we must build our
faith in him, when as we see him to have in such sort overcome death, and the
Devil, and triumphed over him, as that after that he was offered up for a
Sacrifice, he was received and exalted unto this power and dignity, whereof
mention has already been made. But we must also note by the way, that all this
belongs to the whole body of the Church: for it is not the purpose of Jesus
Christ to separate himself from it. Heb. 2.11.
And in deed it is further said, that he shall see his seed. True it is we
are called the brethren of Jesus Christ: For we could not be called the
children of god but by the same name. And therefore, he who is the only
beloved must receive and join us so unto himself, as that we might have that
by adoption, which is only his by nature howbeit, this is no let unto us from
being as children engendered of his seed. For, what is the true seed of the
Church? Verily even the word of the Gospel as Saint Peter tells us. 1.
Pet. 1. 23. and 25.
And in deed it is the very self and same which we have already seen
veryfied unto us out of the Prophet Isaiah, That the word of the Lord
endures for ever, because by it we are made incorruptible, Isaiah. 40.8.
whenas we receive profit thereby, according to that measure that it is given
unto us by the holy ghost, this then is the seed by which we are regenerate
into everlasting life. Howbeit we must first come unto our Lord Jesus
Christ. And how comes it to pass that the Gospel has this office and
Property to beget us to be the children of GOD, Forsooth the reason is this,
because the blood of our Lord Jesus Christ was a true seed to quicken us.
And therefore it is not for naught said here. That he shall see a seed of
long continuance, or an everlasting seed. So then, we are again to conclude,
that the benefit which our Lord obtained by his resurrection, was not
particular for him self alone: But that we might have part thereof, and be
called unto his company, because we are members of his body.

Now, we are here, by the way admonished, not to seek for one drop of
life in our selves, but to take it wholly from our lord Jesus Christ. Why? how
will God then acknowledge us to be his children? How shall we have any place
in his Church? How shall we be taken to be of his flock? Forsooth we must
come to this point, Because we are partakers with our lord Jesus Christ: Thus
we see how God accepts of us, this is our begetting, and first birth. And
now let our freewill men go and brag of their free will, by which they
suppose them selves to be ready to receive the grace of God. For what ability
is he able to have to do, either good or ill, that is not yet begotten in the
womb of his mother. Wherefore, let us understand thus much, that since our
chief and first creation is this, that we are begotten in Jesus Christ, that
we are able to do nothing, neither yet that any thing proceeds from our
power and strength, but that all whatsoever we have, comes from that free
goodness of his, whereof we are made partakers. And this is the sum and
effect of all that which we have to consider of. But by the way, to the end
we might also have a great deal the better taste of his death and passion, it
is said,

Because he gave his soul an offering for sin (to wit, for satisfaction* or
for sacrifice) that he should see his seed. For, we right well show, that
we would blot out all hope of salvation, if we glorified not the goodness of
God, in the death and passion of our Lord Jesus Christ. And to say truly,
they that proudly disdain to cleave unto our Lord Jesus Christ, because he
was crucified, rightly declare that they have not known the end thereof: For
without it, what should become of us? Surely, we should have no Church in the
world, there should be no salvation, and to be short, there should be no hope
of any goodness: For without doubt we should be all remediless confounded,
lost, and condemned, without Jesus Christ had offered up his soul, and bought
us again by that only mean.

1. Cor. 6. 30.
And for this cause the Scripture also oftentimes shows us, that we were
redeemed with no small price. And thus much we have to consider of for this
point.

Now, it is said, for a final conclusion, That the will of God shall prosper
in his hands. The words which the Prophet here uses, signifies a worldly
will, and free favor: For, it were not enough that our Lord Jesus Christ
should execute the will of God: But that it should be a will proceeding of
love, as a testimony of his fatherly affection. For, Moses executed the will of
God when he published the law: and yet notwithstanding every man was afeard
at the thunders and lightnings: for there was nothing else but threatenings of
death. And why so? Forsooth, because the law brought nothing else with it but
wrath and vengeance. For, it was meet that the world should feel in it an
horrible condemnation, Hebr. 12.18.
and be wonderfully afeard. Howbeit, there appeared an other manner of will of
God, in Jesus Christ: and that is this, his meaning was to receive us unto
himself, and to have mercy upon us, to abolish our sins, and to discharge us of
the condemnation wherein we were. Thus we see ye property of the speech which
the Prophet here uses, when he says, That ye will of God should prosper. Now
it is by and by after said, in his hands, which signifies, yt Jesus Christ
should be a distributer and bestower of the grace of God for our salvation.
True it is, that God might by some other death have delivered us from death,
howbeit it was not his meaning, neither yet was it so good. And therefore he
appointed our Lord Jesus Christ, to the end we might by him, be redeemed and
reconcyled: and to be short, that by him we might obtain whatsoever was
requisite for our salvation.

Let us now make a collection of the sum and effect of this saying, It is
said, That the good will and free favor of GOD should prosper in the hands of
Jesus Christ. Wherefore speaks the Prophet after this manner? Forsooth,
because, we are enclyned unto mistrust, and have a number of lettes to make us
fainte, the holy Ghost, preuenteth the matter, and declares unto us, that
howsoever the world goes, the grace of God shall work it effect, and be
accomplished,

And therefore, although the Devil craftily goes about to devise to make the
death and passion of our Lord Jesus Christ to be of no force and effect unto
us, and bring forth no fruit in us: and although we for our parts are so
wicked and perverse, as that we will so fall from it, as that we will make it
altogether unprofitable unto us: yet will God by his infinite goodness
overcome it all. To be short, the Prophet his meaning here in this place
is, that the death and passion of our Lord Jesus Christ, has not been only
sufficient for the salvation of the world, but also that God will make it so
forcible, as that we shall see the fruit thereof, and feel and prove it by
experience.

And heerevpon we are to gather, that God will always have a Church in the
world, and that the Devil may very well devise all the mischief he can
possible, and bend all his force to overthrow the house of God, and yet, be
as be may, Christ Jesus shall have the victory, and the grace, whereof he is
a distributer and bestower, shall be beneficial, and performed amongst men.

And for this cause it is said by the Psalmist, Psalm. 2.1.
Why have the Kings and Rulers of the earth lifted up themselves? and made
couenantes with the people? Yet must God in the end, execute his Counsel and
judgment. In very deed, they will go about to imagine much, but yet he
which dwells above in the heavens will mock them all to scorn in his wrath.
Let us therefore well consider, that the meaning of the holy Ghost is to
declare, that the death and passion of our Lord Jesus Christ will always work
his effect, to the end the Church of God might stand firm and sure, so that
it shall never be overthrown, by all the assaults, tempests and
whirlewyndes, whatsoever that the enemies with Satan their head, can any way
possible raise up against it. And this saying, to prosper, is set down, to
show, that God will make the death and passion of our Lord Jesus Christ
flourish, to the end it might more and more fructify: and when it shall seem,
that it should be utterly defaced; that God will uphold it, and overcome
whatsoever may be any let for the bringing of it to a perfect end. Moreover,
every of us ought to apply this unto himself, and not doubt, that although our
wings flagge* and we the bondslaues of sin, yet that God will deliver us from
out of that slavery wherein we are, make perfect that which he has begun in
us, and amend also whatsoever is wanting in us. And how? Forsooth, we must
first come unto our Lord Jesus Christ: because it is he which puts to his
hand, and to him the charge thereof is committed, and this office he received
from God his Father. And therefore let us be contented, that since he is
appointed to be the Minister of our salvation, there shall be no defect or want
which he will not accomplish by his mean, and that because he has so
determined it. 2. Cor. 5.19.
Now, let us by the way, apply to this which is here set down, the place of
Saint Paul before by us alleged, to the end we might be partakers of the fruit
of the death and passion of our Lord Jesus Christ: that is, let us give ear
unto the message that is daily brought us. For it were not enough that Jesus
Christ had suffered in his own person, and appointed to be a sacrifice for us:
but we must also be certified thereof by the Gospel: that we have this
testimony by it, and not doubt but that we are justified by him, because we
know that he has made satisfaction for our offenses. And thereupon let us
look that God will in such sort continue his work in this Redeemer, as that
he will make it increase more and more, until he has brought it to a full
end and perfection.

Let us now fall down before the Majesty of our good God, and acknowledge our
offenses, beseeching him so to make us feel them, as that we may be more and
more displeased with them, and also learn us so to look into the death and
passion of our Lord Jesus Christ, as that it may be a good instruction for us
to be grieved and groan for our sins and not doubt, since that our Lord
Jesus Christ has discharged us of that whereof we were guilty, but that we
might now come before the Majesty of God his Father, and be received as his
children, although in deed we are unworthy to be reckoned amongst the number
of his creatures. And that we may in this strength fight against all our vices
and wicked lusts, and so be made partakers of the forgiveness of our sins,
as also we might be strengthened, to make all our whole life agreeable unto
God: and as he has showed him self favorable unto us, we might also labor
most obediently to please him. That it would please him not to show this favor
unto us only, but also unto all people and nations on the earth, etc.

The sixth Sermon of the Prophecy of our Lord Jesus Christ.
Isaiah. Liii. 11 HE shall see of the travail of his soul, and shall be
satisfied: by his knowledge shall my righteous servant justify many: for he
shall bear their iniquities.


ALthough the Prophet, for a confirmation of that which he has already said,
brings in this sentence: to wit, that the death of the Son of God should
not be unprofitable, but should yield a most excellent fruit for the salvation
of the world: yet does he more lively set it forth then heretofore he
has done: For, in the first place, he shows unto us the love which Jesus
Christ bear us, saying, That he shall be satisfied, by reason he had
purchased for us, by his death, everlasting life: and besides, he shows in
the second place, that he shall not suffer only in his body, but in his
soul also. Now, we know that this saying, to be Satisfied, or to be
Contented, imports or carries with it, a great desire. For, many things
shall come to pass, which shall touch us no whit, and we ouerslip them: yea,
and although they be for our commodity, yet is not for us to say, that we
altogether rest in them. And a man may have a great number of things, and yet
not be contented: For it is possible that he has not the principal, or else
that he has not the whole: But the Prophet shows that the Son of God shall
be thoroughly satisfied, never respecting him self, when as he shall see that
he has gotten unto him his Church, and that poor sinners shall be delivered
from the curse wherein they were, and so be reconciled unto God, for the
obtaining of the heavenly enheritance. To be short, we see here that our Lord
Jesus never respected his own person, but was ravished with the love of us,
wherein he sought his whole contentment and felicity, as if that had been his
only desire, love, and care. Now, we have again here to note, that if so be
we look for the benefit which our Lord Jesus Christ purchased for us, by
Faith, which is daily offered unto us by the Gospel, we shall never be void
of our hope. For the Prophet says, That he shall see, by which he
expresses, that God does not only mean to show his mercy unto us in the
person of his Son, when as he delivered him to death: But will bring it also
to pass by his holy spirit, that this his death shall not be fruitless, and
that many shall see, and find by experience, that it was not in vain, nor for
naught, that he suffered so great torments. And therefore let us embrase our
Lord Jesus Christ, to the end we drawing near unto him by faith, might be
made partakers of the fruit of his death and passion: and let us be assured,
that whensoever we shall at any time estrange our hearts from him, that God
will not add this benefit with the rest, that as his will was that his Son
should be our Redeemer, even so also should we truly enjoy ye benefit which he
has brought us, and understand that it was not in vain that he suffered such
cruel torments for us. And this is the thing which we are to consider of out
of this place. As for the second point which is propounded, it is here showed
that Jesus Christ should not only be beaten, scourged, and afflicted by the
hand of God his father, that he might bear the chastisement which we were
worthy of, but that his soul also should be grieved and vexed. It is not
here said, that he shall see the fruit of his strypes, affliction, and
death, as the Prophet had before said: But also the fruit of the travail and
grief of his soul. For the words which he uses, imports as much. And
therefore he meant to express that Jesus Christ was not only crucified,
after he had abode the grievous torments in his body, but that he should go
a great deal farther: to wit, that he should be heavy and sorry for us, and
suffer the sorrows of death, and be even subject theretoo for our
justification. And to say truly, to what purpose had it bin, if our Lord Jesus
Christ had but openly suffered, and in the sight of the world? For if he had
suffered but in body, he should then have bin a Redeemer of bodies only. But
because the principal matter why we should believe in him, is, that we might
feel and be fully persuaded, that death shall be no more deadly unto us, and
that we are freed from the curse of God, it was meet that our Lord Jesus
should feel these points in himself: and so coming before God, might be as
a wretched malefactor before his Judge. For, we know that the sin of man
brought not with it a temporal death only, but also a feeling of the enmity
of God, and of his horrible judgment against us. And what is that? Forsooth,
the most insupportable and terrible thing that possibly may be. And therefore it
was meet that our Lord Jesus should be driven theretoo, for our deliverance: and
this is it which the Prophet at this present declares unto us. And here we
see a great deal the better, how God has loved us, and what the infinite
Treasures of his grace and goodness are, which he has powered out upon us.
Moreover, we may also very well understand, what care and zeal our Lord
Jesus Christ had over our salvation, when as he forced not to make his own
body answer the satisfaction of our sins, but also to bring him self into
such an horrible fear, as one that should feel the judgment of God, who
laid hold on him, as upon him who had deserved the curse which God had
pronounced from his own mouth: to wit, that it was the very thing to swallowe
us up into hell, and a gulf utterly to destroy us. And therefore it was meet
that Jesus Christ should feel all this. Now, to say the truth, when we see
that he had thereby sweat water and blood, Luke 22.3.
and that the Angels came down to comfort him: this could not choose but be an
wonderful extreme sorrow and grief: seeing the like example had never been
seen all the world over. Thus we see the meaning of these words, Of the
travail, or grief of the soul of our Lord Jesus Christ. Now, it is true
(as Saint Peter says) that the sorrows of hell could not hold him under:
howbeit it was meet he should strive with them: Act. 2.24.
and in the end he had the victory over them, but it was not without great
and painful fight. Moreover, we are presently to gather out of this place,
that although we must dye, we must not therefore say that the death and
passion of Christ was not effectual, nor yet profited us so much as was
expedient: because, the death whereunto we are now subject, is but a warning
unto us of the curse of God.

For, if we were clearly exempt from death, we should then never know the
grace which was purchased for us by our Lord Jesus Christ. And we also know
what need we have to be humbled, and that God makes us always to feel his
wrath: For although we were altogether exempt thereof, yet ought we to think
still of it, to the end we might groan by reason of our sins, and therefore
magnify his mercy so much the more. Wherefore, the death to speak properly,
which all men now dye as it were, is not deadly, to those which have faith in
Jesus Christ, because they pass out of this life, to live unto God. And
therefore when we dye, we are to comfort our selves and rejoice, because we
know that God will be merciful unto us, and convert the evil into good, and
make death (which before brought with it a mortal wound) to serve for a
plaster. And how is that? Forsooth, because we shall understand that God
will not become a severe Judge unto us, and pour out his vengeance upon us,
when as we bring Jesus Christ with us, to show that he has made satisfaction
for us. And therefore death has not taken such fearful hold on us, as to
confound us, and bring us to despair: Ioh. 6.39. and 10.28.
But do come, freely to put our selves into the hands of God. For, as it said
that Jesus Christ commended his soul unto God his Father, Let us understand,
that it was to make him Gardaine of our souls, and therefore may we commend
them most assuredly into his hands: because he has said, that whatsoever is
given to him to keep, shall never perish. Thus then we see to what end this
anguish of our Lord Jesus Christ serves: and that over and besides he abode
death, and the rest of the torments, yet had he also this terror of the
feeling of God to be his Judge, as if he should have suffered the pains of
hell. Now, it is so far off that this is any whit derogatorie from his
Majesty, as that it is to make us a great deal the better understand, how
greatly he esteemed of our salvation, and how dear and precious we and our
souls were unto him. And therefore, although he was made of no reputation (as
before has been seen) and had neither form nor fashion, why men should be
desirous of him, yet was this his light estimation of him to exalte him so much
the more.

And in deed, although God showed his highness and infinite Majesty in the
creation of the world, yet have we a far more large cause to glorify God in
the death and passion of our Lord Jesus Christ, because Jesus Christ abased and
humbled him self for us and for our salvation: and although he was not robbed
of his divine Majesty, yet lay it hyd for a time, and was never perceived by
any man. And this is in sum, that which the Prophet here handles, as
concerning the pain and grief of our Lord Jesus. Now, we see herein that he
forgot him self as it were, and never cared for him self, and the reason is,
because he was altogether given to save us: And so answered for us both in
body and soul, and was our only pledge. And in this we see, that the very
curres who would at this day abolish this doctrine, have neither faith nor
religion in them, but bark at it like Mastifes, they know not why nor wherefore.
And although our Popish hypocrites who understand this but by halfes, are yet
notwithstanding, howsoever the world goes, driven to confess, that Jesus
Christ felt most terrible panges. In deed they were never able fully to define
of all that was in it: But yet, how ever it comes to pass, they iumble partly
at it. Notwithstanding, there are here a company of villaynes, more Monkish
the^ they which live in their Celles, and in those stews out of which they
come, who have brought their stench and infectio^ into the Church of God. And
therefore this is most certain, yt these Dogs which at this day carry the
name of Ministers, and do also occupy that place, and yet make a Swynes stye
of the Church of God, being like Dogs without all religion, and go about
nothing else but to deface and put out of men's minds all the grace of God, and
whatsoever else our Lord Jesus Christ has done for us. Now, when we see that
Satan has thus pushed them forward, as to become like shameless whores, we
ought so much the rather to consider of this Article of our faith: which is,
That Jesus Christ was not only condemned of Pylate, being an earthly Judge, to
the end we might be pardoned before God his Father: and not only crucified,
that we might be delivered from the curse: that he did not only suffer
death, that we might be freed from it, But also that we at this day might have
peace of conscience, and be glad in that we feel the fatherly love of our God,
and so may be bold to call upon him with open mouth, being assured yt he will
receive us, and that we shall be acceptable unto him. And it was meet yt Jesus
Christ should be plunged in these horrors which he felt, it was also meet that
he who was the immaculate Lamb of God, should be made like unto a wretched
malefactor, and that he who was the mirror and pattern of all holiness and
perfection, should answer for us, and become our Borrow even to that very
pinch, as if he should have been condemned unto the bottomless pit of hell.
Moreover, he vanquished and overcame all these sorrows (as we have before said)
but yet he wrestled stoutly against them first. Thus we see what the meaning of
Isaiah is, when he says, that Jesus Christ must see travels and griefs in his
soul: howbeit we see that he was notwithstanding well contented and fully
satisfied therewith, always provided that we might be redeemed by that mean.
And therefore we may at this day be so much the more bold, knowing that if we
have a true obedience of faith, whereby to receive the inestimable benefit
which our Lord Jesus Christ has obtained for us, we may feel that he
suffered not all these torments for us, in vain. Wherefore, our unthankfulness
shall be so much the more inexcusable, when as we come not unto him with such
an earnest zeal, to enjoy this inestimable benefit whereinto he is entered,
and whereof he has in our behalf, taken possession, having told us that he
has reconciled us unto God his Father, who is ready to receive us as his
children. Thus we see in sum, what we have to consider of in this place. Now,
the Prophet goes on farther, and says, That by his knowledge, my righteous
servant shall justify many. As for this word, Servant, we have before seen,
that it is no whit derogatorie from the majesty of our Lord Jesus Christ:
For, although he was Lord over all Creatures, yet obtained he a new
government in the person of a Mediator, and in our nature, according to that
saying of Saint Paul to the Philippians, and as we have also seen partly
heretofore: Phil. 2.9.
for it was his meaning to become a servant, and to humble him self under that
state and condition. And therefore it was not in vain, that he was called the
servant of God. Now, this ought to be no strange thing unto us: But this
should be much more strange unto us, that Jesus Christ being the very Son of
God, John. 17.9.
and coequall with God his Father in glory, should become a servant to men (as
it is said in the Gospel after Saint John) and so abase him self under this
condition, Mat. 20.28
as that he would serve us: and yet notwithstanding it was so in deed. Mark
also why he said, I was conuersaunt amongst you as a servant, and not as a
Master.

Now, since it is so, that Jesus Christ became so humble, as to make him self
the servant of men, it is not for naught then that he is here called the
servant of God. And to say the truth, he could not otherwise have redeemed us.
I speak now in respect that God his Father had so decreede it, as we have
alredie heretofore said. For, I know that God could, if it had pleased him
have saved us without any mean, But we are always to presuppose that it was
Jesus Christ which must purchase life for us. And therefore, for the bringing
of this matter to pass, it was eftsoons meet that he should become a servant:
because he could not otherwise have yielded his obedience unto God his Father:
and without this obedience, it was impossible for him to have repaired our
transgressions and iniquities. Thus then we see why he was called a righteous
servant. To be short, the Prophet does us to wit, that because we were, and
yet are, rebels to God, until such time as he has reformed us by his holy
spirit: and again, although after he has given us the touch of a good mind,
yet are we unprofitable servants, and tryp and stumble every hand while: and
besides, when we shall think that the service which we do him, should be
well accepted of him, yet may it be very well amended, yea and worthy to be
rejected: and therefore for the blotting out of our offenses, it was meet that
the service and obedience of our Lord Jesus Christ should please God: and that
it should also carry with it a right and full satisfaction. This then is the
sum and effect of his meaning. And hereupon we are to gather, that Jesus
Christ did not only justify us in that he was God, but through the power of
his obedience, in that he took upon him our nature, and therein would
accomplish and fulfill the law, which was impossible for us to do, because it
was such a burden as would have pressed us all down, and have broken our
necks. For So Much then as our Lord Jesus Christ forsook himself for our
salvation, and became obedient unto God his Father, we see in what sort he has
justified us. Now, he speaks also namely of his knowledge, meaning thereby to
express, that it was not enough that our Lord Jesus Christ performed in his
own person, all whatsoever that was necessary for our salvation, but that we
also should take fast hold thereof by faith.

And therefore knowledge is very requisite. For how many incredulous or
unbelieving persons do we see perish, unto whom the death and passion of our
Lord Jesus Christ, serves to none other purpose, save only for their greater
condemnation, because they tread his most holy and precious blood under their
feet, and utterly refuse his grace which he offreth unto them. John. 3.14.
Numb. 21.9
And so, although our Lord Jesus Christ be like unto the Serpent which was
set up in the wilderness, for the healing of all diseases, yet can we for our
parts receive no profit by him, except we know him. For, as it was meet also
that the brazen Serpent should be looked on in the wilderness, and without
which looking on, the biting or stinging of the Serpents was always deadly:
Even so at this day, is the Gospel unto us as a Scaffolde whereon to set up
our Lord Jesus Christ: or else like a Banner to represent him unto our eyes, 3.
Cor. 4.1.
that we might see him a great way of. To be short, The preaching of the
Gospel (as Saint Paul says) is not dark: For we may in it behold the
grace of God, appearing in our Lord Jesus Christ, or else the Devil has
blindfolded our eyes. But how ever it is, we are thoroughly to consider of that
which is here spoken, that Jesus Christ justifies not but by his knowledge. In
deed it is most true, that the very substance of our salvation must come from
thence: For, when it is said, that we are justified by Faith, this is not to
exclude Jesus Christ, neither yet the mercies of God, but rather to lead us and
bring us unto them. But to the end we might the easelyer come to the
understanding hereof, we are to consider in the first place, that we are not
righteous of our selves, since we must borrowe it of some other: For if we
were able so to rule and order our life, that it might be all in all answerable
unto the law, and will of God, then in deed we deserved that he should accept
us. And why so? Forsooth, because he is to allow of the good, since he is the
fountain thereof: for else, he should deny him self. And therefore if we
could frame our lives to agree with the law of God, and be so perfect as he
requires, we should then without doubt, be justified by our works, and Jesus
Christ (as Saint Paul says) should profit us nothing.

Collos. 5.4.
But contrariwise, when we are driven to borow our righteousness of our Lord
Jesus Christ, and seek it at his hands: that is as much to say, that we are
as bare of it, as we say, as my nail.

Wherefore let us thus conclude, that the whole world is condemned of sin,
and God shows us that we are all accursed, when as it is said, that we
must come unto our Lord Jesus Christ. And thus much for this point. Now, to
say the truth, the ancient Philosophers spoke thus much of virtue: and this
has been always a common opinion, that God will accept of us for our good
life and conversation: But what are we the better for all this? For there was
nothing but hypocrisy in the best livers, and in such as was thought could in
no wise be touched: and as for the rest, they were altogether given to
wickedness: But to speak of those who were thought of all others to be the
most able and renowned people, were notwithstanding infected with very
grievous sins.

And therefore let men presume as much as they lust, and think how they will
to live virtuously, yet when they have done all they can, and set down many
laws and rules for their government, they shall never be able to be justified
before God by that mean. And why so? Forsooth, because sin has taken such
deep root in us, as that it cannot be pulde out of us by man's help. To be
short, we shall never be justified by going to School with men, although
they teach never so much what virtue is. And that which is more, Behold, God
publishes the law wherein is true and perfect righteousness: for mark what
Moses says, Behold, says he, I pronounce at this day both good and
evil: I show unto thee the way both of life and death. But by the way, can
we be justified by it? Can it so order us, as that God will take our life to
be good and holy? 2. Cor. 3.7. Romans 4.15.
No surely, it is all clean contrary: For the law engenders death,
redoubleth our condemnation, and kindles the wrath of God against us.

Thus we see what tytles the holy Scripture gives unto it. And therefore
since the law of it self cannot justify us, how then is it possible for men
by their doctrine, statutes, and ordinances, make us to be truly righteous.

Now, if it be asked how and wherefore the law is not able to justify: the
reason is alredie set down. It is true in deed that God declares unto us in
his law, how we ought and may attain unto life, if so be we were such as
that there were no let in us. Wherefore, although the law of God speaks unto
us, yet it refourmeth not our hearts. For, when God tells us and says,
Behold, what it is that I require at your hands: But and if in the mean
while all our desires, affections and thoughts be altogether against that
which he commands, we are not only condemned, But the law also, as I
have alredie said, makes us so much the more guilty before the Majesty of
God. For before the law was given, we sinned through ignorance: but now,
we so wittingly and willingly stand against him, as that it seems we would
even despite him. For we know that the servant which knows his Masters
will, and does it not, shall be beaten with many strypes. Thus we see why it
^e said, that the law engenders nothing else but wrath: to wit, that when we
have been instructed in it, it kindles God his wrath so much the more against
us: and brings with it death, but how? Because forsooth we see in it, that
we are condemned and utterly cast away. What? is it so that it announceth not
life? no: and yet by the way, we cannot attain theretoo. And therefore we must
be justified after an other manner, which is, by the Gospel. For, God says
not unto us in the Gospel, Behold, ye shall do this or that: But he
says, Believe that my only Son is your Redeemer: embra^e his death and
passion as a remedy for all your diseases: wash your selves in his blood, and
he shall purge you, and ye shall be made clean therewith: stay your selves
upon the sacrifice which he has offered up unto me, and then see in what
sort you shall be justified. Wherefore for so much as the Gospel brings us
back unto our Lord Jesus Christ, and commands us to seek for all our
righteousness in him, because he has made full satisfaction for us through
the free mercy of God, see how we shall be justified by his knowledge. Romans 10.
And this is it which Saint Paul handles in his Epistle to the Romans, For
there he makes a comparison between the righteousness of the law, and the
righteousness of Faith. For, he says, that there is this righteousness in
the law, when as it says, Whosoever shall do all these things, shall live
by them. For, this is most true, that if we be able to fulfill all the
commandments of God, so that our life be in such sort ruled as that it is
without spot or wrinckle, God has promised to receive us as righteous, that
we shall be very sure of our reward, and not miss of it.

Mark then the certayntie that is in the law: but tell me who it is that
does all that the law commands? Surely we go altogether backward, and a man
would thinks (as I have beforesaid) that we would go about even to set our
selves against God Thus we see yt the gate of ye righteousness of the law is
quite shut up against us, and that there remains nothing else for us, but the
very curse of God. But in the Gospel, it is said, behold, the word is in
thine heart, and in thy mouth. But how? forsooth, after thi^ sort* S. Paul
speaks of it, and says, Romans 10.^.
That if we will have the word in our hearts and mouths, we must come unto
Jesus Christ: because it is he which writes and imprinteth the doctrine of
salvation by his holy spirit: with which doctrine we have had our ears
beaten unprofitably and in vain. And therefore since our Lord Jesus Christ
puts his word in our hearts, let ^^ beseech him to grant us this grace as
that we may have a pure and free affection, to the end we might seek in him
whatsoever is wanting in us. Thus we see how we shall be justified by his
knowledge: for it is out of al doubt that we are no way able to bring any
satisfaction of our own with us which may please God, and to make this
account, as to say, we have deserved, O Lord, that thou should receive us:
but we should rather say, we confess, O Lord, that we are miserable sinners,
bound over so thy judgment, and it is impossible for us to make satisfaction
thereto, so that we must needs acknowledge that there is no sufficie^cie in any
but in Jesus Christ alone to make satisfaction for the same.

Wherefore we should most humbly confess this: and say that we are forlorn and
damned creatures until such time as our Lord Jesus reaches out his hand to
p^^ us out of the pit of hell Now here we confessed all this to be so: And
besides, we know that our Lord Jesus also supplyeth all our wantes. For, if
we ^ee foul and filthy, his blood washes us, wherewith we (...) ^^eane. If
we be fallen in debte, not only unto GOD ^ut also unto Satan, as too our
enemy, Ephe. 5.1.
the payment was made ^ the death and passion of the Son of GOD* And if we
be defiled, and not to be abidden, the Sacrifice which our Lord Jesus
Christ offered is such a sweet smelling savor as that all our wickedness
is defaced.

Thus then we see how we are justified by the knowledge of our Lord Jesus
Christ. And according to this doctrine, we see in ye first place, yt we must
not seek far for our righteousness, because we shall find it in the person of
our Lord Jesus Christ, in yt he is clothed with our nature, and is become our
brother: and this is a matter of great importance: for if we should be
justified by ye divine essence or nature of our lord Jesus Christ, we must
needs be far of from his righteousness, and we were never able to come near
it. But when we are told that the righteousness which he bestows on us, was
fulfilled in his humane nature: mark then how much more familiarly we may
come unto him. Consider also why Satan would so fain confound this doctrine,
and there are likewise some fantastical spirits, which fondly dream that our
Lord Jesus Christ, as he is God, justifies the faithful. But we must (as I
have already said) seek for our righteousness very far of, and that were
enough to make us fainthearted, and to make us also vanish away before we came
at him. But contrariwise, as he is a mortal man, he calls us unto himself,
and made himself a Mediator, because we might seek for our righteousness
therein. And this is a point worthy the observation: and besides, let us
always come unto this knowledge. And because the faithless shut the gate upon
themselves, and so spoil themselves of the benefit which they should receive
by our Lord Jesus Christ, let us therefore be dilligent to receive the testimony
which is given unto us by the Gospel. We bring you (says S Paul) the
Ambassade in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, beseeching you to reconcile
yourselues unto God. S. Paul sets down a double reconciliation, 2. Cor.
5.10.
the one is, the sacrifice which our Lord Jesus Christ made for us in his own
person, the other is that which we daily obtain through faith, when as GOD
tells us, that although we have moved him to anger, yet is he continually
ready to forget our faults, and tread them under his feet, so that we make
account of the benefit which he offreth us.

And therefore, let us learn too esteem of the Gospel a great deal more
then heretofore we have done: and understand, that it is to this end too
make us Partakers of the death and passion of our Lord Jesus Christ. For we
are ingraffed into his body, and made his members, and al whatsoever is his,
is also ours, and that through the aptness of the Gospel: and for this cause
it is, that Saint Paul says, Romans 1.16.
that the Gospel is the power of God unto salvation, to all that believe:
showing hereby, that if we refuse to be saved by the Gospel, it is as much as
if we rejected the salvation which God would obtain for us in the person of
his Son, and whereunto he daily bideth and exhorts us. And this is the
sum and effect of that which we have here to observe.

And therefore, we ought so much the more make estimation of the Gospel,
whenas we see that it was in popery so darkened, yea and in such sort,
altogether defaced, as that the poor souls were utterly famished. For,
although it was somewhat slightly preached, yet left they always the poor
people doubtful, and supersticious, without having any assueraunce of the
mercy of God. Yea, and the Papists say, that we must not presume to assure
our selves of the love of God, but only live upon conjectures and gesses.
Howbeit this is to make the fruit of the death and passion of our Lord Jesus
Christ of none effect. And therefore let us learn so to benefit our selves by
the Gospel, as that we may be certified that God loves us, and takes us for
his own dear children. Wherefore, let us (as I have already said) so much the
more praise and magnifye this grace, whenas we see the greatest part of the
world to be so far from it.

Now, it remains that the Prophet adds and says, that he laid down his
soul for many. Whereby he signifies, that we are not justified by a certain
vain imaginatiue faith, in only believing that there is a God, and by a
confused knowledge and general conceit to understand, that Jesus Christ has
suffered death and passion: but because we are made partakers, by faith, of
the sacrifice that was offered for us, to the end God might be favorable
unto us, and not impute our sins and iniquities any more unto us. Surely, the
Papists are so blockish and brutishe, as that when they would show that we are
not justified by Faith only, they reason after this manner, we are (say they)
justified by the mercy of God: and therefore not by faith only: Moreover they
say, we are justified by the death and passion of our Lord Jesus Christ: and
therefore no more, by faith only: it is much like as if a man would say, we
are made warm by heat, and therefore not by the Sun: we are lightened by
the light, and therefore not by the Sun.

Now, let us here note, yt when we speak of faith, it is to this end to bring
us back to the Gospel: for (as I have already said) here are two kinds of
righteousness. For we are said to be justified by the law, whenas we have
fulfilled all whatsoever God has commanded us therein. Now, it is impossible
to come to the perfection thereof and therefore we see that we are bare of
this righteousness, and utterly cut of from it.

There is also another kind of righteousness, and that is the righteousness
of Jesus Christ, for after we have been throughlye examined and tried, we are
sure to be found guilty of malice and wickedness, so that we must needs be
afearde, because we feel God to be so armed in wrath against us, as that he
does nothing else but thunder out vengeance upon us to throw us down into the
pit of hell. And therefore, when we are driven to this so great an
extremity, behold how Christ grants us a remedy to mitigate and assawge
all our sorrows: which is this, he certefieth us, that he him self alone
will be altogether sufficient to bring us the saving health which he has
purchased for us. Thus we see, that we are justified, by faith, wherefore we
may perceive that the Prophet speaks after the self same manner that Saint
Paul spoke, after his time, that is, he makes us in the first place to come
unto the death and passion of our Lord Jesus Christ, beholding him crucified
for our sakes, and besides, that we are assured by the Gospel that whatsoever
Jesus Christ did and suffered, belongs and is to be applied to us at this
day, because the Father would not have this his death to be unprofitable: but
that it should be a Sacrifice full of power and effect, to fruictifie daily in
us. And this is the sum of that which we have, to remember out of this
place. But by the way, let us here note, that this knowledge of our Lord
Jesus Christ is no vain thing: as many, when the knowledge of the Gospel is
told them of, understand it, for they think it sufficient, if they do but
slightly conceive of that which is taught: but we are taught to take our
Lord Jesus to be the only cause of our salvation.

Which thing we are never able to do without we lively feel that we are
lost in our selves: and besides, that as God meant to receive us once for all to
his mercy, even so he at this day increases the same in us. And to say the
truth, it is impossible for us to attain to this knowledge, except we be
enlightened with his holy spirit. Which when we have obtained, it is an
undoubted sign yt god means to work in us, to the end he would put us
into the possession of that righteousness, from the which we were before very
far of, We see then that God would gladly have the Gospel preached. But yet
that is not enough: for, we should understand no more of it, then an high
Almane (as we say) until such time as he inwardly touched us with his holy
spirit (thus we see from whence faith proceeds) and then are we the true
and good disciples of Jesus Christ, able to feel the fruit of this doctrine.
And this is it, which the Prophet here shows unto us. Now, he again makes a
recital of Jesus Christ his bearing of sins, whereby he means to declare,
that he made satisfaction for them, and that our sins should be such a charge
as should cast us headlong into the bottomeles pit of hell if we were not helped
and eased by our lord Jesus Christ. For what is meant by sin, but the very
wrath of god? For, if God but once hold up his finger, it is enough to destroy
and overthrow the whole world: for it is said, that with his breath the rocks
should riue in pieces, Psalm. 104.32.
and the mountains be softened and melt like wax. Wherefore, if God shows
the least token of his fury and wrath, there is nothing so firm and sure in
the world, but shall melt away: and what shall become of us then, who are so
frail creatures, when as God shall show unto us the face of a terrible judge,
and call us to an account? Were it not meet that we should hearken unto his
voice: howebeit the only sign that he will give us to summon withal shall be a
bottomeles depth to swalow us up in. And therefore it cannot be chosen but that
our sins must needs be a burden not able for us to bear. Now, there is an
infinite number of them in us: and we have not the shoulders to stand under
them and to bear them. But although our Lord Jesus Christ suffered in the
weakness of his flesh, yet did the power of the spirit, which he had always
uphold him. 2. Cor. ^3.4. Collos. 2.1.5.
And mark how he himself (as Saint Paul says) tryumphed upon the Cross.
And therefore we must always come back again to the saying of the
Prophet: and Saint Peter also is a good expositour hereof, when he says,
That he bear our sins* upon the tree. 1. Pet. 2.24
Indeed the virtue of the tree did no way help our Lord Jesus Christ for the
bearing of our sins: howbeit it is said he bare the^ on the tree, because yt
when he was crufied, he was as one accursed of God, and had received the whole
curse wherein we were plunged. All this then he took upon him, to the end
that we might feel the fruit thereof, and rejoice in the victory, whereof at
this day he has made us partakers. And therefore if we be ouercharged, let us
come unto our Lord Jesus Christ that we might be eased, and acknowledge him
to be the mean, because we are so discharged by him of al our debts, as yt we
must not once imagine that we are ever able to make satisfaction, or payment,
when as we shall come to make our Audite before God, we must therefore begin at
this end to be utterly ashamed: and besides, not stand in doubt but that we are
now discharged, since our Lord Jesus Christ has borne our burden: and that
we may also be bold, because we know that we are freed from the judgment of
God. This then is the sum of that which we are here to consider of, That
for so much as we have once for all been sanctified through the Sacrifice which
Jesus Christ offered up, whenas he consecrated himself unto the service of
God, as he then said: we must at this day lay all our sins on his back,
Gala. 3.10 Deuteronomy. 27.29
and seek our full righteousness in him: for the perfourming whereof, let us
lend our ears to the hearing of the Gospel, because we know that God with a
loving voice calls us unto himself, requiring no impossible thing at our
hands, which might make us despair: as it is said in the Law, Cursed be he
which does not fulfill all these things (which was to exclude us from all hope
of salvation) But that it is here told us, that although we are miserable
sinners, yet that God applies a convenient remedy unto us: which is, that we
coming unto our Lord Jesus like poor beggars, might be justified by him and
be helped in such a necessity as in deed we are. And besides, that we might
understand, that when our Lord is called Righteous, Romans 10.6.
it is to show us that we are justified by him. inasmuch as he has taken upon
him our nature, that we might have familiar recourse unto God, for the inioying
of such a benefit: and not say, Who shall ascend up into heaven? For, when
Saint Paul alleges this place of Moses, he shows, that when we hear the
Gospel preached, we must not make any long discourses, to know whether God
be near us or not. For that were to pluck Jesus Christ out of his heavenly
throne. And likewise, that we might no more say, Who shall go down into hell?
For Jesus Christ descended thither, to the end we might be assured that he
has fetched us out thence, and plays now the part of a Mediator: and
means to make us such partakers of his righteousness, as that we shall be
clothed therewith, and have such possession thereof, as that it shall dwell in
us, and that by it we might with a full hope be so lifted up unto God his
father, as to call upon him without doubting.

Let us now fall down before the Majesty of our good God, and acknowledge our
offenses, beseeching him to make us so too feel them, as that we may truly
repent us of them, and daily amend our lives, until such time as we have so
much profited, as that we may be joined unto that perfection of his
righteousness whereunto we must bend our selves, and also seek to attain
unto it all the days of our life. And in the mean while in such sort
magnify the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, as that we may wholly rest
therein: so that we might no more wonder after our false and deceitefull
imaginations, which Satan continually labors to set before us (as at this
day the miserable world is seduced and beguiled with. But let us understand
that all the perfection of our salvation rests in our Lord Jesus Christ: and
then let us by no mean decline from him, but in such sort possess him as we
may be wholly contented with him, and that he also may altogether take pleasure
in us: and to be short, that we may feel, that his death and passion, has
been auailable and profitable unto us. That it would please him to grant unto
us only, this grace and favor. But unto all people and nations of the world.
etc.

The seventh Sermon of the Prophecy of Christ.
Isaiah. liii. 12 THerefore will I give him a portion with the great, and he
shall double the spoil with the strong, because he has powered out his soul
to death, and he was counted with the transgressors, and bare the sins of many,
and prayed for the trespassers.


THE Prophet declares here in sum, that our Lord Jesus Christ has not
only overcome death by death, But that he has also a just title and interest
to take away the substance of his enemies, and to make a spoil of them, even
as a conqueror that has won the field. In deed I must needs say this,
that our Lord Jesus Christ enriched not himself with the goods of this world.
But that which he did was to this end as I have said, to overcome death. We
know that it was meet yt Satan, who is said to be the Prince of this world,
should be displaced of his kingdom: For if it had not been so, our estate had
been most miserable. And besides, it was meet that sin should bear no more
sway. Ephe. 4.8. Psalm. 68.19.
Thus we see how our Lord Jesus Christ made a spoil of his enemies, to wit,
because we might be no more under the tyra^nie of Satan, and the bondage of
sin, but be set at liberty. And to say the truth, S. Paul alleging the
saying of the Psalmist, shows after what sort this place was fulfilled, when
it is said, That God ascended on high, and lead captivity captive: and kept
his enemies bound and fettered, so that they were not able to resist him:
receiving also homage and tribute of men. Indeed David in that place speaks
by way of similitude: For when it is said that God ascended on high, it was
because he made a show for a time as though he had been a sleep: so yt when
things were after such a co^fused manner, it might make the faithful groan when
as they see no help, and cause the wicked to run headlong into all
licentiousness. Wherefore when there arise such troubles in the world, and
that we think ourselves never a whit the better for the calling upon God, he
is for the time as it were one that were lost, and that had hid himself. And
contrariwise, by this reason, whenas God has defended the cause of his Church,
in destroying the enemies thereof David says, that he arose up. Howbeit S.
Paul says, That this was accomplished in the person of our Lord Jesus
Christ, because his majesty was darkened, and was had in no estimation of men
for a season. And therefore it was meet, says he, that he should come down
on the earth, and be contemned of men, that he might in the end be so
exalted, as that he might not only be simply and plainly honored of men, but
that he might also make a distribution of the spoils and tributes. For where
the Psalmist says, That he took the tributes which belonged unto him, as unto
one who had brought his adversaries in subjection, S. Paul says, that he
liberally bestowed his gifts amongst men. A man would think at the first sight,
these were things clean contrary one to another, and yet they right well
agree, because our Lord Jesus Christ was not enriched particularly for
himself, for he had no need of any thing, but it was to this end, as the
Psalmist says, to bestow the spoils on us, so that not only they which
should fight, should have part of the booty, but women also who never set one
foot out of doors. Psalm. 68.13.
For, to say the truth, we feel how God by the death and passion of our Lord
Jesus Christ, has filled us with his benefits: not for that there was any
virtue or industry in us: For we are of as little force as women with their
distaffs, when as we come to the fight. Wherefore, when it is said in this
place that GOD will give to Jesus Christ the booties of the enemies which he
had conquered, as strong and mighty as they were, it was not only for himself,
but it was to the end that we might understand, that the Devil has no title
nor interest in us whe^as we are partakers of ye death and passion of ye son
of god: which we obtain by the mean of ye gospel And therefore let us without
hipocrisy, submit our selves unto our Lord Jesus, and take him for our king:
and not doubt but that in ye first place he will surely set us free, and
besides, that we shall receive from his hands all such benefits as we have
need of, and are necessary.

Let us now then consider yt if Satan were not spoiled, how miserable we should
be: For he possesses and peaceably inioyeth us: For as our Savior Christ
Jesus says: Iuke. 11.21.
we are even as his own proper possession and demaines. Wherefore we had need
that the death and passion of our Lord Jesus Christ should, bring forth
fruit in us, and that our enemies being conquered, should be eftsoons chased
away, that Jesus Christ should so tread on their necks, as that they
should never be able to rise again, although they went about to devise to do
all the mischief they could against us. And here he namely speaks of strong
and great men to the end we should not be abashed at the force, munition,
and all the furniture of our enemies: For this were enough to fear us, to see
on the one side, our own weakness, and to know on the other side that the
Devil is like a roaring Lion, 1. Peter. 5.8.
and sin to have dominion over us: this, I say, were even enough to fear us,
except we were assured of this, that neither power, strengthes, nor any thing
else whatsoever, can let our Lord Jesus Christ from spoiling of all his
enemies, from chasing and bereauing of them of all they have, so that which
before was hurtful unto us, shall now be turned to our good and benefit. And
this is not only meant of Satan, the captain of all the wicked, but also of
all our Adversaries: For, look how many faithless people there are, even so
many furyous enemies have we against us: and to make few words, we see all
the world almost on our tops. And therefore what should become of us, if
Jesus Christ could not overcome all the strong and mighty ones of the earth?
So then, we see here in the first place what it is that we have to consider of
out of these words, That Jesus Christ being ascended, has not only held al
our enemies captive, but also has made an utter spoil of them: and we have
received all the gifts which were given him for homage, to the end we might be
enriched by his liberality, being of our selves altogether poor and needy.

Now, it is namely said, Because he has powered out his soul to death.
Whereby Isaiah again expresses that our Lord Jesus Christ, of his own free
will, offered up himself for these words, to pour out, signifies, that he
spared not himself, nor sorrowed for the matter. For he that gives with a
good will, and in the end slacketh his hand, makes always a show of
sparing. But he that powers out, shows yt he gives lustily, and
liberrally. So then, it is showed us, that our Lord Jesus was so fervently
inflamed with the love of us, as that his life gushed out like water, and that
he became a willing Sacrifice, thereby to show, that he desired nothing else,
but for reconcilement unto God his father. And this is always for our greater
confirmation, to the end that when we come unto him, we should never doubt
but that he would most gently and lovingly receive us. For, how is it possible
that he should so reject us as members cut of from him, seeing he so utterly
as it were, forsook himself for our sakes, and shed his precious heart blood.
Wherefore, when we hear this, we are occasioned to come more boldly unto him,
and to assure our selves that he at this day will make this Sacrifice, which
he so freely offered up unto God his father of great effect by reason of the
wonderful love he bare to us ward,

Moreover, for so much as the death and passion of our Lord Jesus Christ is
perpetual, let us understand, that we are at this day enriched as much as is
needful, as by experience we feel: For, Jesus Christ must needs help us in
all the distresses wherewith we are encompassed. For otherwise how should we
do, if his hand were not always upon us to uphold us? Surely it were
impossible for us to stand. And therefore he always gives us wherewith to
relieve al our needs and necessities. And to say the truth, all the graces of
the holy Ghost are a part of the spoil of our Lord Jesus Christ: For, God
his father has enriched him with them, because we might be as a man would say,
familiarly acquainted with them, and the Devil will still be a let that the
power of the holy Ghost might not have his course with us: howbeit we are now
enriched with them, in as much as al lets are taken away: yea, and (as I have
already said) that thing that was an hinderance unto us in this world, is now
turned to our good and benefit, because our Lord Jesus has made a spoil of
all his enemies. Now, it is namely said, Because he was accounted amongst
sinners, and bare the iniquities of many, and prayed for the trespassers. We
have already heard, that our Lord Jesus bare the transgressions of many: and
that was because he sustained the punishment which was impossible for us to
bear. And besides, we were too too frail and weak to stand before the
majesty of God, if we should be burdened with our sins: because there is no
mean in the whole world to be found to discharge us of them. And therefore it
was meet that our Lord Jesus for the easing of us should present himself in
our steed, and be charged with our sins, that they might be imputed unto him
before God his father, and he be bound for the payment of them. For, when a
man shall only owe a thing that he is never able to pay, he is like unto one
that were stiff and crooked, and knew not which way to turn him, and has
such a burden on his back, as it were, that so crusheth and bruiseth his
shoulders, as that it makes him to stoop again: what shall the^ become of us,
who are not debtters to a mortal man, but even unto the living God? and not
debtors of gold and silver, but of our sins, which deserve as the scripture
tells us his fearful indignation. Thus we see how the judgment of
everlasting death was prepared for us, until such time as our Lord Jesus
Christ had discharged us thereof. And to say truly, how had we been ever able to
have discharged it, except he who had a most triumphant power over all
creatures, had placed himself in our steed, and supplied our wants? Thus we
see how our Lord Jesus Christ bare the sins and iniquities of many. John.
3.16. Romans 8.32.
Indeed this saying of many, is oftentimes taken for all. True it is that our
Lord Christ offered up himself for all the world, for it is not spoken by
three or four, when it is said, God so loved the world that he spared not
his only son. But by the way, we must note, that which the Evangelist
further says in this place, That whosoever believes in him should not perish,
but have everlasting life. We see then that our Lord Jesus Christ suffered for
all, so that neither great nor small can excuse themselves at this day, since
by him we may be saved. And therefore the unbelievers who by their wickedness
turn a side, and deprive themselves hereof, are at this day twice guilty. For
what color can they set in it to excuse their unthankfulness, in yt they
receive not the benefit, whereof they might be partakers through faith. Wherefore
let us here learn, that although we should come by heaps unto our Lord Jesus
Christ, one of us should be no let to another, but yt he is able to suffice
every of us. Indeed if the question were to be helped and eased by a mortal
man, it were another matter. For, if one should come and say, I beseech you
bear this burden for me and another say as much, and so an hundredth at once:
surely, although he were very desirous to help and ease them all, it could
not be chosen but that they would make his shoulders crack: for, it were
impossible for him to be of that strength to bear al yt they would lay upon
him, And so likewise if the question were of borrowing, for put the case that
they were hungry, and thirsty, and should go to some man and beseech him to
give us meat and drink, and it may be that he were well able to bestow meat
and drink of a dosen persons: But if there should come such a great number as
that his victualles should fail him, we should see him come short of his
reckoning. So then, with us me^, it is meet yt when a great number have need,
that there should be also many to help and aid them: but when we come to
Jesus Christ, we need not fear the want of his ability, for when every man
shall have his portion, yet has he never a whit the less, and others also
shall find enough at his hands, for the more of us that come unto him, the richer
shall we find him to help our need. And therefore we have here to note, that
it is not for naught that the prophet says, that he bare the sins of many:
to wit, to the end we should not malice and envy our neighburs, as if we
could not be helped, because some of them have to much of him. This then is the
sum and effect of that which we are to learn out of this place.

Moreover, it is said, That it was, because he was accounted amongst
transgressors. We are here to observe in the first place, that he must
needs be hanged between two thieves, that he might suffer all the
condemnation that we deserved, and to the end that we might have a more sure
and certain pawn, that God his Father has pardoned and forgiven us all our
sins and iniquities.

Mark also why Saint Mark aleadgeth this saying of the Prophet, Mark. 15.2^
yt there were two Thieves hanged with our Lord Jesus Christ, to show, that
he was taken to be a most detestable and cursed man: and to the end it might
be openly seen that he was placed in ye rank with all shame and rebuke,
because we should at this dai be exempt from ye wrath of god, and from ye
punishment of ye evil deeds which we had deserved: and where before we were
cast down even unto the pit of hell, we might now be coupled together with
the Angels of heaven, who altogether worship God, and have fulfilled all
righteousness. All this benefit then have we by this, in that it has pleased
our Lord Jesus Christ to take upon him this place and to become a malefactor,
to the end he would be thought the most shameful amongst men.

Thus we see how the shame of our Lord Jesus Christ has exalted us on hie,
to the end sin should not be laid to our Charge, and we to be free from all
condemnation. For, wherein consisted our salvation if our sins were not
covered and taken away? surely we were never able to come to this by any other
mean, without the son of God as S. Paul says, were our redemption, that is
to say, 1. Cor. 1.30.
he was the price and payment of that which we owed, to the end, that we might
now be quitted and discharged thereof. And therefore it was not for naught that
the Prophet joined these two things together: and daily shows us, as
heretofore has been said, that we have wherefore to gloryfie our Lord
Jesus Christ, in that he was put to all the shame that might be, seeing the
fruit and commodity that we reap thereby. For if our Lord Jesus Christ
should have done that only, for a show and token of humilytie, it had been
too too bare a matter: but he did it to this end and purpose, that we might
find that in him, which we want, and that it might also be the remedy for the
same thing which might grieve and oppress us.

Wherefore, when we are so reconciled unto God, as that we obtain
righteousness thereby, and full forgiveness of our sins, Behold, we need
not then be a feared to come unto our Lord Jesus Christ, albeit his crucifying
in the view of the world, seems at the first blush, to be very shameful:
and yet we see, that he so triumphed over Satan and sin, as that he has
made us righteous, and canceled the obligation that was against us, so that we
may now come bouldly to God, with good assurance that we are righteous: and
with open mouth glorify him for it, wherefore before we were most horribly
condemned. And this is the effect of that which the Prophet means, again to
put us in mind of.

After all these things, he says, that he praid for the trespassers. This is
namely put in, to show that Jesus Christ in his death and passion, played the
part of a priest: for if this had not ben done also, we should never have had al
ye was requisite for ye assurance of our salvation True it is, that for so much as
the death and passion of our Lord Jesus Christ is the sacrifice whereby our
sins are wiped away, and his blood our washing and cleasing, his obedience
the avolishing of all our rebellions, and the obteining of our righteousness by
this we have wherein to rejoice. Howbeit this is not all: Because it is said,
That whosoever calls upon the name of God shall be saved. Nevertheless,
Joel. 2. 3^.
how were it possible for us to have recourse unto God? What boldness were it
for us to pray, and cry out with open mouth and say, O our father? Were not
this overmuch presumption to come thus pure and clean to God, and vaunt our
selves to be his children, if we had not the word to bear us in it? And
again, where should we find such an Aduocat and Proctor that would do so
much for us, except we come to Jesus Christ? Thus then we see what the Prophet
meant to add for a conclusion of that which went before. To wit, that Jesus
Christ prayed for the trespassers. Now, this is very true, yt he prayed of god
his father when he was on the Cross, that he would pardon and forgive his
persecutors. For these are his words, Father, says he, I beseech thee pardon
the^, for they know not what they do. Luke. 23.34.
Here we see what a prayer our Lord Jesus made for the trespassers, and for his
enemies who so cruelly handeled him, and by whose hands he was crucified. But
it was not the meaning of the Prophet to speak only of this especial prayer,
but rather to declare the Sacrificing of our Lord Jesus Christ. And by the way
let us here well consider, that it was not for naught that he spoke here of the
Trespassers. It is said a little before, that he bear the sins of the people
of God, and suffered for the transgressions of many: But now the Prophet
attributes another name to those for whom Christ prayed, and calls the^
transgressors. When he spoke of the people of God, it was to show that those
whom a man would think to be most excellent and righteous, had need of
forgiveness of sins, which they could never have had, had it not been that
Jesus Christ had shed his most precious heart blood for the washing and
cleansing of them. And thus much then for this point: That if we would be of
the Church, and be allowed to be of the congregation of God, we must needs
understand, yt it is because Jesus Christ is our redeemer, and therefore let us
not fear to come in great companies to him, and rather then fail let every
one bring his neighbor with him, because he is able to save us al. Moreover,
it is here set down, that we are all transgressors to the end we might
thoroughly consider of our sins: For we know our selves to be so bold and rash,
as that we will oftentimes be more shamefast and sober in requiring of any
thing at the hands of amortall man, the^ we will be when we come before the
Majesty of god. Now the Prophet, here pulls down all the Peacocks plumbs,
when he calls us transgressors: as if he should have said, O you cursed and
wicked ones, what are you that dare presume to call upon God by the name of
father? From whence have you this dignity? What is he ye dares once
enterprise to come before the presence of the Majesty of god, and say, I am
one of thy children? Away (says he) and go hide your selves, for you are al
malefactors, and in coming before God, you come before your Judge, and
therefore you ought to tremble and be utterly ashamed. Howbeit the only remedy
to assure your selves is this, that when you call upon ye name of God, you have
an invincible defense by the power and intercession of the Mediator. For
without him there is no hope of your salvation, but are altogether dead in your
sins. And therefore understand you, that you had need have the son of God
to be between you and him, and to make intercession for you, by playing the
Priests part. We see then here why the Prophet namely calls us al
trespassers and transgressors, to wit, to the end we might know that the gate
is shut upon us, and are unworthy to come near unto God: and that we are all
oppressed and confounded, if we run not to that help: For without this remedy,
we must needs perish and rotte in our wretchedness and miseries. Now, when we
are thus humbled, then may we come to our Lord Jesus Christ, Because we know
that it is he that speaks for us, and that by him also we may boldly call
our selves the children of God. For when we come to pray, and say, O our
father which art in heaven: we must needs acknowledge that our mouths, as
concerning our selves, are filthy, and therefore not worthy once to call God,
our Creator, and it is so far of in deed, as that we ought not to be so
presumptuous as to take our selves for his children. And yet our Lord Jesus
Christ speaks for us, Heb.
and so by his mean our prayers and supplications are sanctified: For so it is
said in the Epistle to the Hebrews, That by him it is by whom we render unto
god the sacrifice of praise, and all our prayers, and that he is our mediator,
in whose name at this day, we call upon God our Father. And therefore we may
boldly glorify our selves in that he will take us for his children. We see
then how we are to put this place in practice. Now we see that our Lord Jesus
Christ has verified this, when he prayed for his, as appears in the Gospel
after S. John, Look unto them, John. 17.11.
holy Father which thou have given me: for now I go out of the world. Those
that thou gave me I have kept, and none of them is lost, but ye lost child:
but those whom thou gave me in charge, have I kept. Now I pray for them, and
not only for them, but also for all those which shall believe on me through
their preaching, I pray not for the world, but for those whom thou have given
me, that thou would bless and sanctify them, that they might also be one
as we are. When then we see the son of God pray: and see him also, who is God
eternal, so to abase himself, as to become a peticioner, and offer up his
supplication unto God his father in our name: should not we here acknowledge an
infinite goodness? And we are in the first place always to consider of that
which has gone before: to wit, that we shall do nothing else but profane the
name of God with calling upon him, if we do it not in the name of Jesus Christ,
And why so? Forsooth, because our mouths are filthy and unclean: yea and we
our selves full of corruption: and no better then stinking worms: but because
our Lord Jesus Christ abased himself even unto the state of a Beggar, and to
become a peticioner unto god his father for us: there should be a sure and
settled staiednes in us, when there arises any question in the framing of our
prayers at this day. It is true, that as the Prophet Isaiah says: that Jesus
Christ prayed for the tra^sgressors, eue^ so likewise says he himself yt he
prayed not for all the world for such as take pleasure in their iniquities, and
continue obstinate, for such men are quite and clean cut of from this benefit
and privilege which is only reserved for the children of God. And therefore
if we remain still in the world, and be separated from our Lord Jesus Christ
without doubt, no whit of the prayer which he made unto God his father,
apperteineth unto us, neither shall it do us any good: But let us hearken to
that which he says, Behold, John. 17.6.2^
I have showed thy word unto them, and they believed it. I pray for the^ says
he, and not only for them (to wit the Disciples) But also for all those which
shall believe their preaching. And therefore let us at this day understand
that we are made companions with the Disciples, and Apostles of our Lord Jesus
Christ, and that this prayer which he once made, will very well serve our
turns, and leave an open way for our prayers, so that we receive the doctrine
of the Gospel, in faithful obedience. Wherefore we need not now stand in doubt
how to frame our petitions: For since we know that Jesus Christ has prayed, we
have no more to say, how shall we be assured that the power of this prayer
shall do us good? Forsooth, let us believe the Gospel, and then we shall
follow the Apostles and Disciples and be linked together with them. Would we
make the son of God a liar, who is the everlasting and unchangeable truth? I
think there is none that would. Now he has spoken it with his own mouth,
that all they that will receive the preaching of the Gospel, are linked to
this prayer, and comprehended within it. Since then it is so, although on the
one side we are miserable transgressors, and therefore not worthy to come
near unto God, yet when we by the mean of the Gospel, do embrace through
faith the promises therein contained, then may we present our selves unto the
Lord, because he will not only accept us, forasmuch as his only Son has made
intercession for us, but that we may also at this day call upon him, and be
likewise, as he himself says, Companions with him, Isaiah. 8.18. Heb. 2.13.
for these are his words, Behold me, and the servants which thou have given
me. He offers himself here in the first place (as has already been
declared in the viii. Chapter) and then brings with him his whole company.
Now it is said, that he, and all the company which were given unto him, were
there ready to worship God his Father. And therefore there is no doubt but that
we shall all be linked together in this prayer, and in all the praises and
thanks giving unto the Lord, and that Jesus Christ does as a man would say,
power out and become as it were, the chief chaunter, to bring us into our
prayers, so that by his mean the sound of our voices do in such sort join
together, as that they make very sweet and pleasant harmony. For, when we and
the Angels of heaven shall pray together to God, will not this be a most
excellent privilege? But, when the son of God will vouchsafe to be so
familiar with us, as to say, come your ways, and I will be your spokes man,
would not this meruellously ravish us? Moreover, his was figured in the Law
whenas the high Priest did not only offer unto God the Sacrifices, but joined
also with them prayers and supplications. And therefore under the ancient
shadows, no Priest could make intercession unto god, and be made acceptable
without the sheading of blood: howbeit, he joined also with blood prayers,
that the sins of the people might be forgiven, and that God might receive
such to mercy, as were worthy to be rejected. Thus we see that our Lord Jesus
Christ has taken away the figures of the law, and has fulfilled and ended
them in his own person. That is, he has offered up blood for the washing away
of our sins, not the blood of Calves, Hebr. 9.14
and sheep, as the manner was in the law, but even his own precious blood,
which was consecrated by the holy Ghost, to the end we might be wholly
sanctified by him. And yet he joined prayers with the effusion of blood. And
therefore we see why at this day he is called our Mediator, and makes
intercession for us. And when Saint Paul speaks of prayers, he says, 1.
Tim. 2.5.
That there is one God, and Mediator, even the man Jesus Christ. He might
very well have said, There is one God, and one Jesus Christ who is the
eternal word of God, and of the self same essence, glory, and majesty.

Now, he uses not this kind of speech: But he says, there is one God,
and one Mediator between God and men, even the man Jesus Christ: As if he
should have said, Hebr. 4.15. Hebr. 7.27. and 9.7.
Behold the Son of God, who after he had taken upon him our nature, and was
made man like unto us, sin except, makes now intercession for us. Now, the
Priests in the old time, needed to pray for them selves (and so they did) and
for the sins of all the people, in which number they were also comprehended.
But our Lord Jesus as touching him self, needed not so to do: neither is
there any cause why he should for his part, crave pardon for any sins that
he had committed: but makes intercession for us. Romans 8.31
And therefore when Saint Paul would enbolden us to come unto God, he namely
says, If God be on our side, who shall be against us? For, although we have
many enemies, yet let us not be afeard: and unto whom must we yield an account
of the bestowing of our whole life? Who also is our Judge? Forsooth, even the
man Jesus Christ, and he him self also is our Advocate, to make intercession,
and an agreement between God and us. It is even he that must obtain grace for
us. Wherefore we may with good courage come before the majesty of God, yea, and
boldly present our selves before his judgment seat, since we have Jesus Christ
to stand there between him and us.

Thus then we see what is the effect of that which we have to consider of, when
as this saying of intercession is here spoken of. To be short, as often as the
death and passion of our Lord Jesus Christ is talked of, let us join theretoo
eftsoons the prayer which he made once for all, to the end it might remain
for ever, and work his effect: For it is not now needful for our Lord
Jesus Christ to kneel on his knees before God his Father, to pray unto him: In
deed it is said, that he will make always intercession for us. But how?
Forsooth, even by the power of his death and passion, and by the prayer that is
made at this day. For, through the power thereof we are heard, as if he him
self at this day spoke for us, and besides (as I have said) all our prayers
are sanctified by him, otherwise they should be but profane. And to say
truly, as often as ye faithful prepare themselves to pray unto God, They
(where the Papists sprinkle holy water, as they call it, about, and charm and
conjure, or rather mask and mumme) should feel that their prayers are
besprinckled with the blood of Jesus Christ, to the end they might be pure and
clean, and that God might receive them as a sweet smelling sacrifice. And
hereupon, let us understand that our Lord Jesus Christ was not a sacrificing
Priest for a day only, but keeps that office still even unto this day, and
for ever, that we might always feel the fruit thereof. Now, if this had been
rightly known, men would not have exceeded (as has come to pass) in so many
villainies and superstitions. For, we see how the Papists at this day wander
about like miserable stray beasts, not knowing which way or path to take, to
pray unto God. For they have an infinite number of Patrones and Advocates, and
every man builds upon his own Patron and Advocate. In deed, they have
many common and ordinary ones, but yet after al their kyries (as they say)
every man will say his devotions to ye Saint which he has forged unto him
self. Thus we see how Jesus Christ is robbed of his honor and glory. And this
is out of all doubt, that when they are not contented with Jesus Christ, it
must be that the Devil has possessed them, and put them in such a fury, as
it were, to despite God, who speaking of Jesus Christ in giving him that
office, they have given the right of it to this body and that. As the Papists
as this day, call the virgin Marie their Mediatrix. Now, the Devil go with
all their prayers: For this is as much as if they forsook God, and our lord
Jesus Christ. And it cannot be chosen but that the virgin Mary her self
cries out for vengeance against them, John. 5.45.
because they have made a detestable Idol of her, and robbed Jesus Christ of
the honor of this sacrifice, ratefied by God with a solemn oath: and have done
all they can to falsefie the whole scripture. The Papists think that the
virgin Mary will help them, but she will rather (as I have alredie said)
call for vengeance against them, for the wrong which they have done her: For,
if they should spit on her, and do her all the villainies that were possible to
be done, without doubt, they could not devise to do her a greater shame, then
to call her a Mediatrix. And why so? Psalm. 110.^ Hebr. 5.6. and 7.17.
Forsooth, because it is said, that Jesus Christ was appointed to be the
Sacrificer of God his Father. And how? Truly even with a solemn oath. I have
sworn (says he) and do not repent me of it.

Here then we see whereupon we should lay our foundation, to wit, upon the
intercession of our Lord Jesus Christ, because (as Saint Paul says to the
Ephesians) we may come near unto God, Ephesians. 3.^
and present our selves unto him, when as our Lord Jesus Christ shall guide us
the way, who (as I have alredie said) is he, that must bring us into the
favor with him. Now, what would the Papists do? Forsooth, even make the
sacrifice of our Lord Jesus Christ of none effect, and to be nothing at all.
And when they will come with such a Deuilish boldness as to overthrow the
unchangeable decree of God, how can they hope any way to be heard? Let us
therefore conclude, that all this doctrine was clean buried in Popery. And
why so? Verily, I know they will say, that we are unworthy to come before the
Majesty of God, That is very true, and who doubts thereof? But let us
consider by the way, where it is that we must seek for our dignity, must we
not seek it in Jesus Christ alone? And yet will they run, to the virgin
Mary, to Saint Michaell, and to the Apostles: and besides, they will have their
Saints of their own devising, which were never heard of in the whole world
before, or else which were canonized at the Popes pleasure, even in the
bottom of hell. Lo, here are their goodly Patrons and Advocates. But, let it
be that we granted the Papists all this, That their Saints which never were,
or else which were half Devils, and fantastical spirits, had been Apostles
and Martyrs, and had lived as holily as were possible, had not they, I beseech
you, as great need of a Medyator as the rest. This is most certain, that the
Virgin Marie could not find grace before the Majesty of God, without the
head and principal* it was as needful for her that Jesus Christ should be her
Redeemer, as well as ours. The Apostles, Martyrs, Patryarches, Mat. 11.28
and Prophets, had also the self same need to run unto this common Redeemer
of all men. And what shall we do when we go about to seek him? Wherefore,
for so much as the Apostles do send us unto Jesus Christ, and have told us
that it is he that must be our guide and stay, and who inuiteth us so
lovingly, saying, Come unto me, etc. Let us not draw backward, nor royle
abroad, but boldly draw near unto him. For, he spoke not these words
only for the behoof of the Apostles, Martyrs, or for the Virgin Mary, But
his meaning was to entertain us all with him self, as in deed it is most
necessary for us. Let us, I say, learn not to wander too and fro when we pray
unto God, and let us also understand what a good turn he has done us, when
as it has pleased him to draw us from out of this bottomless confusion of
Popery, and shows us an open plain way to come unto him, to wit, Because
Jesus Christ is our Intercessour.

Let us rest our selves there, without turning either to the one side or yet to
the other. For this is out of all doubt, that if our prayers be not ordered and
squared according to the word of God they are altogether vain and of none
effect, and God utterly rejects them: and besides, they can not be made in
Faith, without the certainty of them proceeds from the truth of God. Now
then if we would build our Prayers upon faith, they must be agreeable unto the
word of God, and we must follow that which he commands us: and that is,
we must take Jesus Christ for our Intercessour, Advocate, and Mediator. Thus
we see what a proppe it is which he gives us, and what the foundation is
whereupon we must stay our selves, that we might not be shaken like Reeds
with every wind.

We see also why he so often says, Ioh. 14.15. and 15.16.16.24.
Whatsoever ye ask my Father in my name, he will give it you. Yea, and we
our selves likewise see, that although the faithful who lived under the law,
see not so clearly as we at this day see, by reason of the Gospel, yet had
they Jesus Christ ever before their eyes, even under that figure which was
given them. For thus they say, Psalm. 84.9.
Look upon the face of thy Christ, O Lord, and hear us for thine anointed
sake. Daniell likewise says, O eternal God, hear us for the Lords sake:
and this kind of saying is in the Psalms very often repeated. In deed, all
this was spoken by David: but it was because he was a figure of our Lord Jesus
Christ. And besides; Dan. 9.17.
when Daniell says, For the Lords sake: he very well declares that it was
the Redeemer that was promised, and whose coming was then near at hand.
Howbeit, Jesus Christ speaks more plainly, John. 16.24.
and says, Hethertoo have ye asked my Father nothing in my name: But ask
now, and it shall be given you. As if he should have said, Hethertoo ye
have not known that mine office was to be a Mediator between God my Father
and you. And in deed, he was not as yet ascended into heaven, neither had he
yet broken the veil of the Temple, that we might have access unto him. Hebr.
9.24.
But we may now come very familiarly unto him, because the veil of the
Temple is broken, and Jesus Christ is entered, not into a material Sanctuary
(as the Priests in the old law did) but into heaven in the majesty of God his
Father, that there with him we might find grace: So yt the Throne of God is
not now a Throne of majesty to fear us, but he graciously, and after a
Fatherly loving manner calls us, because we came unto him in the name, and by
the mean of this Priest which was appointed for us. Thus then we see, that the
intercession of our Lord Jesus Christ is always profitable, and an inuicible
strength for us: and that so forcible also, that when we come unto him, he will
so hear us, as that we shall by proof feel, that whosoever calls upon the
name of the Lord, shall be saved. Joel. 2.32. Romans 10.22.
And although the Prophet Ioell spoke these words before the coming of our
Lord Jesus Christ, yet the faithful who lived in the time of the law, did so
practice it, as that we our selves, by their example, ought to be conformable
and assured (we, I say, that have the full perfection and accomplishment of all
that was shadowed under the law) that when we come to pray, and call upon our
God in the name of him who was established our Mediator, we should in truth
always feel him to make intercession for us, to the end that all our
petitions might be heard.

Let us now fall down before the Majesty of our good God, and acknowledge
our offenses: beseeching him to make us more and more feel them, that it might
be so to our humbling, as yt we might daily fight against them, and be
spoiled of all together: and that we might seek to be clad with his
righteousness, and enriched with the gifts of his holy spirit, to the end we
might appear pure and innocent before him. And for so much as we had need to be
daily reconciled unto him by mean of the Mediator, that it would please him to
grant us the grace to pray unto him with a sure hope and trust, so that we
staying our selves on him, might by true faith and power, embrase the promise
which he has made us, Mat. 11.^8.
when as he says, Come unto me all ye that labor and are heavy laden, and
I will ease and refresh you: So that we may feel that the office of the
Mediator which was given him, is not in vain and of no effect: But that by his
mean we might at this day be heard, and our petitions and supplications so
dedicated and consecrated unto him, as that God would receive and allow them.
Let us therefore beseech him, that he will not show this favor to us alone,
but also unto all people and nations of the world, etc.

The first Sermon of the ascension of our Lord Jesus Christ.
Acts. first. 1 THe former book have I made, O Theophilus, of all that Jesus
began both to do and teach.

2 Until the day in which he was taken up, after that he through the holy
Ghost, had given commandments unto the Apostles, whom he had chosen.

3 To whom also he showed himself alive, after his passion, and that by many
tokens, appearing unto them forty days, and speaking of the kingdom of God.

4 And gathering them together: commanded them that they should not depart
from Jerusalem, but wait for the promise of the Father, whereof says he you
have heard of me.


BEcause we are too buyld our faith upon God and his truth, S. Luke here
tells us, that Jesus Christ sent not his Apostles to teach what they
themselves thought good: But put his word into their mouths, and gave them
sure and certain instruction, to the end they might carry such a faithful
message, as yt we might take no occasion to doubt thereof. And therefore, when
as we at this day hear the Gospel preached, we ought to be fully resolved,
that it is the charge which God committed unto his Apostles, and receive it as
the thing which comes from himself, as indeed it does.

Moreover, to the end we should bear greater reverence unto the Gospel, it is
not said only that Jesus Christ delivered it, but that it was also done by the
holy Ghost. For as Jesus Christ is the very natural Son of God, even so
likewise is he man, and has taken upon him our flesh and nature. Now under
this shadow (as no doubt of it, the world is wicked) a man might under a
color take occasion to contemn this doctrine, or else not make so great an
account of it. Here then we see that Saint Luke says, that the charge which
was given unto the Apostles to teach, proceeded not from Jesus Christ alone,
but from the holy Spirit also. Wherefore, we at this present see, that the
preaching of the Gospel, is heavenly, and not earthly, and ratified, by God
himself.

Notwithstanding, we must also observe, that the sum and effect of the
Gospel is comprehended in these few words, to wit, That Jesus Christ both
taught and made it: So that if we will bear the name of Christians, we must be
taught that doctrine which Jesus Christ brought us: and besides, be also
eftsoons confirmed therein. For he has not only spoken, but has likewise
accomplished whatsoever was necessary for our salvation.

Moreover, because his death and resurrection was of all the rest, the most
principal point, we have therefore spoken of it in order, as it follows, S.
Luke then says, that Jesus Christ, after he had suffered, showed himself alive
unto his Disciples: and that, by many manifest proofs, which was not without
good cause: For when we hear the promises of God spoken on, our faith will
still hang in suspense, until such time as we are assured of his grace and
favor: which can never be, without the gage which he has given us: to wit,
that Jesus Christ suffered for our redemption, and bear the punishment due for
our sins.

Thus here we see that Saint Luke speaks not in vain of the proofs which
were given to assure us that Jesus Christ is risen again. 1. Cor. 15.14
For harken what Saint Paul says, that if Christ be not risen, our faith is
in vain, and our Preaching also in vain, we have no more hope then very
Beasts. By this we see, that the end of our hope is, that Jesus Christ is
risen from the dead. And this is the victory indeed which he has gotten: yea,
even to show that he is Lord over life and death.

Romans 4.15
Saint Paul also says, that Jesus Christ dyed for our sins: and if he had
remained dead still, what hope might we have had by him? but behold he rose
again, and that is the triumph which he had over death, to the end we might
believe in him.

Saint Peter likewise to show, that we ought to believe in Jesus Christ, 1.
Peter 3.21.
brings for proof hereof none other thing but his resurrection. Let us
therefore observe, that when Saint Luke says, that Jesus christ showed
himself alive, he speaks of a thing that was requisite for the assurance of
our salvation. Wherefore, if we would have the principal point of
Christianity, we must come to this resurrection, by which he purchased for
us life and salvation, and showed himself to be the very Son of God.

Moreover, let us also learn, that since Saint Luke says, that Jesus Christ
has made us such proofs of his resurrection, let us not call that thing into
question, which God himself has so well approved.

And therefore if we are not at this day fully persuaded, that Jesus Christ is
risen again, let us thank our own unthankfulness.

Saint Luke also uses a kind of speech, which a fourdeth an argument that
brings with it a present proof. And in deed, we see what pain the
Evangelists have taken in this matter. For, when they come to speak of the
resurrection, they lay forth all the circumstaunces, and besides, they recyte
all the testimonies of his words, for he has said, and declared that it was
no vain imagination or vision, whereby some trouble might afterward arise. And
therefore, we ought to understand and know, that since they have taken so
great pains herein, that we must not stand in doubt of it, but it is fit
we should receive their words as sure and certain, seeing they bring so good
a proof with them. And therefore, for this matter, whereof Saint Luke
speaks, that Jesus Christ showed him self a live, after he had been dead,
with so manifest and many proofs, we must learn to build upon such a
foundation as shall never be able to be shaken. And as he has thus overcome
death, even so does he now stretch forth his hand to guide and bring us to
salvation. And so often, as we would assure our selves of our salvation, we
must not run unto Creatures, but let us behold as it were in a glass, that
as Christ Jesus is risen again, and has overcome death, even so also has he
opened the kingdom of heaven, that we might enter into it under his charge.

It is further said, that when he showed him self, That he spoke of the
kingdom of God, amongst his friends. Wherein we are to note, that the
Commission which was granted unto these, from whom we receive the doctrine of
the Gospel, was not set down in a word, or for a minute of an hour, but,
that they were, so sufficiently instructed, for a long while, and that they
have not instructed us at randon, not knowing what they meant, but were taught
and instructed as they should be. And when they had, thus fully and wholly
received this doctrine, and therewithal authority to bestow it, they have
delivered the same faithfully unto us.

Thus we see what we have to note in this saying. Now, it is said, that
Jesus Christ showed him self unto his Apostles, and in showing him self, He
spoke of the kingdom of God amongst them. But here we are to understand,
what it is that Saint Luke means by the kingdom of God: he means not by
this kingdom of God, everlasting life, as we commonly take it, and as at the
first sight, it might here be taken, as who should say, That, that, is the
kingdom of God, which we wait for, through hope. But Saint Luke takes it to
be the spiritual government, by which Jesus Christ holds us in his
obedience, until he has wholly reformed us unto his own Image, and having
dispoyled us of this mortal body, sends us to heaven. And this is the very
meaning of S. Luke: But to make the matter more easy and plain, let us take
the kingdom of God clean contrary: and that is this, the life of men, which
follow their corrupt nature. And in deed, if Jesus Christ should go from us,
and let us go whether we listed our selves, surely we should be quite and
clean out of the kingdom of God. For by the kingdom of God, is meant a
reformation: and we bring nothing with us but miseries and corruptions in this
world: to be short, we are wandering beasts, and the Devil rules us, and so,
thralleth us, even as it pleases him self.

Thus, we see what man is, until God has reformed him. Wherefore, let us
take out this lesson, to know what we are, until such time as Jesus Christ
has reformed us. Why then? would we have a greater mischief then this, as to
have Satan so to possess us, and to be our Master? And thus, I say, we see
what we are, until such time as God of his infinite goodness, stretches
forth his hand unto us, even to bring us into his kingdom, that we might be
obedient unto him, and to his justice. Now, by the way, we are also to see,
how highly we ought to esteem of this grace when it is offered us, and that
Jesus Christ draws us unto him. And lo here is all our blessedness, that
God is our King. In deed, although Kings covet to have kingdoms to increase
their honor and wealth, and to be Lords over nations, without any regard to a
better end, yet if any Prince be endued with excellent graces, every man will
think him self blessed that is his subject. But when Jesus Christ reigns
over us, we have a king yt is not only endued with many excellent graces, but
also who reigns over us for our benefit. And to say the truth, he is no whit
bettered by us: for we can no more increase, then we can diminish. Psalm. 16.2.
Thus we see, that the thing which I have alredie said, is very true, That we
are blessed, when as God sets up his kingly throne amongst us, to reign
over us. Here we see what we are taught in the second place, to wit, to esteem
and make much, of such a benefit when God bestows it upon us: now, the
mean comes by ye Gospel. We also see, why Jesus Christ spoke so oftentimes
of the Gospel, Mat. 13.24.31.33.44.45.
calling it the kingdom of God: For if we stick not to it, we are very
rebels to God, and banished from all his graces: For we shall never have
part of them, until we be reformed. Which thing the Gospel works by
calling us to Jesus Christ, and showing us that we must be regenerate by his
holy spirit. Since then it is so, when the Gospel is preached, it is to the
end we might be like unto Jesus Christ, and forsake whatsoever is in our
selves, that we might be raised up again by his grace: And therefore the
Gospel is not called the kingdom of God without good cause. And in deed, as
without it the Devil reigns, and by reason thereof is called the King of this
world: Even so when Jesus Christ causes his Gospel to be preached in any
country, it is as much as if he should say, I will reign over you and be
your King: But yet it cannot be said, that all they which dwell in that
country where the Gospel is preached, do obey God: For we see some of them
lift them selves up, and show forth their iniquity which before lay hid in
them: and othersome contemn the doctrine, in whom is no fruit of the kingdom
of God. And yet Christ Jesus has always a little congregation, where the
Gospel is preached. And how so? Forsooth, because there is no King, but has
subjects.

Nevertheless, we may conclude, that it is an inestimable benefit, when GOD
offreth us his Gospel. For what would we more, then when our Lord Jesus
Christ says unto us. Lo here I am: and take charge of you, to the end you
might be under my wings and protection, now, what can you desire more? We
know then that all this comes unto us by the Gospel. And this is the
perfection of all our happiness, if we could rightly understand it.

Moreover, this is certain, that when Jesus Christ thus brings us into his
kingdom, and takes us unto him self, it is because he would cloth us so
much the rather with immortality and incorruption, to the end we might enter
into his promised glory And therefore when we receive this Gospel, we enter into
the kingdom of God. But what? This is only but an entrance, howbeit we must
go on a great deal further into it: which thing is brought to pass, when as
he delivers us from this cursed bondage of sin, and sets us at the
liberty which he promised us. Thus we see, that it is not enough to have an
entrance, but we must go still forward, until such time as we are wholly
united unto Jesus Christ. And in deed, we know, that although God enlightneth
us with his holy spirit, and we have a desire to walk in his fear, and
acknowledge his goodness whereunto we trust, yet are our infirmities so many
as is lamentable, and we are to fight against a number of temptations, wherewith
we are oftentimes overcome. What shall become then of all this gear? Is it
enough that we have entered? No, no: But we must understand that our life, is
a way, and we must still be going on, until we be come unto our Lord Jesus
Christ. And so must the kingdom of God, more and more increase, until we are
quite rydde of sin: For we daily have experience enough hereof, although we
are a great way of, from being united to God as we ought. Wherefore, this is a
token that God reigns not in us as he should: For if he did, all our power
and force would bend it self that way. Contrariwise, we feel even as great
rebellion as may be, when as we would go about to do that which God
teaches us. Seeing then we in such sort stand against God and his justice, it
is a sign that he rules not us peaceably: For, all that ever we have, even
without our bellies, as we say, should go that way, that the glory of God
might appear and shine throughout. Contrariwise, we see that there is nothing
in us, even from the top to the toe, but horrible rebellion.

^ Cor. 15.18.
And thus we may see, that the kingdom of God is not accomplished. Wherefore,
we are admonished to go on, until such time as God is all in all: to wit, we
should be so full of him, as that we should be empty of our selves: namely, we
should be unclothed of this body, and be raised up into that glory which is
promised us.

The speech then which our Lord Jesus Christ had with his Apostles of the
kingdom of God, tended to this end, that we should forsake our selves, and
overthrow whatsoever is ours, and that Jesus Christ might set up his Throne,
and guide us, so yt we might be altogether agreeable unto his righteousness, and
seek only to follow him as our sovereign and liege Lord and King. And all this
is spoken to us. Why so? Forsooth, because ye Apostles were not taught only
for them selves, but for us. And therefore let this be a note unto us, that
whenever the Gospel is delivered unto us, it is to this end that we should be
ready to leave this world: to wit, all the wicked affections, and vanities that
are in us, which keep us back here below: For we must be wholly changed, and
God must give us a new life. Thus we see how it is, that the Gospel must do
good, to the end it might be indeed the very kingdom of God, and bear such
authority with us as is meet. And by the way, God calls us not unto him,
meaning to keep us always in one state, but will continually prick us on,
until he has brought us to perfection, making us to understand that this
present life is like a Sea full of all miseries: thus we see how Jesus Christ
bends him self to bring us unto the heavenly kingdom, after we are once
entered into the kingdom of God in this world. It is said, That he forbad them
going from Jerusalem, until such time as they had received the promise of God.
And all this was spoken for the building up of our Faith: For we see how
necessary it is for us to be assured and resolved of this point: to wit, that
men, devised not the doctrine of the Gospel, but that God sent it from heaven.
And therefore this ought to be put out of all doubt. What would then become of
it, if it were not thoroughly declared and verified unto us, that Jesus Christ
in such sort sent his Apostles, and were not led by their own motion,
counsel, or will, but sent by God, who taught them their lesson, and
understood not of their own wits this doctrine, but by the holy Ghost.

And therefore the words of Saint Luke are here to be well marked, that he
handled this doctrine oftentimes amongst them, to the end they might be the
better instructed therein, and not run at randon. Over and besides this, it
is said, that they must needs be enlightened with the holy Ghost, that they
might be quite void of all worldly wisdom, and that it might be known that
their doctrine was the very word of God.

Let us therefore mark this well, that our Faith may always cleave unto God,
as a fast Anchor hold: For we shall find nothing in the Creatures, but shall
flyt away like water, and therefore it were an ill foundation to build our
Faith on them: but when we shall build it upon God, it shall not be subject to
reele this way and that, but shall stand fast and sure. And here we see why
the Apostles were forbidden to depart from Jerusalem, until they had received
the holy Ghost.

Now, by this, we see their obedience: For, in man's reason, they might have
somewhat replied and said, What? Are not we the Apostles of God? have not we
authority to preach his word? Are not we able to execute our charge? They had
some show why they might thus have said. For to what purpose had God
justified them in this charge, without they might do it? But they knew well
enough that it was he whom they must obey, For cursed is that man who trusts
in him self to do any work, before God puts him forward to do it. And
contrariwise, when God sends him, he must not strive against it, but say,
Lo here am I Lord, employ me as pleases thee. And thus we see how Saint
Luke shows, that the Apostles obeyed Jesus Christ, when as he forbad them to
depart from Jerusalem, until such time as God had performed his promise unto
them. And herein we see that the grace of the holy Ghost had alredie wrought in
them: For not long before, they were clean out of the way, they had forsaken
their Master, they knew nothing what ye assistance and sauegard of God meant:
and suffered Satan to disperse them abroad. But what? when as God had once
granted them the grace to understand his voice and meaning, he needed not
but to have beckened his finger, and they would have obeyed him. And if he had
forbidden them any thing, they would not have attempted it: But contrariwise
when he commanded them to go, neither fire nor water could stay them. Thus
then we see that it is God which must work in us, to bring us unto such a
subjection. For else, when he would say, retyer, we would go on, and when he
would bid us march on, Number. 14.3. 40.
we would go back. Now, here we see what our nature is. And this notable
myrror have we even in the Jews. For if we read how they behaved them
selves, after they were delivered out of Egypt, we should there see their
wonderful unthankfulness. For, when God commanded them to go against their
enemies, and promised them that they should have victory, they would not go
on, but murmured against him. Why, say they, whether should we go? It
should seem that he goes about to destroy us, and to send us like sheep
to the Butcherie. Lo such was their rebellion.

Contrariwise, when God said, stir not: they would needs march on, and
would not be staide. What? (say they) we loose time, why march we not
forward? Here we see, how that we will march, when God says we shall not,
again, when he says march on, there is no man that will step one foot
forward. To be short, it seems we would endeavor our selves to gainsay God,
Lo, here our dealing. Surely we are much of the boldness of mad men: For they
are strong, and a mad man will be strong enough both to kill him self, and
others. For when God would retire us, we are mad, and would make havoc of
all things, and again, when God would have us march on, we are so slack, as
that every finger is a thumb. And therefore we are to beseech the Lord, to
grant unto us the like grace that he gave unto his Apostles, that we stay
when he commands us to stay, and march on when he bids us. Thus we see,
why he has appointed to every one his several office and charge. When he
ordained housholdes, he declared what authority the man should have over his
wife, and family, and what the woman's obedience was unto the husband, and the
childrens to the Parents, so, he ordained a law for every one. And to the
same purpose and effect was his ordinance, for the administration of Civil
government. For, he declared unto Magistrates, what their duty was, and how
they ought to use the authority committed unto them: and to the Ministers of
his word likewise, he set down a lesson in writing. Thus we see that Jesus
Christ has so well ordered us, Romans 14.25.
as that if we have any regard unto him, we will attempt nothing, which he
commands us not. We see also the saying of Saint Paul, That whatsoever is
not of Faith is sin. Now, if God leaves us in doubt of any thing that we
have to do, we cannot but continually sin: and therefore he has set down a
rule unto us what we shall do, and what we shall not do.

Wherefore, let us look well that we be ruled by him, and attempt nothing, on
our own foolish brain.

Moreover, we see that the Apostles stayed in Jerusalem, because Jesus Christ
had so willed them: yea, although they knew that God had ordained them to that
calling. And although Jesus Christ had given them the holy Ghost by breathing
upon them, nevertheless they might very well know, that they were not as yet
fenced as was meet, Ioh. 26.22.
but looked for the promise of the Father. This promise (as we shall
hereafter see) was the holy Ghost. Wherefore waited they? forsooth, it was
even for us.

We see then here, that although Jesus Christ was ascended into heaven, yet
that he had care of us, and helps us from thence: neither is he so far
from us, but that he keeps us company, and governs us by his grace. And
here we see why S. Luke says, that he was taken up into heaven, after that
he had by his holy spirit given commandment to his Apostles whom he had
chosen. And he went not thus away without thinking of us. How then? Forsooth,
he gave a charge unto his Apostles, and showed them, how they should govern
them selves, after they had received the holy Ghost. And now we have here a
pledge, that we shall never want his help, so that we stick unto him.
Moreover, this is one notable comfort for us, that Jesus Christ being ascended
into heaven, has all power and authority in his own hand, and is above all
Creatures, because he is made Gods Lieutennaunt, to the end he might rule
all things both in heaven and in earth.

Now, that we might make our profit by this, let us mark, that although God
has so highly exalted Jesus Christ, as that all Creatures are subject unto
him, Col. 1.16.17.18.
yet is he our head, and that this his great rule and Empire, is all for our
benefit, if so be we are his members: But he can not be our head, without we
be truly united unto him. This then is the full assurance of our salvation:
which is, that because Jesus Christ is ascended into heaven, and rules all
things, insomuch that the very Angels are his subjects: both they and all
the rest of the Creatures, should minister to us herein.

And again, he so fast and sure holds in the Deuilles, as that they can do
nothing without his leave.

Wherefore, we are assured that they can do us no hurt. And why so? Forsooth,
because they were not able any way to stand against him.

Moreover, we must join this glorious power, with that knowledge which we
here have: not as though it was done but for that present, but the power
thereof extends it self even unto us, because it reaches over heaven and
earth. Now, this witnesses unto us, that he is with us, whenas we
understand his word: because he has so promised, and he uses not to lie as
men do. Thus we see how sure we are of his presence, and will defend us by
his holy spirit. For else what should become of us? Every thing would make us
quail: because we are as frail as is possible. Contrariwise, we see how
the Devil, is armed at all points against us. And therefore it is needful
that God should assist us with his holy spirit, that we might withstand all
his forces. We see then that although the body of our Lord Jesus Christ be
far from us, yet are we near him through his power and might, which thing
he shows us in the Supper, and therefore are to apply this doctrine to our
selves. For the bringing of which to pass, we must not approach unto him as
many do, which come unto him like beasts, but let us understand what it is
that is there given us. When we see God give us food for our bodies it is a
great blessing: But we come not thither to fill our paunches. Why so? Because
it signifies unto us, that we ought not to seek for our bodily sustenance
therein. For as Saint Paul says, 1. Cor. 11. 22
We have houses to eat and drink in: and therefore we came not hither to
fill our bellies. Wherefore then? Forsooth, it is a testimony that Jesus
Christ will feed our souls. What? shall our souls be fed with bread and
wine? No, no, that is not the meaning. For there is nothing wherewith they can
be fed, but with Jesus Christ, For they must be maintained with everlasting
life, which the Angels themselves cannot give. For as they had no being from
eternity, so also may they have an end. And therefore, we must conclude that
there is but one Father of life, which is Jesus Christ. Wherefore we come to
seek him in the Supper, and every one that comes must have this settled mind,
to be able to say, I come hither to have a testimony that Jesus Christ is my
life, that being incorporate into him, I might live for ever. But after what
sort come we to find him in the supper? If we come after the manner of the
Papists to find the body of our Lord Jesus, we deceive our selves: For that is
the most cursed Idolatry that may be, to think the bread that we receive
there, to be the body of our Lord Jesus Christ. We must therefore seek for
him above: and although we know him to be in heaven, yet doubt we not but that
he is with us by his grace: insomuch, that even as we see and touch the signs,
so likewise does Jesus Christ accomplish in us the thing which the signs
represent unto us: to wit, that he dwells in our souls. And although by
nature our souls are in deed dead, by reason of our sins, yet will he make
us partakers of this everlasting life. For, as he says, This bread presents
unto you my body, even so does he truly accomplish the same in our souls: and
as our bodies are sustained with bread, even so our souls receiving Jesus
Christ for a spiritual food, are preserved by the power of God, and he
remains in us by his grace. Howbeit here is not al, to have understood thus
much: but we must also lift up our minds unto heaven, for else we should never
be united to Jesus Christ. No doubt of it there are many which know well
enough that Jesus Christ, is not in the bread and wine, but in the mean while
where are their hearts? Forsooth, some of their hearts are plunged over head
and ears in covetousness, some of them are drunken with ambition, and other
some, their hearts are wrapped up in all kind of villainy. For behold, the
Whooremonger his mind, is set on nothing else, but upon Lechery: others upon
drunkenness, and belly cheer: in other some is nothing but blasphemy,
murmuring, and all villainy, which Saint Paul calls earthly members. Colos.
3. 5.
If you will (says he) come near unto Jesus Christ, you must mortify your
earthly members What? must we forgo our hands, and feet? No, that is not his
meaning: But we must mortify our fornications, uncleanness, inordinate
affections, evil concupiscences, ambition, and covetousness, which is
worshipping of Images, and all other such like. Would we then seek for Jesus
Christ in heaven? Then must we rid our selves of al these earthly members. For
what agreement can there be between us and Jesus Christ? We must not thrust
him amongst our pollutions, but let us go unto him, that he may rid us of
them. Thus we see, that we must not only understand that he in heaven, but
we must also mortify these earthly members which do separate us from him, and
have our minds occupied a loft. How is that? Let us live chastely, soberly,
charitably, temperatly, patiently, and altogether vertuosly. And these are the
feathers wherewith we must fly up into heaven: although to speak properly, we
must have neither wings to fly with, nor yet ladders to climb up: But it is
Jesus Christ that brings us thither, and rayseth us up by the graces which I
have named, and which he bestows upon us. Here then we see, how we must
apply this doctrine to the Supper: so that when the bread and wine shall be
delivered us, we must learn to seek for all our felicity in Jesus Christ
live in brotherly love together, and every man mortify his sinful lusts and
affections. If I feel my self to be by any means carried away from Jesus
Christ, I ought to pull that mean from me, out by the roots: that I might
be truly raised up to Jesus Christ: not that we can be perfectly raised up,
but we must labor to go more and more on. For in deed, the Supper was
ordained to that end, and we should not receive it only once in our life, but
very often: to signify unto us, that we must go on in this world, until
such time as he has delivered us from this corrupt body, and brought us unto
himself.

And according to this holy doctrine, let us fall down before the face of our
good God, and acknowledge our offenses, beseeching him that he will not suffer
us to be so given over unto the^ as heretofore we have been, but so weane us
from them, as that we seek after none other thing, but our Lord Jesus Christ,
and obey his commandementes, because, that is the rule and order by which he
would have us to be brought unto himself. And so let us all say, O Almighty
God, and heavenly father. etc.

The second Sermon of the Ascension.
Acts first. 4 AND when Jesus had gathered his Disciples together, he
commanded them that they should not depart from Jerusalem, but wait for the
promise of the Father, of whom, says he, ye have heard of me.

5 For John truly baptized with water, but ye shall be baptized after a while
with the holy Ghost.


WE have heretofore spoken of the obedience of the Apostles, and of their
patient waiting for the promise which Jesus Christ had made them by mouth and
besides, although they were appointed to this office of Apostleship, yet did
they not thruste them selves in to preach, before such time as they had bin
confirmed by the holy Ghost. Here then we see their obedience, joined with
humility, in that they acknowledged God, to be their guide. And now we are
to handle that which follows, that when Jesus Christ told them of the
promise of God his father, he said, ye have heard of me, heretofore. As if
he should have said, That they were not to look for that at the hands of
God, which they in their own judgment thought to be best, but for the thing
which he had promised. To be short, we must here gather a doctrine unto our
selves, which is this, we must not build our faith upon any thing that we our
selves shall imagine, Romans 10.17.
but upon the promises of God. For Saint Paul says, That faith comes by
hearing: not by the hering of men's speeches and talks, but only by the hearing
of the word of God. And in deed, because we are inclined to diverse
temptations, it is meet we should build upon God, and upon his word. Yea
verily, howbeit he will not come down from heaven to speak to us. That is
true in deed: but we must be well assured that the doctrine which is preached
unto us, comes from him: whereof Jesus Christ is a witness when he spoke
unto his Apostles. For all things (says he) that I have heard of my Father,
have I made known unto you. John. 15.15.
And therefore you must not in any wise distrust me, because I am a faithful
witness. For we see that Jesus Christ never went beyond his bonds,
Whatsoever therefore that we wait for, let us neither look this way nor that,
but stand to his word.

Moreover, because the name of God is often abused, let us look narrowly and
warely whether it is he that has spoken unto us or not. And although Jesus
Christ himself speaks not at this present unto us, yet has he ratified
whatsoever is contained in the Law and the Prophets. We must not therefore
stand in doubt of the doctrine. Why so? Because it is allowed.

Thus we see, that if we follow this doctrine, we cannot do amiss: and
contrariwise, this were a trim kind of speech, to say, we are Christians,
when in very deed, there is nothing in us but a vain opinion.

And now let us behold the faith which is taught in Popery. They will say
forsooth, I believe this and that but if they be asked why believe you so? They
will answer, because they were so told. But who is it that taught you thus?
Our ancestors. Thus we see, that there is no certentie in their belief, but
a vain opinion. And therefore we are to consider of the great grace of GOD to
us ward, in that he has plucked us from that religion: for we go not now by
thinking and ghessing, but we must stay our selves upon this infallible truth
which he has given us. In very deed we cannot do thus, without the holy
Ghost ratify the same in our hearts. For otherwise it were a jolly kind of
speech to say, God has said it, and this is his doctrine. And therefore
until such time as the holy Ghost has wrought in us to show us that the
promises of God are Autenticall, we shall but stumble. But as Jesus Christ is
a faithful witness of God his Father, even so confirms he us by his holy
spirit, and we are to beseech him that he would perform it more and more in
us. And this is it which we at this present are to stand upon. For Jesus
Christ promised to send the holy Ghost unto his Apostles, as may be seen in
John's Gospel, John. 14.16.26. and 15.26.
where this promise is set down that Jesus Christ said unto them, when I am
ascended up into heaven, I will send you the holy Ghost. This saying then he
confirmed unto them, that they might constantly look for it.

It follows, John baptized with water, but ye shall be baptized with the
holy Ghost. And this is a confirmation of the promise which he gave them: as if
he should have said, my office is to baptize, not with water: but with the
holy Ghost. And God my Father h^th not given me this office in vain: and
therefore you must feel the benefit thereof by experience. Let us therefore
understand this one point, yt nothing is in vain given to Jesus Christ. Now he
has no need of this himself: But it is for his members, to the end we might
all draw grace with grace, John. 1.16.
out of his fullness. And so let us conclude, that since Jesus Christ has
this office of baptizing with the holy Ghost, we must needs feel it by
proof, and be partakers of such a benefit: for otherwise it were but an
uncertain title, and no truth in it: which were very blasphemy so to say.
We are therefore to understand, that Jesus Christ acquainteth us with such a
Baptism. For, mark what it was that he said to his Apostles. Now S. John
Baptist, had told the Jews before, that he baptized but with water, and the
reason why he so said, was this, that they would have given overmuch honor
unto him, and so have derogated from Jesus Christ. And therefore he refused
this, and said, that he did but administer the visible sign of water: so that
it belonged not to him to give grace to Baptism, but was the office of Jesus
Christ to do it. Behold (says he) I baptize you with water: Mat. 3.11. Mark.
1.7. Luke. 3.16. John. 1.26.
But there is one whom you yet know not, that has power to baptize with the
holy Ghost: whose shoe latchet I am not worthy to untie: for although I came
before him, yet am I, no body, and it is he that must have all the honor. And
this is the speech of John Baptist: and now Jesus Christ uses ye same, as if
he should say, This ought to be no strange thing unto you: for it was known
unto you long ago, how that the privilege of baptizing with the holy Ghost,
was reserved to me alone. Now, here might arise a question, why Jesus Christ
rather spoke of John baptist, the^ of any other. The reason is manifest:
because the greatness of John Baptist, as they had abused it, was a let, yt
Jesus Christ was not honored as he ought, and although he had spoken of any
other, yet would it have been thought notwithstanding yt John might well enough
have been compared to Jesus Christ. And therefore he chose to speak of the most
excellent man, to the end he would show that he would not have the world
deceived, but that it was himself unto whom all honor was to be given. And thus
we see, yt where men go about to get themselves credit and estimation amongst
men, Saint John baptist here does al he can to abase himself, John. 3. 30.
because he would have no more given unto him, then became him. And after he
had used many speeches, he concluded, that he must be abased, and Jesus Christ
exalted, Neither was this hypocritically said of him, but in truth and in
deed. And I would it pleased God that the world would take forth this lesson.
But what? We are so continually given to this wicked superstition, as that we
look still unto the creatures, who are so many vailes, to keep us from
beholding of Jesus Christ, And by this we see what the cause has been of the
setting up of such an infinite number of Idols in ye world. For, look how many
holy men and women have been in the world, even so many Idols have been set
up: yea, although the graces which God has liberally bestowed upon us, ought
to be Arguments sufficient to have us put our trust in him, and not in
creatures. And the papists, when they will honor their Saints, say, it is
written. Praise God in his Saints I will not call them beasts, Psalm. 150.1.
for taking of this place after this sort, seeing the Prophet in saying,
Praise God in his holy place, or in his Sanctuary, means the heavens: as if
he should have said, praise this divine majesty, who rules in his heavenly
throne, over all his Creatures. And yet they so magnify the Saints amongst
them, as that (as they themselves say) God is not known from his Apostles, or
else is placed all in one rank with the rest. Now this devilish Proverb which
is among them, A man cannot know God from his Apostles: will be a testimony
against them, yt they have torn in pieces the glory of god, like mastiffe
Curres, and have bestowed one piece of it in this place, and another in that:
and have divided it even as pleased themselves: and whereas Jesus Christ
should have been only exalted, and the Prophets, and Martyrs made of no
estimation in respect of him, they have turned all clean contrary. Wherefore
seeing we are inclined to this sin, to magnify Creatures, and to rob
Christ Jesus of his glory, Let us so much the rather remember that which is
said, That John baptized with water, to show yt if we would have any grace, we
must neither go to Peter, nor yet to John, John. 1.15. and 3.34.
but to Jesus Christ, of whom it is said, that he received the grace of God
full and whole: to show that we must come to him alone.

Moreover, herein has been occasion taken, to say, that the baptism of John
was imperfect: but this is plain deceit: for the meaning of John, when he
spoke so, was not to declare the truth of the Sacrament, which he administered,
but only to show the difference that was between him, and Jesus Christ. And
therefore although the sacrament of Baptism which John administered, and the
Sacrament which Jesus Christ administered, was al one, and tended to one and the
selfsame end, yet John declared that it was not in his power to make baptism
of any force, But that Jesus Christ must do it. And therefore it is not to be
doubted, but that he administered true baptism: For we look not to the sign,
but to ye truth: and yet the sign agreeeth with the truth of Jesus Christ.
But the principal matter which we have to consider of in Baptism, consists
upon two points: that is, that we have put of the old Adam, and are renewed, and
united to Jesus Christ: and cleansed of al our spots, when God forgiueth us our
sins. And this is the sum and effect of Baptism,

Mat. 3.2. 8. Mar. 1.4 Luke. 3.3. 8.
Let us now consider if John did not all this. It is most certain that he did:
For he came and preached remission of sins: and baptized to that end and
purpose. Moreover, when he baptized, he preached repentance, which imports as
much as we have said, That we our selves must be mortified, and this
corruption which we received from Adam, must be put of, that the righteousness
of god might reign in us. And so, when as we have thrust out all the
corruption we can, yet shall we find nothing else in us But what? we must make a
difference between the person of the Minister, and the person of Jesus Christ.
In deed this is true, that when we speak of baptism as it is in it self,
Acts. 9.18
it is a washing away of our sins. How so? Because, by it we are confirmed
and ingraffed into Jesus Christ, that we might be cleansed, and live by his
mighty power. For so says the scripture, as may be seen when Annanias baptized
Paul, who said to him, come, and wash away thy sins. And when baptism is
spoken of, we speak not only of the sign, but of ye thing signified: to wit,
that we are acceptable to God through the forgiveness of sins, and renewed by
his holy spirit, to ye end we might no longer live to our selves and as we
lust. Wherefore do we say that all this is within the compass of Baptism,
forsooth, because the commission of Jesus Christ is most certain and sure: and
he performs that inwardlye which is outwardlye signified: for otherwise it
were but a may game, if the truth were not joined together with the sign.

Thus we see how God joins the truth with the sign to the end we might
understand, and know that as the visible sign signifies a thing, even so also
receive we the graces therein signified. And the like may be said of the
Supper. For when we come to the supper, look how the minister distributeth to
us the bread and wine, even so does Jesus Christ make us partakers of his body
and blood, that we might be truly, and indeed, his members: and by that
mean, we may say that the supper is a partaking of the body and blood of our
Lord Jesus. But when we shall come to handle by piece meal the thing which
mortal man does, we must then look what power and authority he has. As when
I baptize, to wit, whether have I the holy ghost in my sleeue to give or not?
or when I celebrate the holy supper, have I the body and blood of our Lord
Jesus, to give to whom it likes me? Now this were over great arrogance, to
attribute that, to mortal men which properly belongs to Jesus christ. And
therefore let us not take from Jesus Christ, the office of baptising with the
holy ghost. For, as I take water to baptize, even so does Jesus Christ
accomplish the thing which I signify, by his own power and might. Wherefore
let us mark the saying of Saint John, I baptize with water (says he) and
Jesus Christ baptiseth with the holy ghost. Thus we see what we have here
already handled, and shall be more thoroughly in the eleventh chapter.

Moreover, it is for us thus to make answer: to wit, Acts. 11.16.
that we cannot fulfill the things, whereof we make a show. And yet
nevertheless, we must assure our selves this, that God accomplisheth yt, which
is signified by the sign: and as by ye water, is signified the washing away of
sins, even so does he accomplish it by his blood. And thus we see how we must
distinguish between the person of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the person of the
Minister, to the end every man might have his degree and measure, and we to
know, that Jesus Christ is the fountain of all perfection.

Moreover, this is certain, that when John said that Jesus Christ should
baptize with the holy Ghost and with fire, this does not restrain, Mat. 3.11.
but that the holy Ghost did once appear in the same shape: For this promise
has been already performed, and shall take place unto the worlds end. Let us
then consider, yt when the holy Ghost was visibly sent unto the Apostles, it
was to signify unto us, yt the Church should be always governed by the holy
Ghost, and should fill us with so many of his graces as were needful. In very
deed, we shall never have them in full perfection, because it is needful that we
should be humbled. For if we should have them in full perfection, what would
become of us? Surely, we would never have any care to call upon God, neither
yet once think that we stood in need of him. And therefore it is meet we
should always feel the want of his benefits, to the end we might be
stirred up to beseech him liberally to bestow them on us. But by the way, let
us understand that we are all baptized with the holy Ghost and with fire: and
that Jesus Christ will in no wise that his Sacraments should be received in
vain of his faithful ones. In deed, although a man be baptized in the name of
God, yet when he comes to age, we see him inclined to all mischief, and
therefore we cannot say that he is a new man, but rather like a brute beast.
And yet we cannot say, but that the Sacrament had his full nature and
propriety: For baptism of it self is as much as if we were renewed: and then
if we be not so, the fault is ours: because we will not suffer Jesus Christ
to accomplish his grace in us, and so for want of belief, we in such sort
close up our hearts, as that there is no entrance for his graces, which he
would largely bestow upon us.

Thus we see that the Sacrament is never without his power and virtue, howbeit
we receive no fruit nor benefit by it, because it cannot enter without faith.
We have here therefore to note, that the truth of Baptism is not in the
water, but in the holy Ghost. And besides Jesus Christ gives us the holy
Ghost. And therefore we are thoroughly to mark, that if we would be
benefited by Baptism, we must not stick so much to the water, as though our
salvation were enclosed therein: but let us understand that it is the holy
Ghost that must work all.

Moreover, we see that the world has received this doctrine very
perniciously: for the Papists think, that the grace of God is tied to it, and
they charm it like Coniurers, giving to the water, the power of the Sacrament.
And therefore they say, that that child that is not baptized, is damned.
Wherefore, for the preventing of this danger, they are not only contented to
give power and authority to all men, of what state and condition soever they
be, to baptize, but even to women also: for fear, say they, that the children
might die without baptism. And so, they think that the truth of baptism
consists in the water: so that by this mean the blood of Jesus Christ is
laid clean aside. But as for us, let us learn, that ye truth of baptism is
not in the water, but in the holy Ghost. And yet is not the sign unprofitable:
for it witnesses unto us that our souls are washed: But if we will have the
truth of it, we must come to the holy Ghost as we have already showed.

Moreover, it is said, that Jesus Christ gives the holy Ghost to the end we
should neither seek for it in the water, nor yet at the hands of men, but
look up unto heaven. And this is also a point wherewith the world has been
deceived. For who is he that looks to Jesus Christ, when we speak of any
thing concerning our salvation? No man: For we think it to be in the power
of men, as if Jesus Christ had resigned his office unto them, and that he had
no more to do in heaven: See I pray you, how blockishe we are. Now the
Scripture choketh us by the chin (as we say) to make us look aloft: for in
it, is the thing which we hear Jesus Christ teach us, behold, it is I that
baptizeth you. I grant, it is said that God sends the holy Ghost: and so
does Jesus Christ also: John. 14.16.26. John. 15.26. and 16.7. Mat. 28.18.
For when the father sends him, he sends him in the name of Jesus Christ,
and at his request: And besides, Jesus Christ speaking of himself said, that
he would send him. And indeed, he is one and the selfsame God with the
father. And besides, inasmuch as being made man, he became our Mediator, al
power both in heaven and earth was given him, so that he is as it were the
very arm and hand, to bestow ye graces of God upon us. Let us also note, why
it was that John spoke of the Baptism with the holy Ghost and with fire,
using these two words: For it is all one thing.

When he speaks of fire, it is because he means to boil us again, to
scombe of al our filthynesse: as men use to melt gold or silver, when they
would fine it, and as we see men purge filthy places with fire. And therefore
the holy ghost bears not this name in vain: seeing it is he that must purge
all our spots and blots: and it is also to signify unto us, that so soon as
we come into this world, we bring nothing with us but uncleanness, and the
longer we live, the greater heap of unclean things we lay up together:
whereof Jeremy speaks saying, that man knows not himself: Ierem. 17.9.
for there is such a gulf of wickedness in us, as there is none but God alone
that knows it.

A man may well cast an Anchor into the bottom of the sea, but none is able to
search our hearts but God. For we stink before the face of God, and are more
filthy then Lazarus, yea too too horrible stinking and filthy. But what of all
this? Behold here is our comfort, whenas we see that Jesus Christ will purge
us by his holy spirit: for we have thereof a sure testimonye in Baptism, that
he will make us new cretures, by purging of our infirmities. But as by purging
with fire, all superfluities are taken away, even so also let us understand
that when God will reconcile us to himself, all what soever is ours must be
clean taken away.

Moreover, let us note, that so long as we shall remain in our selves, we
cannot choose, but perish, and yet if we would always remain safe and
sound, GOD must needs bray us that he might save us, and make us become
acceptable in his sight. And this he does by his holy spirit. And thus we
see yt it is by God alone that we must be gloryfied.

Indeed, we are contented to have a good opinion of our selves, that we might
be extolled amongst men: but when it shall be sifted before the majesty of
God, the thing that we thought to be excellent, he will make no reckoninge
of. Let us learn then, that there is no goodness at all in us: but if there
be any, it is because that he has purged us with his holy spirit.

Moreover, when he says, That it shall be after a while, it is to encourage
them the more: and not to murmer, and be discouraged when God deferreth his
aid: for we must appoint him no time. And indeed, the time which he takes
is always very short, How so? because he leaves us not one minute of an
hour without aid. As for example, let it be, that we are any war, afflicted,
and then we call upon God: howbeit, he will not at the first cho^, forthwith
deliver us, but commonly for the most part, the torment increases: and yet God
assisteth us, because he comfort us. And this shall we very well perceive,
when as we fall into the consideration thereof: For what man is able to bear
the least grief that is if God assist him not? By this we see a proof of his
aid, when as we quail not. For as S. Paul says, if we have any
tribulation, and do bear it patiently, then we know that God aydeth us. Romans
5. 4.
Thus we see that although God delivers us not forthwith, yet leaves he not
us ever languishing: For so long as we are able to say, that we have life, God
promises to assist us against all assalts, and to deliver us: howbeit we must
war against all the temptations of our flesh, so long as we are in this
world. That is very true: But if we look into the shortness of our life, shall
we find it to be of any long continuance? No, 2. Pet. 3.8.
For, a thousand years are as but one day with God. If we consider the^ of
this, it will be no charge unto us to abide it all our life long. Let us now
see, wherefore he said that it should be within a short time after. And so let
us learn to make our profit upon this place: which is, not only to understand
that Jesus Christ spoke it to his Apostles, but that it was also spoken to us.
True it is, that we receive not the holy Ghost in a fiery manner: and yet this
office was not given to Jesus Christ in vain, and we have also the power
thereof: neither has he taken Baptism a way with him: But even as he has
left us the sign, so likewise is it eftsoons a manifest proof, that he will
always be present with us, to make this Sacrament availeable unto us by his
holy spirit. And we must also acknowledge, that we are altogether polluted,
to the end we might go to Jesus Christ, and be made clean by him. In deed,
this counsel would never come from our selves, and therefore must God, by the
admonitions which he has set down for that purpose, bring us to Jesus Christ
for the finding out of the truth of Baptism. And let us no^ be (...) foolish
as to think that any creature is able to help us: But let us go directly on,
to Jesus Christ, and acknowledge him to be wholly ours. Surely, when it is
said, That he baptizeth, although we see him, to be far from us, and advanced
unto this excellent majesty above al other creatures: a man would think that
this might be an occ^sion for us to mistrust: but because he is our brother,
we have a ready way to come unto him. Let us therefore believe that he will
stand to his promise, and that whatsoever he has said, is undoubtedly true:
and besides, that it will not be long too. Wherefore, when we have abidden a
day, let us also be ready to tarry a month, and look unto that everlasting
kingdom: and so without doubt, we shall not only step for ward, but also
continue to go on, until such time as we have attained unto the mark which
is set before us.

And according to this doctrine, let us fall down before the face of our good
God, and beseech him not to punish us for our sinful life past, but so renew
us with his holy spirit, as that we cease not marching on, until such time as
we be come unto this glory, whereof he has already given us some taste and
feeling. And so let us say, O Almighty God, and heavenly Father. etc.

The third Sermon of the Ascension.
Acts first. 6 When they therefore were come together, they asked of him,
saying, Lord, will thou at this time restore the kingdom of Israel?

7 And he said unto them, it is not for you to know the times and the
seasons, which the father has put in his own power.

8 But ye shall receive power, after that the holy Ghost is come upon you, and
ye shall be witnesses unto me, both in Jerusalem in all Jury, and in
Samaria, and even unto the worlds end.


IF we could enter into the consideration of our weakness, whenas God
forsakes us, we should do our selves great good. Now, under this word
weakness, I mean all our vices and imperfections: as very feeble things, and
easily to be overcome with every temptation, according to the corruption and
perverseness of our gross wits and minds. Wherefore, whenas we shall have
deeply considered of these things, we must pray unto God, and beseech him to
have an eye to the remedying of all the miseries, whereunto we are subject.
Thus we see I say, how we shall greatly profit our selves, by the
consideration of these things. We have therefore to note the matter which Saint
Luke sets down here in this place: because he declares how gross minded
the Apostles were, having been taught by the space of three whole years, from
the mouth of our Lord Jesus Christ all whatsoever belonged to their salvation.
Here then we see that they are like unto young Scholars, as if they had
never understood one word of that which was taught them. And what is the
reason? Forsooth, we should be continually unable to any goodness without
GOD should first correct this ignorance: which is a thing that ought greatly
to humble us. And therefore, we must understand that our hearing of whatsoever
is said unto us, will be to no purpose, and that because it is spoken as unto
a Block, until such time as God takes away the grosnesse of our corrupt
nature: for else we shall never understand what he says unto us: by reason
his word is far beyong our reach. Neither need we any other proof to
condemn the ignorance of the Apostles, the^ their own words. For the question
which they asked Jesus Christ was foolish, and of no valor: but only a
superfluous curiosity, whenas they said unto him, will thou at this time
restore ye kingdom of Israel? now by saying, at this time they declared yt they
would eue^ at the first dash, have come to honor without any more pains
taking, and whereas they were called to take pains for ye pla^ting of ye
gospel throughout ye world, they would in no wise away with yt, but be forth with
filled with al manner of prosperity, with was a double fault: besides, when they
spoke of the Kingdom, they ^ayled also in that: For they thought our Lord
Jesus Christ should have been an earthly King, and reign after the manner of
worldly Princes: and so they being near about him, should take no pain nor
have any harm, but live honorably with great offices, and in high dignity.
And they failed also in naming of Israel: because they restrained the grace of
God to Israel, which he had promised to all the world. Thus we see that they
spoke never a word which was not false and erroneous. Moreover, Jesus Christ
reproved them with the answer which he made them: and although he said not
flatly, you are deceived: yet, the words which he used, declare no less, but
that he spoke them to their reproof, when as he said, It is not for you to
know the times and the seasons, which the Father has put in his own power:
he reproved them of this fond curiosity, for where they should have
enquired after some necessary, or profitable matter, their minds roued at
curious things, and of no valor. Howbeeit we must content our selves with
that which it pleases God to declare unto us, and we cannot do better then to
be ignorant of that which God will not teach us in the scripture, and thus we
see how he reproves this their curiosity.

Besides, when he said unto them, Ye shall receive power after the holy
Ghost is come upon you: Hereby he showed them, that they were fools to
aspire so high, as to enquire and seek after the secrets of God: For they
were not able to attain thereto, until they had received this power from
above. In deed, they had received some portion of the holy Ghost: but he
told them that it was very needful the same should be increased in them: and
that it was then, no time to triumph, but to fight: and they might see also,
that it was not long before it should come to pass. And afterward he said,
Ye shall be witnesses unto me, both in Jerusalem, in all Iewrie, and in
Samaria, and even unto the worlds end: As if he should have said, you
think that I should reign like a worldly Prince, but you are deceived, for
my kingdom is spiritual.

And thus he corrects their last error, touching their question of the
kingdom of Israel, by saying, that the Gospel must be conneied even to
Samaria: For there was great inimitie between the Jews and the Samaritanes,
albeit they were near neighbors, and agreeed so me what in the principles of
religion, as we and the Papists do at this day: For there is a kind of
familiarity between us, because we have the Gospel, and they also say, that
they have it. The Samaritanes likewise had the same law, with the Jews, but
they had altogether perverted it, even as the Papists now do: and therefore the
hatred was the greater between them.

Now, Jesus Christ tells his Apostles here, That the Gospel must be
preached to the Samaritanes. We see then that Jesus Christ lively reproves
their errors, and brings them into the right way. This must we apply to our
own use: and in the first place, if the Apostles were so gross minded, as we
may see very well, this vice was not in them alone, but it is also in us. And
therefore let us look upon this as in a glass, that it is not enough that we
be preached unto, but God must also inlighten us, and make a way for his word
that it might enter into us, and open also the eyes of our minds, that we may
be able to comprehend his will: for else our hearing will be to no purpose, and
without profit.

And therefore let us beseech God to grant us his grace to understand his
will: or else we shall remain in our beast linesse still. Here we see what
we are to note in the first place of this Scripture.

Now, for the faults which the Apostles committed in their question, we must
consider of them, by the reproachful answer which Jesus Christ makes them. In
the first place we see, that we our selves have experience even of our selves,
how curious we are. And now let us see whether we are given to desire such
things as are necessary and meet for us. Surely no, for, if we be told twice
of a thing, we think it does but break our brain. Again, if an hard
matter, yea and such a thing as in deed is most necessary to be understood, be
told us in two words, we think it even enough. What an inconstancy is this in
us, not to settle our minds upon necessary things? But if we should hear a
sort of tales, lies, and things nothing worth, ho, we would never be weary of
hearing of them all the day and night long. And thus we see yt our minds are so
toyish, as that we have no care of any necessary things: but are desirous of
all vain and unprofitable matter: yea, and to speak of any good and
profitable thing, it is (as we say) lost labor. Here we may perceive, how
we ought to bestow al our life time, to wit, to consider of the grace that God
has given us, in sending of us Jesus Christ to make us wise: for this wisdom
stretches it self through heaven and earth. And this is it whereof S. Paul
speaks to the Ephesians, Ephe. 3.18.
when he makes mention of length, breadth, height, and depth: That is to say,
that so farrefooth as our minds are able to reach, we should give our selves
more and more to understand the love which Jesus Christ has showed us, in
bestowing of us his well-beloved Son Jesus Christ. After this sort (as I have
said) must we bestow our time: and yet if we be but preached unto, one half
hour, we think it over long. Whereby we see how wandering minded we are to
all vain and unprofitable things: and therein take all our delight and
pleasure. But if there be any matter in question that might confirm and stay
us, or that we be told of things that shall come unto us, we will never
hearken to that, but our mind will forthwith be turned clean away, wandering
too and fro, building (as we say) castles in the air: so that he which has
Goods, thinks neither of his possessions, nor of his riches, and he that
has none, will continue and abide like a senseless brute beast, and never
once think upon that which is spoken unto him. Behold I pray you how closely
we are linked to this vice, and there is no man, but is condemned before God
thereof. And although we see that the Apostles were curious to understand of
things which appertayned nothing unto them, yet let not us be busy to
condemn them in it, but let us know that there is matter enough in us to
condemn our selves. Seeing then we know this to be so common a fault, every
of us ought to withdraw his mind from being so fantastical, and not wittingly,
be so toy headed, but let us apply our minds, to understand whatsoever it
pleases God liberally to bestow upon us from out of the knowledge of his
counsel, and hold us there: and let us diligently weigh the saying that is
here set down. It is not for you to know the times and seasons, which the
father, has put in his own power. Now this saying ought to bridle us and pull
us back at once, from al curiosity, yea and although our nature would prick
us to go on, yet ought we to draw back, and understand what Solomon says,
that he which goes about to seek out the secrets of God, shall be
oppressed with his glory. Prou. 25, 27.
And therefore if we be such curious searchers, he will make us right well
feel, that he spoke not this in vain. Wherefore let not us go beyond this
reach: but let us look what it is that he forbids us to search after:
That which the Father has put in his own power. Now here might rise a
question, to wit, whether the father has put in his own power, Winter, and
Summer, and the rule of all times, and seasons? Yea, it is true. It should
seem then, that his meaning is, that we ought not to make enquiry after these
things. No not so, for that is not the thing which the father has in his own
power, whereof Jesus Christ spoke unto his Apostles, that it is not for them to
know of it: but he spoke of things which he reserved a part unto himself,
and the knowledge of which, is clearly forbidden us: and therefore not for us
to know of it. Now he has declared unto us, the things which come by order
of nature: that winter must be cold, and Summer whot. For if we have any
great cold in Summer, let us understand that such a perverting of the order of
nature comes by reason of our sins, and that for the horriblenesse of them
we justly deserve, that all things should be turned out of course: Howbeit
God cease not to help all those things. So the^, since God has declared
this unto us, he has not reserved it, to himself alone. For he would not
have us to imagine his power to be a superfluous power: but the thing which
he would not have us know, he so keeps back, as that we shall never be
able to understand it.

This saying then of Jesus Christ, it is not for you to know the times and
seasons which the Father has put in his own power is as much as if he had
said, Be contented with that which I have said unto you, and hold you there:
For if you would enter into disputation with him to enquire after that which he
would not have you know, It would turn to your confusion: seeing he has
not spared to let you understand, whatsoever he thought to be meet for you
to know. Now, if we would go beyond this, this were, as a man would say
to set our selves against him.

Let us see then what we are to note out of this place, to wit, we must
learn to submit and keep our selves within a compass and not seek after
that which God would not have us know, and diligently understand and search to
know, whatsoever he would have us for to learn. And over and besides all
this, let us not be too too inquisitiue and say, Why is this: and wherefore is
that: But let us take heed of such curiousness, as of a deadly Plague. Now,
this can no man do, without every of us violently strives against his own
nature: for we are naturally inclined to such foolishness, as to leave the
principal matter which is most necessary for us, and to occupy our heads
about that which is neither necessary nor profitable, but only foolish and
vain curiousness: as every of us for our own part shows himself* As for
example: behold, we have the Gospel, the very fountain of all wisdom,
which teaches us to believe in God, to run only to him, and call upon him,
to the end we might fight against all our carnal affections, to submit our
selves wholly obedient unto him. Lo, this is the very meaning of our Lord,
throughout all the Scripture.

Now, we think this to be but a small matter to understand, and every of us
seeks to stick unto such things as God would not have us know: we would
feign contruoll our Lord: and we think he had done better, if he had
done otherwise, Mark, how it fares with us. And therefore as I have said, If
we would put this doctrine in practice, and not be curious, we must every of
us bridle his nature, because it drives us into such imaginations whereby, man
is not contented to consider of God in the creation of the world, although
these works therein are enough wherewith to satisfy us. But what? We forget
even those his works which he wrought for our redemption (a work without
length, depth, breadth, and height) and go about to enquire why God so greatly
busied himself in the creation of the world, Ephesians. 3.18.
seeing it is not yet seven thousand years since it was made. But let us note,
that before God created the world, he had made Hell to throw such curious
searchers into. And surely he had great reason in it: for over and besides,
that this curiosity of entering into such thoughts is worthy reprehension,
what a boldness is this to lift our selves up against GOD, in lifting up our
selves against his works, as though we thought them not to be good?

We see therefore that we must content our selves with the things which God
has given us to understand: for although we have beheld them all our life
long, yet have we not have had time enough to understand ye least part of them.
And let every man know, that he must obey whatsoever Jesus Christ has said,
and not enquire after that which the Father has reserved to himself, to wit,
the things which are not declared by his word.

Hereby, we see that he shows us our vncapablenesse, which he more and more
confirms in this that follows, saying, But you shall receive power, after
the holy ghost is come upon you: and then shall you be better able to
understand the thing which God has declared unto you.

In this, Jesus Christ advises us, that we do rashly in enquiring to
understand farther of any thing, then God declares unto us For it is as if we
who have no wings, would fly beyond the Moon: seeing that if we knew our
state, we would be very wary how we advanced our selves as we are wonted
to do. And herein we are diligently to note this saying, The power of the
holy ghost coming upon you: Which is as much as if he had said, understand ye
poor and miserable wretches, What you are, what spirit have you to understand
so hie things? how is it possible for these things to enter into you. Learn
therefore to humble your selves rather, and acknowledge your ignorance, and
pray unto God.

In sum, we have here a general aduertisment, that whiles God leaves us
to our own wits, we are as bruitishe as may be, and the least thing in the
world will dull us: so that we shall not be able to understand the least
percell of scripture, although it be handeled before us peecemeale. And
therefore this understanding must come from God, who of his mere goodness
bestows it upon us. For although we have the Scriptures expounded unto us, it
is none otherwise then as if the Sun shined upon us, being stark blind.
Wherefore, there remains nothing for us, but to beseech the Lord to help our
ignorance.

Let us now come to the second error, which is, they would have been
honorable at the first, and besides they would have lived according to their
hearts desire without any pains taking. Now, this is a falt which is common
unto us all: for there is never a man in the world but desires to reign with
Jesus Christ in that everlasting kingdom which he has promised: But when we
are told of the bearing of his Cross, and of fightinge against Satan, the
world, and our own flesh, when we are told of this, I say, we would gladly
draw our selves out of the heap. Wherefore we are so much the rather to
consider of this place, to wit, that if we would be partakers of the benefits
of Jesus Christ, we must even in this life set our hand to the labor.

Would we be conquerours with him? let us the^ fight whiles we are in the
wars. And if we would be partakers of al his benefits we must abide all the
miseries which he will have us bear in this world. Romans 8. 17. 2. Tim. 2.12.
For as Saint Paul says, if we be partakers of his sufferinges, we shall also
be partakers of his joys.

Behold, Jesus Christ now sits in his glorious throne, into whose hand all
things are put: But how behaved he himself in this world before he came to
it? what numbers of afflictions suffered he? surely he was so afflicted, as
that his life was thought to be accursed: for, he was continually tormented all
his life long: and in the end, we see that he suffered the most cruel
death, that was possibly to be devised, and that which is more, it seemed that
God his father had forsaken him, in that he suffered him to be thus condemned
by the world. Here then we are to consider, that if we entend to enter into
this immortal glory, we must bear his cross in this present life.

Now, we could be very well contented to bear a little blame for him. But we
would not step one foot forewarde to abide to be hated, despised, and
afflicted. And yet this must we do because it is not in us to change the
inviolable order, which God has set down. We would be glad to know what is
done in heaven, but we would not hold the way thither, and surely God has not
placed us here below, but to the end to serve Jesus Christ in this world,
that we might be partakers of his glory, after yt we have with might and maine
resisted all the assaults which were attempted against us, for the
withdrawing of us from him. But if we have a desire to know what is done in
heaven, and will not hold the way thither, it is very mockery. We must
therefore, look whereunto God has called us, and we shall find that he
has called us to fight, and it is so hard a matter for us to overcome these
combats as that we shall have no leisure to occupy our selves to seek after
vain and curious things which serve us to no purpose: but let it suffice us
that we have this word which shows us which way to hold. Now, here are two
things wherewith Jesus Christ corrects the curiosity of his Apostles: to wit,
he tells the^, that they must discern of the thing which they have to do.
Lo here I say, is the way whereby to correct this fault whereunto we are
inclined: to wit, we must look unto the thing which God teaches us by his
word: and then if we shall be very diligent herein, we shall surely be quit of
this fault, of being over fool hardy and curious. First of all, they have
the promises which Jesus Christ made them: The holy Ghost shall come upon you:
As if he should have said, Be you contented with that which God means to
send you. And therefore let us learn, that when our nature tickleth us, to
cast away our fond presumption, and hold us to the promises of GOD, and
acknowledge and say, Lo whereunto it is that we must stick, let us then be
contented herewith, and feed and refresh us with it. And besides, we have the
commandments of God to lead us to understand what he will have us to do.

When then we know all this, we shall have no leisure to roame over the
fields: But we shall find room enough in the high way: yea even to fly
when there were any thing spoken of which he commanded us. Which thing we
should more easily understand, if we knew that the word of God were the
physic that could amend this curiosity. How is that? Behold that GOD
promises to assist us in this present life: and Jesus Christ likewise has
taught us to desire our daily bread. But what of all this? yet is not this the
principal point: for he extends his hand even to the brute beasts and
feeds them.

And therefore it were nothing for us to look into: But our principal matter
is, to taste his mercy, knowing that he has compassion upon most miserable
wretched sinners, and would not have us perish in our follies, but stretches
forth his hand to pull us out of them, and therefore let us trust unto it.
And besides, he calls us unto everlasting life with Jesus Christ and
promises us that we shall be united to him.

Seeing then we have all these promises, let every of us acquainte himself
with the same both morning and eueninge, and let it be our wisdom. And
besides, we have his commandments whereunto we must cleave, and not be
be smeared with superstition, and let every man forsake him self, and live
to together in love and charity one with another, soberly, chastely, humblye,
and honestly: and be pure and clean from all the filthiness of the flesh: lo
here a general rule.

Moreover, in them every man is taught his particular lesson. For first the
Husband is taught to understand what love he ought to bear unto his wife,
and the wife her duty toward her Husband: and either of them are advertised
what instruction they ought to give unto their Children.

Moreover, the Maiestrates are taught their lessons, and the Minister of the
word theirs. To be short, this is a perfect docttrine accomplished in all
points, where every man is so sufficientlye instructed, that no man can be
ignorant of his charge and duty. And thus we see what we have to note: And
therefore, if every man apply himself heereunto as he ought, without doubt he
shall have no leisure to royle over the feeldes.

Moreover, if we be such royling roges, surely it is a sign that we never
understood the principal point of our salvation, nor yet how to be the
Disciples of our Lord Jesus Christ. And thus we may be able to reprove these
curious questioners, and say unto them, friend, because you are so full of
fryuelous questions, surely you never yet understood the effect of your
Baptism: for by it you should acknowledge the forsaking of your self, but you
could now be well pleased that God would give you leave to wander whether you
lust your self: well, go your ways and study of these questions, and an
hundred years hence they shall be disputed of.

Wherefore we ought to be so much the rather dilligent, thus to think, mark
whereunto God calls us: to wit, that we might understand, wherein the hope
of our salvation consists, and besides, let us beseech him that he would
have mercy upon us, and that we might also learn to amend our lives.

And heereunto must we bend all our wit and force: and when we shall stand
in doubt to be drawn this way and that, we must altogether endeavor our
selves to have a regard to our consciences, and then is Jesus Christ our
Physician, who is able to remedy us.

And according to this doctrine, let us fall down before the Majesty of our
good God, and acknowledge our offenses, beseeching him not to remember our life
passed, but to give us warning thereof, to the end that we being ashamed of
our selves, it would please him so to govern us, as that after this life we
might reign also with him, And so let us say, O Almighty God, and heavenly
father, etc.

The fourth Sermon of the Ascension.
Acts first. 9 AND when he had spoken these things, while they beheld, he was
taken up an high, and a cloud received him up out of their sight,

10 And while they looked up steadfastly toward heaven, as he went, behold two
men stood by them in white apparel.

11 Which also said, ye men of Galilee, why stand ye gazing up into heaven,
This same Jesus which is taken up from you into heaven, shall so come even as
you have seen him go into heaven.


NOw we have at this time to handle the matter which S. Luke here sets
down, of the Apostles beholding of the Ascension of our Lord Jesus into heaven.
Now, it is not enough for us that we know the history, but we are also to
note that he sets down this as a chief Article of our Faith: and surely
the Articles of our faith are not only profitable, but also necessary for our
salvation. Howbeit we shall never profit our selves greatly by the Ascension
of our Lord, without we know it to be true in deed. And therefore Saint Luke
says, that the Apostles saw him ascend: and says besides, that they abode
still gazing there until such time as they were told that they must tarry no
longer, but return to Jerusalem to do their office as was commanded them,
until the judgment day. Thus we see what he says of the Ascension of our
Lord, to the end it might not be called again into question. Very true it is,
that is said, that they are blessed which have believed, and not seen.
Wherefore, we must believe this Ascension rather then if we had seen it: for
since the Apostles see it, John 20.29.
and tell us of it, it is not for us any whit to doubt thereof. Let us now
come, to the words of S. Luke, That a clowd received him up out of their
sight. Now, here might a question be asked, why the heavens opened not, that
the Apostles might have seen the glorious estate of our Lord Jesus. But there
was great reason, why they should loose the sight of him, by mean of a cloud:
because our Lord knows well enough our condition, and therefore for the
correcting of our high minds, it is good we should be restrained. Yea verily,
for if the Apostles had seen into heaven, we would have taken occasion
thereby to have grown hautie: as we see in deed we are thereto overmuch
given. For we are too too mad headed, and without modesty, to desire to
understand even those secrets of God, which he would not have us to know.
And therefore it was expedient that this cloud should be between them and
him. By this then we are let to understand, that we must be humbled, and not
be so arrogant as to ascend up into the heavens to search after the works of
the Lord. And this instruction are we to learn by this place.

Now, it is said that there appeared two Angels: but Saint Luke calls them
men, according to the common manner of the Scripture: For because Angels are
naturally spiritual, we cannot see them, except they show themselves in some
visible shape. We see now the reason why our Lord would from the beginning
have them appear in men's shapes: Howbeit he left always some token with them
that they might be known to be Angels. For if we understand the^ to be only
as mortal men, we would never do them that honor which unto them apperteined,
which would derogate from the giving credit unto their message. And therefore
God always set a mark on them, that we might know them. For behold, why it
is here said, John. 20.12.
that they were clad in white apparel: and in the resurrection also of Jesus
Christ they appeared in white garments. Herein then the mind of our Lord was
to declare that we should reverently receive them, and undoubtedly credit
their message. Thus, I say, we see, why S. Luke here says, that they were
apparrelled in white garments.

Now we are here to note all the circumstances of this matter, for God would
not have any one of them to be lost, nor yet ouerslipt: such is his infinite
wisdom over all the world. If the Angels then, have such a Majesty in their
appearance unto us, what shall we say of the glorious appearing of our good
God? For, the brightness of God his glorious Majesty, is not only as the
brightness of the Sun, but far excelling the brightness of an hundred
thousand Suns, if they shoane here all at once in ye world. So then, whenas
we see that the Angels should be so precious unto us, as that we should so
wonderfully reverence them, we must consider what the Majesty of God is to be
spoken of, yea even the very thinking of him, should cause us meruellously to
worship him, and acknowledge our selves to be no body, in respect of him, who
is majesty it self. And thus we see what is mea^t by the speaking of the
majesty of Angels, although they appear but in men's shapes? Now let us come
to their speech, Ye men of Galilee (say they) why stand ye gazing up into
heaven? It is commonly thought that the Apostles were here called Galileans by
way of reproach: for we see that the Galileans were of no great estimation in
the world And therefore this was the opinion that went of the^, as if the Angels
should have said, O ye miserable blockheads, know ye not that as he is
ascended up into heaven, that so he shall also come again? Howbeit you
perceive not why this was thus spoken, and in this sense. And therefore, let us
understand, that the angels called the Apostles galileans, because they were
taken to be such, and Jesus Christ was also so called: and when ye Disciples
should have been accused to be of ye company of Jesus Christ, it was asked
the^, Matthew. 2^.
Are not you also of Galilee: And sithe^ce ye death of our Lord Jesus, the
wicked have used this saying, as may be perceived by the wicked Apostate
Julian, who at his death said, Thou have overcome me O Galilean: being angry
and dispited with Jesus Christ, because he felt that he had overcome him. And
so were the Apostles called here Galileans, because they were taken, for those
country men.

Moreover, it is not without cause that the Angels here reprove them: For they
knew that Jesus Christ should ascend into heaven, because he had many times
foretold them, and also said unto them, John. 16. 7.
It is expedient for you that I depart hence, For if I go not away, the
comforter will not come unto you: but if I depart, I will send him unto you. And
therefore it must needs be that they had forgotten it, seeing they stood gazing
up into heaven, to see the issue thereof. For (as I have already said) he had
told them that it was expedient that he should depart from them, and had also
foretold them that he must reign, and that they should serve him, here in
the mean time. He had likewise foretold them that he must sit at the right
hand of God his Father, to make intercession for all the faithful: but they
rightly showed that they had clean forgotten whatsoever he had so oftentimes
manifested unto them.

Now, this their ignorance should serve us for a good advertisement: For this
was not spoken only for their cause, but for ours also. And therefore let us
mark the saying of the Angels, that we might understand what commodity
redoundeth to us by the ascending of Jesus Christ. But as touching this saying,
That he should come, even as they had seen him go up into heaven, That
declares that we must not loo^e for him here below, but when he shall come
to judge the world. And therefore, if we will seek for him now, we must do
it by faith, which surpasses all men's understanding. This then is the first
point of this place that is worthy the observation. For since we naturally
have our minds settled here below, it would go very hardly with us, if we
superstitiously bent not our selves, whenas we should hear the Ascension of
our Lord Jesus Christ spoken of. And in deed, we see that this is already
come to pass, For although he be ascended into heaven, and that it is
written, that he shall come down here below even as he was seen to
ascend, yet are there great numbers of such as call them selves Christians,
who have not ceased looking for him here on earth. So that, it has come thus
to pass, that they seek for Jesus Christ in bread and wine, close him up in
a Pipe, carry him hither and thither, and play with him as they would play with
a Puppet. And from whence came these superstitions, but because our nature is
like a s^one here on earth? Now when I say that we are given to be altogether
earthly minded, it is because we would eftsoons draw god and whatsoever
knowledge we have of him, to us, and make him like unto our selves. We see
then by experience, that we would have Jesus Christ continually in the flesh
with us: But we see on the other side that the Angels would put us beside such
speculations, for they said, ye men of Galilee, why stand ye gazing up into
heaven. In very deed, if we will seek for our Lord Jesus, we must lift up
our minds unto heaven, but we must not seek for him after our own minds and
understandings, and therefore faith must at this present bear rule over us.
For, do not we know, that faith surmounteth all men's reason? Neither have we
such a benefit by inheritance, but it is a grace given us of God to amend our
nature. We must then seek for our Lord Jesus but not with our eyes, ears,
feet, nor hands, But it is faith that must supply all our wantes. Even so,
whenas we shall have rightly understood this place, we shall be sufficiently
fenced against all popish fa^tasies, where they say by a piece of bread, Behold
here is God: and think he may be closed up like a Puppet, We shall, I say,
be sufficiently fenced against them, whenas we understand, that it is said,
that we must not seek for him according to a natural man's reason, but by faith.

Moreover, we are admonished, not to slack the raines to superstition, and
think that we cannot have God corporally with us. And because we have been
continually infected with this vice, we ought the more wisely to beware of
this point. Exodus 32.
We see that the Jews said unto Aaron, Make us Gods to go before us. See
how we would have GOD to be with us, that we might handle him, and make
sport with him? Let us therefore consider of this place, that we might be
armed against this vice: For, although Jesus Christ has showed himself unto
us, and is our brother, yet can we not comprehend him but by faith: neither
must we, when he offers himself unto us, imagine of him according to our
fantasy.

Moreover, since we know that he is ascended into this heavenly glory. Let us
mark why he is there. Let us in the first place remember us of that which is
said, That he is not entered into the holy place made with man's hands, Heb.
9.24.
but that he is in heaven, and thereupon makes intercession for us unto God
his Father: so that whenever we pray unto God, he will not hear us, with
out Jesus Christ were there in our name: and being there, he is our
Intercessour, and is the cause that our prayers come unto him, and that they
are heard, even as though we our selves were priueledged, to speak our
minds, and power out our hearts before God. And this is it which we read in
the Epistle to the Hebrews, Exo. 28.
That as the high Priest entered into the Sanctuary for all men. Even so, since
Jesus Christ is in heaven, we should be certain and sure, that he makes
intercession for us. For, when the high Priest entered into the Sanctuary, he
had upon his head the names of the children of Israel, and before him he had
twelve stones, which signified the twelve Tribes of Israel: which declared,
that although he went in alone, yet he did it for all the rest.

Since then Jesus Christ is entered into heaven, and bears us there, although
we be, as it were brute beasts: and carries us also before him, to declare
that he has us in his heart: we must not then pray unto God doubtingly, but be
assured that our prayers shall always be acceptable unto him, because Jesus
Christ speaks unto him for us.

Now, if this had been before time thoroughly understood, there had not been
such stoare of Superstition in Popery. For, what is the cause that they have so
many Patrones? Why run they so fast unto the Virgin Mary? Forsooth, because
they never understood wherefore it was that Jesus Christ ascended into heaven,
For if they had known yt he had ascended to be our Intercessour, they would
never have said that they had been unworthy to have offered up their prayers
unto God: and therefore had need of Advocates: But they had known yt since
Jesus Christ is there in our name, and in our behalf, we might there have
access unto him, without either Patrones or Advocates. And this we have to
understand in the first place.

Moreover, he ascended, to the end that sitting at the right hand of God his
Father, he might govern the world: and so governs it, as that he always
assisteth his faithful ones, and has a special care over them.

Now, if Jesus Christ had continually abode with us, over and besides that we
had been more given to superstition, he had not had the power to have had all
things under his subjection. In deed he might have had it: But we speak not
now of him, but according to that order which he has set down in his
Gospel. And to say the truth, it were a foolish kind of reasoning to say,
that otherwise he had not been able to have done either this thing or that,
because his power is infinite. But yet he said after his resurrection, that
God had given him all power and authority: and this is also our belief, Math.
28.18 Mat. 28. 18
That he sits at the right hand of God his Father Almighty. What? is the
meaning here of this, that he has a seat, and sits in it? No, no* But
this is it, that he is an assistant unto God, as his Lieuetenaunt. For, if we
would stand before the glorious Majesty of God, we should be crushed to
powder: but because we might come unto him, we have for us there Jesus
Christ, unto whom he has given all things in subjection both in heaven and
earth. And although our Lord Jesus had from eternity all power, yet we said
not, that he sits at the right hand of God, until such time as we said
that he was ascended into heaven. We see then that he had this pre-eminence
over all, after that he was ascended. And here we have to note, that the
principality which Jesus Christ had, is for us: because he has no need of
it himself, seeing he is everlasting with the Father. But what? he is at the
right hand of God in our nature, And it is to this end, that we might be
assured we shall take no harm being under his protection. In very deed, he
is well contented that our flesh should be troubled, and that we should be
wrapped in many miseries: But what then? He is always ready to stretch forth
his hand to help us: and let us be assured, that although we abide it for a
time, yet in the end it shall turn to our benefit. This then is it that we
must understand, when we hear his ascension spoken of.

Even so, since he is ascended into heaven for us, let us note, that we ought
not to fear any thing so long as we are in this world. Surely, we are subject
to so many miseries, as that it is lamentable to see our estate (for we are
more then miserable:) and yet we must not be abashed for all that nor yet
regard our own persons, but we must have a respect to our head, who is
already in Heaven, and say, although I be weak, yet behold Jesus Christ is
strong enough to make me stand upright: although I be feeble, yet lo, Jesus
Christ is my force: and although I be full of miseries, yet is Jesus Christ in
immortal glory, and look what he has, shall one day be mine, and I shall
be partaker of all his benefits.

John. 12.31. Ephesians. 6. 12
True it is, that the Devil is called the Prince of this world: but what then?
yet Jesus Christ keeps him short: because he is King both of heaven and
earth.

Behold the Devils that are above in the air who war against us: but what
of all that? Jesus Christ reigns above them all, and directs all our fight:
and therefore we ought not to doubt of victory. I am here subject to such a
number of changes, as might even take a way my courage: but what then? Behold,
the son of God is my head, in whom there is no change, and therefore I must
trust to that.

Thus we see what a regard we must have unto his ascension, and make it
profitable unto our selves. Let us now come to the saying of the Angels, ye
shall see him come down from heaven, even as you have seen him go up:
meaning that we should not look for him, until he come to the day of
judgment. Now, this should not only pluck all superstition up by the roots
out of us, but also draw us to heaven unto him. Howbeit we have already said,
Col. 3.2.
that we must not seek for him but by Faith. And since it is so, let us harken
to the saying of Saint Paul to the Collossians, Seeing Christ Jesus your head
dwells in Heaven, in whom is all your life, it is meet that your affection
should be on things above, although your bodies be here. Wherefore, since
we know Jesus Christ to be above, we must learn to forsake the world, and be
united to him. There is a great space betwixt him and us: and therefore it were
impossible for us to be joined together except we should use the mean which S.
Paul tells us, which is, to mortefye these earthlye members: as,
Fornication, uncleanness, covetousness, gluttony, pride, envy, and al such
like: would we be partakers of this Ascension? Then must we not separate our
selves from him. But how should we be joined unto him? Forsooth, we must
mortify these earthly members, and all other things that hold us here
below. Some are given to uncleanness, some to revenge, some to gluttony, and
other some to certain other vices.

Now then, as faith looks upward, even so must our affections follow, to the
end we might forsake the world, and al other things whatsoever which may any
way hinder us from being united unto our head. Here we see what is meant by
this saying, That he will come in such sort as he was seen to go up into
Heaven, to the end we might learn hereby to join unto him with all the
affections of our heart. By this, ye Angels had no pretense nor color to
speak either of the apparel of Jesus Christ, either yet of any other things:
as many fantastical brains do, seeking after things neither requisite nor yet
profitable to salvation: But the speech of the Angels was to this purpose, to
show that he would come in visible manner.

As if they should have said unto the Apostles, it greeueth you that your
master is taken from out of your company: howbeit let not ye grieve you:
because you shall see him come again in such immortal glory, as ye now see
him. Now the Papists have other pretty childish subtleties, saying, that
their GOD is in their mass, and and make such sport with him there, even as
they lust. Indeed say they, it is very true that Jesus Christ will come visibly
and manifestly, to judgment: But yet say they, at this present he comes
closely and covertly. Surely, he comes daily unto us: and it is not for
nothing, that the Scripture says the GOD visits us: and it is also well said
of us, that the Gospel is a testimony of his presence.

But let us mark how it is that he dwells with us. Indeed, S. Paul says,
that he dwells in us by faith. 1. Cor. ^.19. 2. Cor. 6.1^.
And therefore let us not give place unto our foolish dolteries, but
understand it according to the meaning of S. Paul, saying, Know ye not that
you are the Temple of the living GOD, which dwells in you? And so as God is
inuisibly every where, and in all things, even so Jesus Christ communicates
himself with us.

And therefore, when we are united to him, our souls are fed with the very
substance of his body (although he be in heaven) but it is through the
operation of faith and of the holy Ghost. For Jesus Christ comes not down
corporally. Wherefore, the papists are doltishly ignorant, when they say that he
comes closely* and hydeth himself under the bread and wine, playing bo
peep. Now since we know the meaning of these words, let us apply them to our
use: we have said that the Angels promised the Apostles (because they should
not think that they had lost his presence) that like as they had seen him
ascend into heaven, even so he should come down again. For, what should his
descending, and the suffering of his death and passion, do us good if we hoped
not to see him again? But seeing it was promised us yt he should come again
to gather us together, and unite us to himself, what a notable comfort is this
for us. And therefore this was not spoken only in the behalf of the Apostles,
but also for our behoof: and herein rests our comfort, that although we are
separated from him a great long distance of, yet will he show himself for our
redemption. And therefore we may boldly lift up our heads, and overcome
whatsoever griefs may come unto us.

By this we may very well judge whether we believe in Jesus Christ or not. For
when we hear it said, that he will come again, and then rejoice at it, and
feel his coming in our hearts, it is a token that we have a true belief in
him. But contrariwise, if we stand in doubt of that day, and have a mind to
put it of, if it were possible, this is a true token of our infidelity. We
see then, that faith at this day is very rare to be found in all the world.
For, to hear the day of his coming spoken of, should be a great comfort to
us: because it is the day of our redemption, as Paul to the Romans says.
Romans 8.23.


Howbeit there are very few that believe it. But if we be sorry and grieved to
hear it spoken that that day will come, is this a token that we hope Jesus
Christ to be our Redeemer? Surely our redemption was purchased by his death:
but yet when we shall be rid of this body, no doubt of it we shall then
be rid of the bondage of sin.

Lo, what an acceptable thing death should be unto us. Howbeeit, because the
universal redemption shall not be until the latter day, we ought to groan, as
all the Creatures groan looking for that day, because they are subject to
corruption by reason of our sins, and desire to be delivered thereof.

We see then that heaven and earth, and all the rest of the Creatures within
them, do desire the appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ: and shall not we be
more ashamed, if we have no greater desire of his coming, then in sensible
beasts? For we, have not only the knowledge which God has given us, as
mortal men, but he has also given us an understanding to wish and desire
his coming. And therefore, Luke 21.28.
this is a very notable true sign of infidelity, when as we have no desire
to see that day: and besides, if we rere not up our heads so often as we
hear this saying pronounced, we sufficiently declare that we have no faith in
Christ Jesus. Moreover, as the faithful are comforted by this sentence, even
so must the wicked feel an inward fear of this coming. And although they
make a jest at it, yet does fear and trembling possess their hearts: which
is this, that our Lord Jesus puts them over unto his judgment.

And the reason why many men take Jesus Christ for their Judge, John. 19.37
is this: because they have no will to receive him, when as God his meaning is,
to give them him to be their Redeemer. In very deed, there are a number which
at this day, make but a laughing game thereat: yet shall they neither will nor
choose, Apoc. 1.7.
but feel his heavy hand whom they had persed. For there are some such men,
unto whom if the judgment of God be named, that will answer and say, Well Sir
well, we shall be sure to see him, but not until he come. As certain of my
gentle scoffers, scoffed here upon Tuesday last past, who not only made light
account, and set them selves against God in the Tauernes, but also made a
muster here, of their impyetie and shamelessness: and because they would
show them selves to be like the most impudent whores of the Stews, they came
and scoffed at God and his word, even in the Church, in the presence of all his
faithful. Well let them scoff at him and spare not, yet shall they feel him,
I say, whom they had pearsed.

And let them be sure that he will come, yea that he will come, For he is not
ascended up into heaven, to suffer ye wicked ones to scoff at him, but that
he will surely be revenged of them: and keeps a register of all their
scoffs and scorns. And since they will not willingly come to a reckoning, they
shall neither will nor choose but receive judgment with their fathers and
brothers, the Deuilles. Now, since this doctrine is delivered unto us for our
instruction let us in Gods name learn to humble our selves, and worship Jesus
Christ: for since he is Prince and Governor of the Angels, whom they obey, let
us follow them for company. And besides, let us be well assured, that we may
boldly pray unto him, since he standdeth for us before God his Father.
Moreover, let us comfort our selves, if at this day we suffer much, and let us
look for that day of the Lord, whereat our Lord Jesus has promised to be,
to unite us unto him self.

And according to this holy doctrine, Let us fall down before the Majesty of
our good God, and acknowledge our offenses, beseeching him that he will not
suffer us to walter our selves continually a sleep in them, but awake us and
unite us unto his Son, And since he has called us to the knowledge of him,
that it would please him to grant us the grace to profit our selves therein,
until such time as we be brought to that perfection, whereunto he calls
us. And so let us all say, O Almighty God, and heavenly father, etc.

The first Sermon of the descending of the holy Ghost.
Acts. second. 1 ANd when the day of Pentecost or Whitsontide was come, they
were all with one accord, in one place.

2 And suddenly there came a sound from heaven, as it had been the coming of
a mighty wind, and it filled all the house where they were sitting.

3 And there appeared unto them cloven tongues, like as they had been of fire,
and it sat upon each one of them.

4 And they were all filled with the holy Ghost, and began to speak with
other tongues, as the spirit gave them vtteraunce.


We are all, so naturally inclined unto incredulity, as that it behooves us
to have the truth of the Lord, Authentically sealed in our hearts, to the end
we might receive it, and stay our selves wholly thereon. Ephe. 1.13.
It is very true that God seals it in the hearts of all his faithful ones
by the holy Ghost: and mark also, why it is called the seal of the Gospel:
yet they which are to deliver this doctrine all the world over, ought first of
all to be sealed, and besides, God must so govern and guide them, as that we
might at this day be fully assured of the doctrine which they have published
unto us, and not receive it from them as from mortal men, but as from God the
true Author thereof. For we know, that our faith should have a weak
foundation, if we should lay it upon the authority of men. And we should
then continually waver and doubt, if we lifted not up our minds far beyond
the world, and founded them in, and upon God, since we know, that this word of
salvation which is daily preached unto us, comes from him. Thus we seee, why
it is, that this history is set down unto us in writing: to wit, because,
that as often as we read, or hear the word of God, we should remember, that
whatsoever is contained in the old and new Testament, was not devised by man's
brain, but that God has testified by a visible sign, so farfoorth as was
needful, that men were but the instruments only of his holy spirit. For,
as concerning Moses and all the rest of the Prophets, they approved them
selves to be sent of God: Insomuch, that if we should stand in doubt of their
doctrine, it were both unthankfully and wickedly done of us.

Now, it is here said, That before the Apostles preached the Gospel throughout
the world, God sent down his holy spirit upon them: to the end we might
know, that they delivered nothing as from them selves, but faithfully
distributed the thing which God had commanded them. We see then to what
purpose this present history must serve our turns: For if we were not assured
that the Apostles had as it were, become new men, and that God had given them
a sure and certain token which declared, that he allowed, and authorized them,
what should become of our faith? Surely it would be but a running opinion. For
thus we might well enough say, I think so, or, it should seem so: But it were
impossible for us to say, that we were rightly and firmly grounded and stayed
thereon. For, what is in man? And therefore because this world is nothing but
vanity, Hebr. 6.9.
it is very meet we should, according to the saying of the Apostle, take Anchor
hold in heaven. Here then we see, how we may ride out, all storms and
tempests: so yt whatsoever either the world, or the Devil devise, yet are they
not any way able to hurt us: But we shall always have a sure faith which shall
never bend one way or other, when we shall take this for a grounded principle,
That it is God that guides and calls us to himself, and that the doctrine
which is taught us, is his pure and undoubted truth. Lo then, to what end we
must refer ye whole sum and effect of that which we have at this present
read: Forsooth, even to this end and purpose, yt when God raised up this
mighty wind, his meaning was to declare by a visible sign, yt he had chosen
the twelve Apostles to carry the glad tidings of salvation hither and thither.
In very deed, there were at that time but eleven of them: But yet there
remained always a full and settled number, because that Matthias was placed in
Judas stead. Thus we see, that the number was filled up which was before
scattered: howbeit this want, was but for a little while, as appears by the
words of Saint Luke in the first Chapter going before. Act. 1.26.
Here now we see the full number of the twelve Ambassadors of our Lord Jesus
Christ, whom he had before chosen and marked. Nevertheless, it was meet he
should furnish them with graces sufficient and requisite for so high and
wonderful a calling. Wherefore it was behoueful they should be fashioned and
framed from above, and that God should miraculously work in them far beyond
man's reach and capacity.

Now, as for the sound of a mighty wind or tempest, that, showed that the
holy Ghost came not down upon the Apostles, to make them, only partakers of
his graces, but also that the whole world should be shaken therewith: For it was
so spoken of by the Prophet Aggeah, in these words: After a while, says the
Lord, Agge. 2.
I will make heaven and earth tremble. Which was in deed fulfilled, in the
preaching of the Gospel. We see then, yt when the holy Ghost descended, that it
was not only for a handful of men, but he came down to fill all the ends and
borders of the world: For otherwise, we should have had but a cold pull of
it, as we say, if we were not thoroughly persuaded that God all at one time sent
his holy Ghost for us also, for the establishing of our faith. Moreover, God
could have sent the holy Ghost after a mylder manner, if he had listed: But let
us note, that this sodeine violent wind was to abate the pride of the flesh:
and again to waken us, because we are over slow and drousie. Surely, there are
two great faults in us, which hinder our feeling of the power of the spirit
of God, for the submitting of our selves unto the Gospel. The one, is, That
we are proud and very presumptuous. Now, all this must be pulde down, that
both great and small of us might humbly learn, so to worship God, as to abase
our selves altogether, and be contented to live by him and by his mere favor
and grace. And therefore it is meet that this pride which is so deeply rooted
in our nature, should be violently reformed: Because we are over much hardened
therein. On the other side, every man feels such an heavy earthly burden in
himself, as that our minds are altogether occupied and nusled in this world.
To be short, we are become so blockish, as it were, as that we can feel no
taste either of God, or of the power of his holy spirit, without we be wakened
spite of our teethes. We see then why it is said, that there arose a tempest,
as if it had been a violent or mighty wind. Now, we are to consider in the
first place, that the holy Ghost descended to shake, and terrefie the whole
world, and all mankind, that we might worship God with one accord, and be
obedient unto him. But by the way, we must be wakened, because we are too too
blockish: and we must also lay aside all arroga^cie, that we might be brought
to obey his Majesty, seeing we right well know that we are most miserable,
and no better then dust and ashes: yea our souls also are very corrupt, until
it pleases the Lord to renew them. Moreover, when the holy Ghost came down
in such a likeness, to wit, in cloven and fiery tongues, that was the more
lively to express unto us, how, God would work, by the preaching of the
Gospel. If a man speak, his voice vanishes away in the air, Romans 1.16.
and dies. Now, it is said that the Gospel is the power of God unto
salvation, to all believers. What? can a sound which flies in the air and
vanishes, bring us to the kingdom of heaven? There is no man living that is
able of him self to make the least fly that is: it is said, That the image
of God is repaired in us, ^. Pet. 1.23.
and that we receive this incorruptible seed, whereby we might attain to
this heavenly glory, be companions with the Angels, be transfigured even into
the glory and immortality of our Lord Jesus Christ, and be partakers, as S.
Peter says, 2. Pet. 1.4.
of the divine nature. And may all this be done by the voice of a man? No sure:
But it is here namely said, that the holy Ghost is linked with an inseparable
bond, unto the word preached. For, why took he upon him this shape of
tongues? Surely, there is always some likelihood, between the visible signs,
and the truth which is figured in them.

And therefore we are to consider, wherefore the holy Ghost appeared in the
form of tongues: forsooth, it was to show, that he would be in the mouths
of the Apostles, and would give them whatsoever was requisite for the
executing of their office and commission: and likewise, so bless their labor,
as that it should not be unprofitable.

Now, we know in the first place, that the most able man that is to be found,
cannot utter one word, without ye spirit of God governs him. And herein, God
shows what we are, 1. Cor. 12.3.
seeing we are not able to open our mouths, to speak one word to his glory,
which shall turn to any purpose, without it come from him.

It must therefore needs fall out, that the spirit of God governed the
Apostles, for else, they had become dumb. We see besides, how groase headed
they were: For they might have bin more quick and sharp witted, but that God
meant to show unto us, as in a glass, by their groasenesse, what we are,
until such time as he has enlightened us with his grace. In deed, when the
Apostles kept company with our Lord Jesus, who^ they took to be their master,
they very soberly obeyed his doctrine: But in the mean while, what was their
knowledge? without doubt, we see that they were very beasts, insomuch that
when we consider of them, how little they profited in so good a School, their
slacknesse should make us ashamed. Howbeit this their dealing has greatly
profited us: For, behold, they were changed in the minute of an hour, whereby
the grace of God has shined a great deal the more, because we see they spoke
so wonderful mightily of the secrets of God, whereat every man was abashed,
where, before, it was thought to be nothing.

Moreover, let us consider of their power and constancy: surely, they all
quayled, and it should seem that their faith was dead and of no force. For,
mark how Peter even one of the chiefest of them villainously forsook his
Master, and yielded himself the bondslaue of Satan. Wherefore it was God that
must put too his hand: because it was impossible for any man to help it. And
so, let us observe, that it was not without cause that the spirit of God
appeared in the likeness of tongues, because it was a declaration, that God,
by that mean had allowed and sealed up the doctrine of the Gospel, to the
end we might reverently, and humbly receive it, and not reason from whence it
came: seeing God has stretched forth his arm, and declared him self to be
the Author thereof. And besides, it is not without cause, that they were
cloven and fiery tongues. For we know, how mankind had divided it self, by
the estraunging of it self from God. And the platform that was laid for the
building up of the Tower of Babylon, Genesis 11 7.
was the cause that men understood not one an other, nor yet spoke one to the
other: so that they thought, that God of very anger had divided them. How
falls it out then, that the Apostles having been always enclosed, as simple
and unlearned people, in this corner of Judea, were able to publish the Gospel
throughout the world, if God had not accomplished that which before he had
promised: to wit, Isaiah. 19.18.
that all languages and nations should know him? In deed, it was said that all
men should speak the Hebrew tongue, that they might agree together in one true
faith: But it is more manifestly set forth when as it is said, that all the
faithful, of what nation soever they were, should call upon God with one
accord, and cry Abba, Romans 8.15.
Father: notwithstanding their sundry languages. Thus we see how the spirit of
God would pour abroad the power of his tongues, Ephesians. 2.14.
to the end that all men might call upon the name of God, that we might all, be
made partakers together of this covenant of salvation which apperteined only
to the Jews, until the wall was broken down. And herein we see the
unspeakable goodness of God, in converting of ill into good. For if we seek
for the cause, why there are so many languages in the world, we must needs
confess it to be the curse of God, and yet herein appears his wonderful
fatherly goodness and mercy, to have the glad tydinges of everlasting life to
be carried through ye world in all languages. Thus we see how God has
converted evil into good. And therefore we have hereby the more to glorify
and bless his holy name, because we know that the diversity of tongues have
not let him to declare unto all the world that he means to receive all
such as had before estraunged them selves from him, and thrust them all, as it
were into his bosom, until such time as he has brought them together into
the heavenly enheritance. And thus much for this. Howbeit, this were not enough
to have the Gospel preached, and to have God to be known all the world over,
without this doctrine had forthwith power, lively to touch men's hearts, that
they might be brought to obedience. This then was the cause why the fyrie
tongues appeared. Yea verily, For in the first place, we had need to be
purged, because we are altogether corrupt and defiled. For let our minds be
searched, our affections and desires examined, and they will be found
altogether soul and stinking. And therefore we must be as men new perboyled,
that God might purge us after a strange manner.

Again, we are on the other side as cold as may be. Wherefore we had need
to be enflambed with the love of GOD: and where we are wholly given to the
world, let us look up into heaven, which must be brought to pass by his
word. Thus we see, to what purpose this history serves us at this day: In the
first place, it is to the end we might receive the doctrine of the Gospel, as a
certain and undoubted truth: because it bears about with it the mark of God,
is sealed with his holy spirit, and is also an excellent testimony of our
adoption. We see then how we are brought to obedience, by reason that God has
allowed, and confirmed his Gospel, to the end our faith should not be
changeable, and we become wavering, for the altering of our mind and opinion:
But that we should go on continually in the right way, until such time as we
have finished our course. Here we see how by the power of the spirit of God
our faith shall overcome the world. Colos. 2.23.
For (as we have already said, and as S. Paul also says) if we should build
upon the wisdom of men, what should become of it? But so long as we have the
spirit of God for our ground work, let us be sure never to be shaken. In
the mean while, we have to consider with our selves, because God makes us at
this day Partakers of the thing which we have of late declared: that is, let us
call upon him with one accord (although I say we are divided in tongues) and
besides let us become new me^ through the doctrine which is preached unto us:
in such sort as yt we might know, that there is fire in it to change and
cleanse our minds, wits, and hearts, from all the corruptions of this world. For
although Gods chosen people are brought home again by the mean of ye Gospel,
yet see we the enemies of ye truth become more cruel and rebellious, so that
it is even sufficient to set all the world together by the ears, as by
experience at this day may be seen. For during the time that the Gospel was
not preached, all the world lived carelessly and quietly: and there were not
many questions nor disputatio^s. And how so? Forsooth because the devil then
reigned without gainsaying. But when our Lord Jesus appeared with the pure
doctrine of the Gospel, what skirmishing was there forthwith. We see also at
this day, what contentions there are amongst those which bear the name of
Christians.

So much the rather therefore are we to beseech the Lord, to make us feel
wherefore the holy Ghost descended upon his Apostles, and to beseech him also
to grant us that grace, that we may obediently testify that it was to gather
us together, that where before we were severed, we might now be conjoined
unto our Lord Jesus Christ, as members of his body, and let him be our true
head.

Moreover, for the attayning thereto, we are also to beseech him so to
stre^gthen us as that our hearts may be set on fire, where now they are key
cold: and also to perboyle us* that the corruptions of our nature might be
scoombed of, and to be short, that we might be so renewed, as that we might be
quite and clean separated from the world. We shall oftentimes see how the
word of God becomes a fire, but it is after another sort, even to consume
those which speak against it: according to that saying of the prophet
Jeremiah, where he shows that it fared even so with the children of Israel,
whom the word of God consumed like straw and stubble for their wickedness and
rebellion. And I beseech you let us see, how many at this day can plead not
guilty because they stubbornely lift up themselves against God, like foming
wild beasts: or else some scorning, and profane men, who set themselves against
God, not giving any authority or honor unto his holy word? In very deed
these people shall never make the word of GOD unprofitable, not yet without
power, but it will consume them like a whot consuming fire, to cender and
ashes. Let us therefore make this observation, why it was the will of God to
have the holy Ghost appear in fyery tongues: Surely, it was to this end and
purpose, that the faithful might understand that they had great need to be
so touched to the quick, as that GOD might change and renew them.

Thus we see in sum, what we are to consider of, for the better applying of
this history to our use. Howbeit, over and besides all this, let us mark the
two principal points of faith: and then let us return to our selves, and
understand what we would do, if GOD wrought not therein. First of all, there
is in faith, knowledge and certayntie, and next of all, is assuredness and
constancy.

Now when God speaks, we are eue^ deaf at his words, because our minds are
altogether set upon this world: and indeed we will account all the wisdom that
is contained in the Gospel to be very foolishness, until such time as God
has enlightened us. 1. Cor. 2.14.
In the first place therefore, God must open our hearres for the understanding
of this truth, and for sticking thereto, otherwise we shall be both deaf,
blockish, and without apprehending of this word. Thus much then for this point.
Now, for the second point, it shall stand us in hand stoutly to withstand all
the assaults and attempts wherewith Satan assaileth us: and to be well armed
and appointed for the same purpose. And how is it possible for us to be so,
until such time as God has put to his helping hand? and there is no way to
help that but by the only power of the holy Ghost. And therefore, although we
be an hundredth times taught the Gospel, yet for so much as we are light and
fickle brained, we should soon be pulled from it, if God did not strengthen us
therein: yea and at this day it is so full of perils and threats, as that the
silly faithful souls can no sooner open their mouths to call upon God, but
that they are forthwith, at the point, to be put to death: neither can they
any sooner confess their faith, but that the fire is lightened utterly to
abolish the memory of our Lord Jesus Christ. Since then it is so mightily
stood aagainst, as that they who should defend the Christian faith, Satan has
enflamed the^, if it were possible, utterly to overthrow al, must not God
therefore show his power herein? We are then at this day taught by experience,
and admonished, what need we have to put in practice the thing contained in
this history, and thereupon pray unto the Lord, and beseech him, that as his will
and pleasure was to testify unto us the coming of the Gospel into the world,
which was wrought by the power of his holy spirit, even so likewise that every
of us for our part might feel ye same. And, as we ought fully to be persuaded
and resolved, that the word which is preached to us is not of men: Even so also
ought not the interpretation thereof, as S. Peter says, 1. Pet. 1. 20
he handled according to every man's fantastical head: for he sets down these
two points together, saying, Since the spirit of God has spoken by his holy
Prophets, we for our parts also, when we would understand that, which is
delivered unto us by their doctrine, ought to lay aside our own natural
reason, and fantasies, in saying, It seems thus to me, and I think so: and
soberly and discreetly, beseech the Lord to govern, and lead us by his holy
spirit unto the understanding of his word, whereof he him self is Author. And
thus much for this: now, for so much as, at this day we see, how the Devil has
filled the world with a number of Sects, so that there are many heretics
which cease not to trouble and infect the purity of the Gospel: and besides,
since there are such a sort of contemners of God, and of Mastife Curres, in
whom is neither faith nor yet religion: so much the rather had we need,
continually to offer our selves before the Lord, to the end he might enlighten
us with his truth, and we to be so united unto our Lord Jesus Christ, as that
nothing may be able to separate us from him. And again, let us beseech him to
grant us a stout and constant mind unto the end: Because, that although the
enemies of the truth be never so fierce, yet that we may notwithstanding
persevere and continue still therein, that Satan thereby might be vanquished.
Neither must we be careful only for our selves, but also, think of others. In
deed, it is an easy matter for us here at this day, to make confession of our
faith: for we see not the bright stambing fires before us, as our poor
brethren do, neither do we hear ye terrible threats wherewith they are
threatened, nor yet feel we the tempests and garboiles that ^ight upon their
heads: and yet are we the members of one body. Now, what is ye reason why we
thus assemble our selves together, but to the end we might be joined together
in a true brotherhood, since God of his infinite goodness has adopted us for
his children, and daily witnesses unto us, that he will be our Father? And
therefore it is good reason that we should be careful for these who are as it
were, in ye Wolfes chapes, and daily feel strange troubles: let us have this
compassion upon them at the least, as to beseech the lord to succor and
strengthen them in all their conflicts, so farfoorth as shall be needful: and
not suffer them to be confounded: So that howsoever Satan goes about to
overthrow their faith, yet that it would please him to give them patience and
perseverance unto the end. We had need also to be admonished of the things
that are even at this day come to pass: For, if ever there were any
persecution, at any time attempted, it is even now, and especially, in one
place the fury of the enemies of God, has within these eight days been so
set on fire, as that they have taken greater occasion the^ ever has hitherto
yet been seen, to execute their cruelty against the poor faithful souls of
God. We see also how Satan has possessed these cursed Tyrauntes, insomuch
that they are become so frantike, as that there is no hope any way of their
recovery. And even there, are our poor afflicted brethren thrust out for a
pray, being watched and narrowly looked unto, and it may very well be seen yt
there is the greatest preparation for fury and cruelty that may possibly be
thought on: so that the obstinacy of the wicked against God, is more
incorrigible then ever yt was. This then is our benefit, that God in the mean
while has granted us leisure earnestly to consider of it, and to put this
history in practice which here we see: to wit, that since the holy Ghost
descended upon them who were of one accord (as Saint Luke makes mention) Let
us learn to assemble our selves: and although we be far from blows, yet let us
join our selves with them that fight, by ayding them in their conflictes, with
our prayers, and supplications: and that in such sort, as that the spirit of
God may be the guider of the whole, and we for our part, so zealously enflamed,
that in stead of our key coldness, that we may fervently and earnestly call
upon our God. And as for our brethren who have need to be confirmed in such
assaults wherewith they are attempted, let our good God show that it is he him
self which works in them, and guides and governs them.

Moreover, we are thoroughly to consider of this saying, of consent and accord,
that we might be brought back again unto our head, even Jesus Christ our
lord. For we see, how plentifully the Gospel is at this day preached: but if
there were a register kept of ye faithful, we should find a small number of
them, and thin sown: For there are but a few places where the pure doctrine
of God is preached: and yet, where there is any Church, there are in it many
co^temners of God, and dissolute and profane people, who would infect all the
rest, if God by his wonderful power preserved them not. And besides, there are
some which would even continue still in their beastlines. Yea, there are such a
number of them at this day, as that for these twenty or two and twenty years a
man cannot perceive that they have gone one step forward in the knowledge of
God: for they no more know faith, nor worship, the^ very bruit beasts. Other
some there are, who although they have knowledge sufficient, yet want courage
and boldness, and are altogether drowsy, making no reckoning either of God or
of his word so that the number of ye true sheep and Lambs is very small.

Now, we see by the way, what scope and elbow room the Devil has all Europe
over: for there, all his leasings, deceits, and illusions are received: and the
world is so bewitched, as that it is impossible to bring it again in frame. We
see how men do not only set them selves against God, and wittingly blaspheme
him, but also are furiously enflamed, that a man would think they would pull
the Son out of heaven, and take his light from him. Now, when we see all this
gear, we had need join our selves again unto our head, Christ Jesus our
Lord. For, what is the cause of this contempt and ungodliness, and of so many
rebellions and mockeries in the world, but because grace is not granted to all
men to be led under this excellent Shepherd, whom God his father has
appointed for us. And we know that they who^ he keeps, shall never perish, as
he himself has said. John. 6.39. and 10.28.
Wherefore, let us submit our selves unto our lord Jesus Christ, if we will
feel the benefit and accomplishment of the thing which S. Luke here speaks
of, to our salvation: to wit, that God does not only speak to our ears, and
his voice resounde in the air: But his doctrine also, pearseth our hearts,
that we might be so enflamed, perboyled, and renewed, as that we might cast
away the corruptions of this world: So that, as we would be taken and allowed
for his people, we might in truth call upon our God in ye name of our Lord
Jesus Christ, unto who^ we are conjoined, to this end, that he might perfectly
unite us unto God his father. And therefore behold why this holy Table is at
this present made ready for us. For, as I have before said, we cannot possibly
be partakers of any of the graces of the holy Ghost, but by being the members
of our Lord Jesus Christ. Now, how can we attain thereto, without he offer
himself unto us, and bids us upon such a condition, as truly joins us
unto him: and he so dwells in us, as yt whatsoever he has, is ours,
whereby we might enjoy the benefits which were granted to him in our name:
Isaiah. 11.2.
It is said in the prophecy of Isaiah, That the spirit of God rested on him:
howbeit, it was not, because he had any need of the same, nor yet for his own
private use: But it was for the benefit of his whole body: to wit, the whole
Church. Let us then know, that since the Supper is at this time offered unto us,
that the meaning of our Lord Jesus is, that we should seek all our felicity
in him. And because we are very far from him, he of his great goodness
comes near to us.

In very deed, he leaves not his heavenly glory: For we must not think that
he descends here below (as the Papists imagine) to bestow his body and
blood upon us: But although we are far from him, yet cease he not to
refresh us with his body and blood, neither let us leave so far forth as
shall be needful for us to be perfectly united to him.

Now, mark why I say, perfectly, although in very deed he makes us go on
in some measure: but yet how ever it is, let not us leave to join our selves
to him. And let us understand that he will not deceive us of our hope seeing
he has declared unto us, that he is our head, and we his members: and that
if we suffer him to govern and guide us, we shall find him to be a good
and sure guide: and the power of his holy Spirit to be infinite to defend us.
In the first place then, when we come to this holy Table, Let us understand
that it is a secret, surpassing our capacities and therefore we must here
give place unto faith. And let us know, that the thing which we cannot
conceive and understand, is notwithstanding accomplished by the secret and
invisible grace of the holy Ghost: for, see how we are made partakers of the
body and blood of our Lord Jesus Christ.

Moreover, since he dwells in us, and that we are truly and in deed his
body, let us not doubt, but that whatsoever Isaiah speaks, of the graces of
the holy Ghost, they belong and are proper unto us, In very deed, we receive
not the holy Ghost perfectly: Ephe. 4.7.
because there is a measure of the gift (according to the saying of Saint
Paul) and we must increase in it more and more. Besides, it is not without
cause that our Lord Jesus has so distributed it to us by certain and sure
portions and degrees: For, it is needful that his power should be made
perfect in our weakness, to the end we might hang always upon him, 2. Cor.
12.9.
and carefully call upon his holy name: that we might also be humbled,
because we know that there are many things in us which may be amended. We see
then that we should understand, that Jesus Christ dwells not in vain in us:
because he will effectually witness unto us, that his holy Spirit will power
forth his power to strengthen us in him, that we might forsake this world, and
come unto heaven. It is said in that place of Isaiah, That the Spirit of
wisdom rested upon him: by which he means to show, that we are nothing but
darkness and miserable blind fowls: and in steed of thinking our selves to
be both able and skillful, we shall always pervert and falsify the truth of
God, until such time as he enlightened us, and granted us an heavenly
cleerenes, which comes not unto us either by birth or yet by inheritance. And
it is said besides, that he has the spirit of the fear of God: and al
because our desires are so many enemies against the will of God, until such
time as they be reformed, Rom 8.7.
and altogether changed. Besides, it is said also that he has the spirit of
power, to the end we might understand our weakness, so that we could not
choose but quail, if we were not strengthened from above, we should then
feel al these things, whenas we should come to the receiving of the testimony
which is here set down unto us: and we should be persuaded that as mortal
men distribute the bread and wine, even so will our Lord Jesus work therein,
because it is done by his authority and in his name: and is no devised thing
of man's brain, but that Jesus Christ is the Author thereof. Thus we see
whereunto we must apply this history.

Moreover, let us be so united unto this head, as that we may worship our God
with one heart and one mouth and in the mean while let us join our selves
together. For it is not said that the apostles joined with all, in one accord
Because all the whole town of Jerusalem was an enemy unto them: and yet
although they were but few in number, and a contemptible people, they ceased
not to persist, and join themselves together under the Ensign or banner of
God, in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ. Even so the^ seeing there are such a
number of Curre Dogs barking against us, and that the Devil raises up, so
diversely, many troubles, let us join our selves together so much the more
constantly: and let not the bond of our concord be loosed, Romans 12.18.
that we may by that mean be able to set our selves against Satan and all his
supporters. True it is that we ought generally to seek for peace with all men
without exception: For we should love those which hate and persecute us, and
wish them good, although they deserve it not: and yet we must be their
enemies, for otherwise we should separate our selves from Jesus Christ. And
therefore, let us set our selves against all the world and let us besides
understand that we must forsake our selves to be joined to our Lord Jesus
Christ: and he does us no hurt nor wrong in raising up the incredulous people
against us, whenas we go about to make an accord amongst our selves, and to
join and unite our selves together in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ: and
let us also understand that he allows and likes of our accord, and although
we are but a handful of people, yet let us boldly contemn the world, and all
Satan's adherents, and gods enemies. And although in respect of them we are
nothing, let us not doubt but that God allows of us, and dwells amongst us.
At what time that S. Luke described this matter here in this place the
Sacrifices were used in the Temple as they had been before time, and the
Priest was there present in all his dignity and pontificalibus. There was also
the common order of all their glorious and glittering show, so that a man would
have thought that God had been tied to this people.

Now, the holy Ghost descended, but upon one house, nay rather but upon one
chamber, wherein the poor fearful Disciples were even like silly lambs
compassed about with wolves. A man would have thought that the state of these
people was miserable: and yet see, the holy Ghost appeared unto this little and
simple company. Even so, although we at this day be contemptible in the world,
and no great number, yet let us not doubt but that the Son of God will pour
out the power of his holy spirit upon us, and cause us to feel his graces so
far forth as he sees to be needful: and therefore let us be so contented
with this inestimable benefit, as that we envy not the prosperity of the
ungodly, and enemies of God: and that he does us no wrong that the world
desp^eth us, and be taken for rotten members: let this be but as a matter of
nothing unto us, so that we remain united and joined together: I mean in that
unite which we have by the mean of the Gospel, and of our Lord Jesus Christ,
who is the fountain of all goodness and life, and in whom also is all perfect
joy.

Now let us fall down before the Majesty of our good God, and acknowledge our
offenses, beseeching him to forgive us them, to correct us for them, and wholly
to rid us of them. And so let us al say, O Almighty God and heavenly Father.
etc.

The second sermon of the descending of the holy Ghost.
Acts. 2. 13 OThers mocking, said, These men are full of new wine.

14 But Peter standing forth with the eleven, lift up his voice and said unto
them, Ye men of Jury, and all ye that dwell at Jerusalem, be this known unto
you, and hear my words.

15 For these are not drunken, as ye suppose, seeing it is but the third hour
of the day.

Joel. 2.28.
16 But this is that which was spoken by the Prophet Ioell.

17 And it shall come to pass in the last days (says God) that I will power
out my spirit upon all flesh: and your sons and daughters shall Prophecy,
and your young men shall see visions, and your old men shall dream dreams.


THese words which Saint Luke has here set down in the beginning of this
percell of Scripture, serve for a notable example of the wickedness and
unthankfulness of men. For behold how the Apostles, who were very well known
to be plain country men, and of base estate, spoke diverse and sundry
foreign tongues and languages, excellently handling the true religion, and
declaring the salvation which was in Christ Jesus. Now, this thing in deed,
was sufficient to have caused the^, who heard it spoken of many days after, to
fall into a great admiration: and therefore it could not be chosen, but that
they which presently behold, and with their own ears heard them speak, must
needs be stirred up to be brought to the true obedience of the word.
Howbeit they would not acknowledge the works of God, whereby they ought to
have magnified and glorified him, but even made a jest at them. Well, this
fault was not only in the world at those days: but we may see it also in
this our age. For God works so mightily and effectually always, as that we
are no way able to comprehend his doings: and yet for all that, we are no whit
moved to thank him for them, but especially, for that great benefit of
calling us to the knowledge of his Gospel, which he has largely bestowed
upon us. But contrariwise, do we not see a rabble of scoffers mock and jest at
the words of the Lord, and make as great an account of preaching, as if it
were an old wives tale told unto them? In which their doing, bear they that
reverence unto the word of God which they ought? without all doubt, no.
Notwithstanding, although there be a great number of such scoffers, as
neither profit by the word of God, nor yet by his miracles, (as some such
there were in ye company of the Apostles) yet let us not be any whit offended
at them, but continue firm and constant, least we fall into the like
condemnation, for the contempt of the wonderful works of God, and for our not
honoring of him as he ought And this is a good observation for us in the
first place. Now, S. Luke says, that Peter in the behalf of all the Apostles
showed that the scoffers and contemners of God were greatly ouershot, to scorn
and jest at such a miracle which they manifestly saw before their eyes, and
that they ought not to have attributed it unto any. such drunkenness, whereof
they accused the Apostles. For, he says, Ye men of Iewry, and all ye that
dwell at Jerusalem, be this known unto you, and hear my words: for these
are not drunken as ye suppose, seeing it is but the third hour of the day.
We have here first of all to observe, that the men in old time reckoned the
hours otherwise then we do: For they made the first hour to begin at the
rising of the Sun, and so they had always twelve hours from the Sun rising
unto the going down thereof, and as the days grew longer or shorter, even so
made they their hours. Moreover, they divided the day into four quarters, to
wit, the first quarter began at the first hour, and continued until the
third, the second, from the third hour, unto the sixte, the third, from six
to nine, and the fourth, from nine unto twelve. So that the sixth hour was as
it were, noone, and the third, was betwixt eight and nine in the morning as we
reckon.

Let us now come to the reason which S Peter brought, by which he showed that
they were not drunk, as the Jews thought. For, it is as much as if he had
said, It is now about the third hour of the day, and that is (as I have
already said) betwixt eight and nine in the morning: and therefore it is not
likely that men would be drunk at that time of the day: and such men
especially which gave themselves to serve God, And herein Saint Peter
reprooueth drunkenness, and shows it to be a very dishonest thing for a man
to be drunk in the morning. And yet we shall find a great many more then
needs, that are given to be so drunkenne as that they have neither wit, nor
reason. And some of them will not be drunk with that which they take in the
morning, but will be so blockish with their wine which they gull in the
evening, as that a man would think they had done nothing else but bybbed from
the peep of the day. Another sort there are, who for fear they should not
have drink enough, will begin so early, as that they will be drunk all day
long: and thereupon the wine so bereaueth them of their wit and understanding,
as that they can neither go nor stand. And therefore Saint Peter says, That
these men here are not drunk: whereby he declares that God is highly
displeased therewith.

Now, we are in this place to note, that the Jews so abhorred drunkenness,
as that when any of them would fall to be drunk, they would be sure to
drink drunk in the night, because they were ashamed that any other should see
the^. And herein we see that men were more shamefast at those days then they
are in these: because at yt time they loved to do it in the night season, and
now they make no reckoning to be drunk at noone days: and then forsooth, they
must needs have a nap, and so keep the liquor warm in the press. And this
we are sure to see by them, that they will show themselves what they are even
at the sermon time: For ye shall not see them scarscely an hour at the
hearing of the word of God, but they will forthwith manifest ye very effect
of their drunkenness by their drowsines, so that they receive no benefit in
the whole world by coming thither. And no marvel: For the wine and the meat
being not perfectly digested, by reason of the over gorging of them selves,
wherein they exceed the very brute beasts, causes them to be so heavy a
sleep. Yea, and ye shall many times see them sleep at a Sermon in the
morning, whenas a man would think they had neither eat nor drunk. But herein
they show what great delight they have in the word of God: and to this they
can make no excuse, because they come presently from their rest. And now to the
matter, S. Peter speaks according to the manner and custom that then was,
saying, It is not like that these men are drunken, since it is but the third
hour of the day.

He now here applies this miracle which was done unto his doctrine. For,
the holy Ghost was not given to the Apostles that they should be silent,
whenas any thing were moved which tended to the glorifiyng of the works of
GOD: but that they should be strong, constantly to deliver out the word of
God, and publishe the Gospel accordingly as our Lord Jesus had granted them
the mean. And therefore we see that God wrought wonderfully, and that the
preaching of the Gospel throughout the whole world by so small a number, came
not from men. Now, S. Peter in his Sermon shows an holy boldness of the
spirit of God, and gives them to understand, who made a mock at the miracle
that was done, and thought not reverently of it, that Jesus Christ manifests
not himself unto those which scorn and scoff at his works.

Moreover, when he says, And all ye that dwell at Jerusalem, He speaks
universally to all men, and yet it appertayned not but unto those which made a
scoff at the miracle. For there were many at that time, who reverently
accompanied the Apostles, that greatly woondred at the matter.

Why does S. Peter then attribute it to all those that iested thereat?
Forsooth he did it to this end and purpose, that by the reproouing of this
their fault, he meant too do good too all the company, and by that occasion
confirm so much the rather the hearts of all such as were abashed, and make
them in an admiration and reverence of the works of GOD, by utterly refusing
the foolish and fantastical opinion of all these, and such like Gybers. And
even so would we likewise at this day do: For if there were any scoffers
amongst us, and that we meant to reprove this fault, we would cry out
against all, although the whole company were not to be charged therewith. And
yet no doubt of it, all they whose consciences were guilty, would surely
condemn themselves: for their own wickedness would sufficiently witness
against them, without being charged therewith, or yet the matter by peecemeale
laid open. Nevertheless, it is meet that men sometimes should somewhat be
narrowly pressed, and found fault with, as it were, by name, and to be
remembered, and poynted at with the finger for their offenses: because they
would then, be more ashamed, then if they were generally reproved.

Howbeit it is a wonder to see, that some men can in no wise abide to be
rebuked of their faults, although it be generally done: for thus they would
cover it, why say they, although there are a great many guilty of the vice
which is spoken of, yet are there some, innocent thereof. And so, we shall
hear them murmr, saying, why cries he out thus against al me^? For, if there
be any such, must he therefore reprove all the rest, and speak it so generally.
Thus we see how al of us continually murmr against doctrine, and yet we
see, that although there are but a very few which made a jest at this miracle
here spoken of, yet S. Peter delivers his speech unto all men, when he
says, All ye that dwell in Jerusalem, be this known unto you that these are
not drunk as ye think. And therefore when we see that S Peter spoke after
this manner, let not us be wiser then the holy Ghost, and when there shall be a
fault which is not in all men, yet let not us for all that cease to tell al men
of it, and although there may be some which are not guilty thereof, yet let
them by this example take heed they murmr not, because they know themselves
to be void of such a vice, and yet if they should be more narrowly looked into
(it may be) they would be found guilty of a thousand other as great. Let us
now see what Saint Peter means by the making of this Sermon: Forsooth, his
intent is, to bring the people to the knowledge of Jesus Christ: and this was
indeed the end why the tongues were given to the Apostles. For the diversity
of tongues did even shut up the gate against the Gospel, so that without the
knowledge of them, it seemed impossible to have the Gospel to be preached
throughout the world. And therefore Saint Peter says, If ye remember the
prophecy of the Prophet Joel, the promise therein contained, is accomplished
by the coming of Jesus Christ. For, after the threatenings of the Prophet, he
sets down this promise, That God would power out his Spirit upon all
flesh. Wherein he shows, that when God will punish the iniquity of ye
world, it is not to make his chosen people despair, but to confirm them by
the exercise of the troubles in this world, which are rather laid upon the
chosen then upon the reprobate.

We see then, how yt our Lord is not so ready to power out his vengeance, but
that he pardons al those which have recourse unto his goodness and mercy.
For he is always near unto the^, Psalm. 145.18.
which truly call upon him. Now this has continually been the common vain of
the Prophets, that when they would comfort poor sinners, they would bring
them to the knowledge of Jesus Christ. And it was not without cause: for take
us from Jesus Christ, and then, what shall we find in God? Surely we shall
find such an excellency and highness in him, as shall throw down all
creatures into the bottomeles depth: because that when we are come to the
knowledge of our selves, we shall find nothing in us, save sin and
iniquity: to present our selves before the majesty of so great and mighty a
Judge, we can by no means possible look for any other thing, then the
justice and rigor of his vengeance, prepared for us by reason of our
iniquities. And I beseech you, which of us in deed shall be able to exempt
him self from out of the number of sinners, that he may be bold to say, he
had not need have recourse unto the knowledge of Jesus Christ? And yet we
see how careless we are in this behalf. In deed there is no man that will
openly say, that he would not know Jesus Christ: howbeit there are but a few
which will travel to seek for him as he ought to be sought for. And
therefore it is no marvel though the Prophets stood always upon this point
to bring us to the knowledge of Jesus Christ: for that is the only mean by
which we must be reconciled unto God, and whereon we must be grounded.

We see then that when the holy Ghost came down so abundantly, that it was to
none other end, but that al such as were estraunged from the knowledge of Jesus
Christ, might be called and we al be brought together to be the people of
God, and so receive him. But for the better understanding of this place, we
must lay open the saying of the Prophet, It will come to pass (says he) in
the latter days that I will power my spirit upon all fl^she: and your sons
and daughters shall prophecy: and your young men shall see visions, and your
old men shall dream dreams. Herein is to be observed, that although the
Prophet says that the holy ghost shall be powered out upon all flesh, yet
that all men shall not receive him: because we see that a great many are
bereaved thereof. Nevertheless, God calls us all, but we unthankfully and
wickedly withstand him. And this is always a true saying, That none comes to
him, but such as the holy Ghost draws. By this also we are let to
understand, that if we come unto Jesus Christ by faith, and so, humbly hold
us there, we shall receive the graces of the holy Ghost so abundantly, as that
we may be able to communicate them unto our neighbors. And thus we see, that
Jesus Christ calls us all in general: howbeit it is very far of, that all
do come unto him, because we refuse the benefit that is offered us. And how
so? Forsooth by reason we make our selves not worthy thereof, always desiring
rather to give our selves unto our vanities, then unto the fear of God.

Wherefore, since it is so that many receive not the graces which are offered
them, although they are all called: here might a question be asked, why the
Prophet then speaks after this manner. In very deed, the Prophet his meaning
is to use this general kind of speech, to show that God will bring some of all
estates and ages to know him: and also because he makes now no difference
between the Jew and the Gentile: For the power of the holy Ghost works
every where. We see that the people of the Jews, were even the very first
amongst all other nations, who knew the true God: and although the believing
Jews were few in number, yet was the holy G^st offered unto them all. In like
case were the Gentiles also instructed by ye preaching of the Gosp^l. Thus we
see it to be no wonder in the saying of the Prophet, that God has powered out
his spirit upon all flesh.

Now the doctrine which at ye beginning was set forth by ye preaching of the
Gospel came first of all to the Jews, to the end that the saying of Ezechiel
might be fulfilled, that from the fountain of Jerusalem, the rivers should
ouerflowe even unto the uttermost parts of the earth. Wherein, the meaning of
the Prophet is, that the diversity of tongues had never been spread abroad, if
ye holy Ghost had not been sent unto the Apostles, to have dispersed their
doctrine throughout all the world. And therefore let us rightly consider, how
God by his inco^prehe^sible wisdom has woonderfully wrought to have ye gospel
to be published: for although Jesus Christ had very sufficiently instructed the
Apostles: yet were they but gross headed, until such time as they had
received the holy Ghost: But after they had received him, see how they became
of simple souls, such great and learned Clerks, as that they understood the
diversity of tongues, the want of which (as I have already said) was an
hinderance to the publishing of the Gospel. And therefore, it was not without
cause that the Prophet Joel said, that God had powered out his spirit, upon
al flesh.

Moreover, we are to observe here in this place, this saying, That the old
men and young men should prophecy. Whereby he declares that both old and
young should be partakers of the grace of the holy Ghost, And therefore, it
is not now needful for us to seek for any gloss, to understand the meaning of
the prophet in this speech, All flesh* because the very Text, sufficiently
shows his meaning. Now, when he says, That the young men should
prophecy, He spoke then according to the manner of the time in those days:
because GOD used these two kinds of means with his servants, either in
vision, or else in dream, according to that which is set down in the book of
Numbers, Number. 12.6.
that God would show himself unto his Prophets by visio^s, and speak unto them
in dreams: But it is said, that he would speak with his servant Moses, mouth
to mouth. Howbeit it might be alleged, yt the doctrine of the law and the
doctrine of the Gospel is not like: and yt although God manifested himself
unto the Prophets in the old Testament, yet will he not show himself unto
us after that sort. To answer this, it is to be considered, that although the
prophet uses these terms, yet does he it, only to fit himself unto the time
wherein he was, because we should not say, but yt we have a greater measure of
knowledge. For to say truly, GOD never showed himself so manifestly in the
old Testament, as he has now done to us by Jesus Christ. For where God
had appointed the offerings to be sacrificed in the old Law, which were but
figures and shadows to be oftentimes used, that it might be seen that men
could not come near unto God, but by the mean of a Mediator: we have at this
present the personal presence of the Mediator himself, who once for all has
fulfilled every thing, by his alone Sacrifice. And therefore there is now no
Sacrifice to be done for the purging and sanctifiyng of sins, Mala. 1.11
but only the Sacrifice of thanksgiving unto our GOD: who therewith is well
pleased through our Lord Jesus Christ. And although it is said in the
Scripture, that at the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, Altars should be
set up throughout the whole world, to Sacrifice unto the Lord our God, yet
must we leave the figure, and rest in the truth. For, inasmuch as the Altar
was a sign of the worship of God, because it is said that Sacrifice should
be done all the world through, the meaning is, that God should universally
be worshipped. No doubt of it, the Pope, with all his College of Cardinals,
and all other his dear friends the Romanistes, will conclude upon this
place, that there must needs be Sacrifices had. And therefore, when they
would have their Mass allowed, they bring in this testimony of ye Scripture.
Howbeit if it were so, as they make themselves believe, Surely, surely they
must needs conclude that Jesus Christ has not yet appeared, nor that his
kingdom is yet come. Nevertheless, we see the contrary. And therefore,
seeing the Prophets have thus said, it is not only to show that God should be
universally worshipped in spirit and truth, and not in figures:

Moreover, here is to be noted, that the saying of Prophecy, is not meant by
the Prophet, to tell of things to come, as in the old time it was taken: but
the meaning is, that whosoever shall have the gift of Prophecy, should be
able to teach and apply doctrine, to the end we might be brought to the
knowledge of the truth and profit thereby, And so, the promise that was made
unto us of the coming of Jesus Christ, conteyneth thus much yt we should be
more deeply seen in heavenly things, then heretofore we have been. For we see
in very deed yt S. Paul calls it the wisdom of God: ^. Cor. 2.
under which all things should be subject. We are now therefore, briefly to
conclude upon all things: That as our Lord in sending Jesus Christ his son
into the world, to make unto us a more lively assurance of our salvation: Even
so, by sending unto us his holy spirit, he has made us greater partakers of
his graces, then ever he did before. The Prophet Joel soon after sets
down in this place, That God will do wonderful things in heaven above, and
signs in the earth below, blood, fire, and vapor of smoke: that the Sun
shall be turned into darkness, and the Moon into blood. These words show,
that great and marvelous things must come to pass, whenas Jesus Christ shall
manifest himself. And why so? Forsooth, because the the world shall then be
changed. For they which would follow Jesus Christ, must wholly alter their
nature. And therefore is the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ called the
latter days.

Moreover, this is not spoken for a day, or for a month: But the Prophet
refers all that is here spoken, unto the whole time from the coming of our
Lord Jesus Christ, until the day of judgment: so that we must enclose the
wonders which shall be done at the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, from
the time of his coming, unto the last day. And to say truly, the forwarder
we go, the greater things will he do, as we daily find by experience.
Now, that we understand the meaning of the Prophet, let us apply the same to
our own use. For where it is said in the first place, that God will power out
his spirit upon all flesh, we are to consider, that the greatest benefit
which we can possibly have, is to be partakers of the graces of his holy
spirit. And this is the most excellent gift which God bestows upon us, in
respect whereof, all the worldly liberality which he renders unto us is
nothing For, whenever we are bereaved of this gift, Jesus Christ is taken
from us, and until such time as we are clothed with him, all whatsoever we
do, tends to our condemnation. Wherefore, God says, that we cannot be his
children, without we be bedeawed and sprinkled with his holy spirit.

Now, if we be not his children, we shall never be partakers in the
community of Jesus Christ. For although God offers unto us his graces, yet
is Jesus Christ nothing unto us until such time as we have received the holy
Ghost. Let us then conclude hereupon, that unto the time that we are
partakers of the holy Ghost, we are reprobate, and the children of perdition:
because it is he which sanctifies and makes us holy in the sight of God. So
then, until such time we be as called by ye knowledge of ye holy scripture
(which we can no way have, but by the gift of the holy ghost) to lift up our
minds on high, we are fast tied to the earth, as if it were in Hell. And
hereupon it is that Saint Paul speaks, when he says, Romans 8.14.
That they which have received the holy Ghost, guiding themselves according to
the will of God declared in his word are I say, the children of God: and they,
without all doubt are the children of the Devil, who following their carnal
affections give themselves over to their pleasure and delight. Thus we see how
necessary a thing it is for all those that would be acccounted the children of
GOD, to have the knowledge of Gods truth.

Moreover, we cannot excuse our selves, if we receive not his graces: because
he offers them unto al: but we are so accursed as that we forsake the
benefit which he would bestow upon us. And herein is known the goodness
of God to us ward, that although we strive always against his will, yet
cease he not for all that, to offer himself unto all: as it is here said
by the Prophet That young, and old, men and women, shall all receive of one and
the self same spirit. And it is to this end, that no man might be able
truly say, O Sir, I am utterly unlearned: and therefore it is impossible for
one to understand the Scriptures, whereby I might receive the holy ghost. Why,
I beseech you, has God promised unto the learned alone, the grace of his holy
spirit, and to none other? Now, surely this is a very strange kind of
excuse. And therefore, when we see that God so liberally deals, as that he
will neither exclude age nor sex from receiving of the holy ghost, are not
we very accursed to withdraw ourselves from him, when as he is desirous to
come near us? And to say the truth, the prophecy that is here spoken of, is
to be accomplished at the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ. Wherefore since he
at this day has all power and dominion, it must needs be manifested, and we
must also understand, that the thing which was foretold, is most true. And
therefore since the thing that was spoken of, has so manifestly appeared,
cursed are we, if we do not our best to walk in the fear of the Lord, and
receive the graces which he offers us. We have alredye said, that he
takes exceptions too none: Howbeit we are so wicked, as that we cannot take
in good part the thing offered unto us. What is the cause thereof? surely,
surely, our infidelity. Wherefore neither young nor old can excuse themselves
of this fault, in not submitting themselves unto the obedience of God, seeing
he has called all thereto. Neither is it to be wondered at, although they so
little profit in this doctrine For if we mark it, the elder sort will grow so
obstinate, and over grown in wickedness, as that no exhortation will do them
good. And the younger sort are as dissolute as Devils: For if they be
exhorted, they wax so mad as that to any man's thinking they would tread
under foot, both God, and his word, and as many as deliver it.

Now, Jesus Christ, who is the wisdom, mildness, and meekness of the
Father, will have nothing to do with such foxes and Lions. And if they be told,
that they must humble themselves under the mighty hand of God, to the end
they might understand that they have a Father in heaven, who will not care
only for their bodily nurriture, but will also entertain and govern them by
his holy spirit, they pass not an hawe of all this, but take leave to do what
wickedness soever they lust.

Now, because the time will not serve, to proceed any further herein, we will
reserve the handeling of the residue until Sunday next. And since we cannot be
acceptable in the sight of the Lord our God, but by the mean of our Lord Jesus
Christ, let us fall down before his majesty in his name, and beseech him so
to instruct us by his holy spirit, as that we may understand that the
Prophets spoke by him for our instruction, and that we also might learn to
benefit our selves, so that it might turn to the glory and praise of his holy
name, and the edifying of our neighbors. And so let us most humbly say, O
Almighty God and heavenly father. etc.

The third Sermon of the descending of the holy Ghost.
Acts. second. 18 ANd surely, in those days, I will power out of my spirit
upon my servants and upon my handmaides, and they shall prophecy.

19 And I will show wonders in heaven above, and tokens in the earth beneath,
blood, and fire, and the vapor of moke.

20 The Sun shall be turned into darkness, and the Moon into blood, before
that great and notable day of the Lord come.

21 And it shall come to pass, that whosoever shall call upon the name of the
Lord shall be saved.


UPON Sunday last past, we declared unto you, how that at the coming of Jesus
Christ, God so powered out his great treasures in the world, as that both men
and women, young and old, were partakers of his grace. Now, the riches which
the Lord God of his bountiful goodness so liberally bestowed, were no earthly
riches, which could perish and come to naught. But even the holy Ghost
himself, from whom comes all the riches and treasure of salvation. And
besides, we have showed that God has not done it only for a time, but is
also ready to continue the same which he has spoken: yea and at this day he
inricheth us with his graces if the fault be not ours. But we be so accursed,
as that we are void of them by reason of our unthankfulness: For his
liberality, is as great at this day as ever it was in the time of the Apostles
(whenas he sent down unto them the holy Ghost) even to make us partakers of
the self same grace, which he liberally bestowed upon them: howbeit, we are
so incredulous and faythlesse, as that we stop that way upon him, by which he
would come unto us. For when he calls us by his word, to make us partakers
of his holy spirit, we draw arsewarde: so that a man would think, we had
conspired to set our selves against him. And where, both old, and young, men,
and women, are called to be partakers of this grace, and ought to endeavor them
selves by all means possible to receive the holy Ghost, and more and more to
persevere and continue in receiving of the same, we see the elder sort to be
more hard hearted and obstinate then the rest: and the younger people to be
given over to all kind of lewdness: so that, if they, be told of their
dissoluteness, they wax so mad and furious, as that it should seem they
would mar all. And when men should be manlyke, and sharp witted, to give
diligent heed unto the word of God, they are become as blockish as bruit
beasts. And where the women also should be humble, and walk soberly, and
honestly, they are extreme dissolute, and too too gallaunt, and full of all
superfluous vain vanities.

And therefore, if now we see not men enjoy the graces of the holy Ghost,
which God here speaks of, that he will pour out upon his servants, and
handmaydes, it is not because he has changed any whit his determination and
purpose, but by reason we will not suffer him to do us good: For, when he
comes near us, we draw backward. Wherefore, he is not the let, why we do
not all receive his graces. For, the Prophet says (as we have heretofore
said) That God will pour out his holy spirit upon all flesh. He namely
says, upon all flesh, which is, upon all people without exception.

True it is, that Jesus Christ was sent unto the Jews, not only to pull them
from out of the bondage of the Devil, but to make them partakers also of the
gifts of the holy Ghost. Howbeit, we are at this present, gathered
altogether into one Church, and therefore there remains nothing but to show
the effect of our Christianity, and of the graces which God has bestowed on
us: and the^ let us not doubt, but that we shall receive the gifts of the
holy Ghost, since it is said, that God has not poured them out upon one or
two, but generally upon all men. Wherefore, it is not enough for us to boast
that we are Christians, without we show the effect thereof, that it may be
known, that we vainly take not upon us this name of Christianity. For, we
must not do as many of the Papists do, who neither care for God nor his
word, but content them selves only with this bare name of a Christian: and so
they may be called by that name, they care for no more. Now, if they be asked,
and if they be Christians, I pray you, what answer will they make? Surely, they
think they have great wrong offered them, to have this question demanded. What?
I beseech you good Sir, will they say, are we not Christians, have we not been
baptized? Yea ywis, I grant it: But what faith have you for all this? Verily,
they will say, that they believe as the Church believes. And so by this mean
they have aswadled faith, wherein their teachers have instructed them, in
saying, That it is sufficient for them to believe as the Church believes. Let
them also be asked, how God is to be served and worshipped, why, they think
that question is soon answered. And thus does God justly punish the iniquity
of men, when we see simple souls guided by such instructers of Satan, to bring
them tumbling headlonges together into the bottomless pyt of hell with them
selves. Thus we see how this Romish Idol has licoured Christendom with all
kind of lying, and false doctrine. And how so? Forsooth, because men have
stopped up the way against the word of God, and are contented to be lycoured,
with leasing. But by the way, let us come home to our selves, and let us
neither condemn the Papists, nor yet any others, but eftsoons apply this
doctrine unto our own use. First of all, we have the Gospel, the doctrine of
all wisdom, and yet how deaf and blockish are we? we are daily preached
unto: But what instruction receive we thereby for all that? Surely, surely, it
is well enough perceived, and the fruit that comes by it. Without all doubt,
it is truly said, That we have the Gospel: But if we live not in all
obedience thereunto, what testimony shall we have, that we are the servants
of God. For (according to that which we handled on Sunday last) we cannot be
the servants of God, without we be partakers of his holy spirit, who is not
without cause called the spirit of wisdom: For, by this we are showed, that
we cannot have so small a portion of the holy Ghost, if we will continue it,
but that God will more and more augment it in us. In very deed, every man
cannot have the like measure thereof: howbeit, that is no let why we should
not increase our small Talent. For although a man has the gift of tongues, yet
may he not have one some grace which an other man has? And heerevpon is that
saying of Saint Paul verefied, Romans 12.3. Ephesians. 4.7.
That God will give of his graces to every man according to such measure as
we are the members of Jesus Christ. As we see, that the members of one body,
have not all one office: For the feet will do yt which the hands cannot do:
the eyes are put to an other manner of use then the ears are: and so
consequently, are all the parts of the body. Even so, our Lord will bestow his
holy spirit upon some, after an other sort, then he will upon other some:
and yet it is all one and the self same spirit, and therefore if we would be
known to be Christians, we must have the knowledge of that which is spoken of:
and that it is God which guides us by his holy spirit, to the end we should
not be like unto those blind ones which walk in infidelity. And thus much
for this saying, That God will pour out of his holy spirit upon all flesh.

Moreover, where it is said, That they shall prophecy, herein the meaning of
the Prophet is to signify unto us, That when God will instruct us, he will
do it so perfectly, as that the doctrine shall not only profit our selves,
but that we shall also be able to teach others. And in deed, whosoever shall
receive greater graces from God then the rest, is so much the more bound to
instruct the base and simple ones, and give him self to teach his neighbors.
Wherefore, let us understand, that after God has instructed us, that it is
our duty to labor to bring others unto the knowledge of him. And hereupon it
is that Isaiah speaks, saying, Isaiah. 2.2. Mich. 4.1.
Let every man take his neighbor by the hand, and lead him up unto the holy
hill. And this is one of the most principal points, whereby God allows our
Christianity, when as we so love our neighbors, as to instruct them in the
word of God. Now, this is done by the doctrine which we have received of him at
the hands of the Apostles, which came out (as we said last Sunday) of the
fountain of Jerusalem, whose rivers so ouerflowed the whole world, as that
every man might not only receive it for his own behoof, but also distribute
it unto our neighbors.

In deed, all men are not Doctors to teach: howbeit if we be Christians, we
have sufficient wherewith to exhort our neighbors. Let us now come to the
other part of the prophecy of the Prophet Ioell, where it is said,

That God will send terrible and wondrous signs, blood, and fire, and the
vapoure of smoke. The Sun shall be turned into darkness, and the Moon into
blood. Wherein (as we have briefly said) the Prophet meant to show, that
when God would visit his people at the coming of Jesus Christ, although great
felicity and blessing was promised, yet the meaning was not for all that, but
that we should see horrible and merueylous things. And therefore it was very
needful that we should be told of it, to the end we might understand, that
the coming of Jesus Christ was not to place us in this world as in a Paradise,
and to live in it at our ease and pleasure: But that Jesus Christ was sent to
an other end: to wit, that we might be drawn from these earthly things, and
be lifted up unto heavenly matters. And to say truly, there were never so
horrible and wonderful things, as were at the coming of Jesus Christ.

Now, if it be asked why such things came to pass, after that Jesus Christ
was manifested: it is because we were so cursed, as that we would not receive
the graces which he would have bestowed upon us. And therefore, when our Lord
offreth him self unto us, and we refuse him, must he not then of necessity
so lift up his hand, as to thunder and storm, that we might be afearde of
that our so great unthankfulness. We see therefore why it is said, that when
God had poured out his holy spirit, that we must needs see wonderful
troubles, and when we have looked unto heaven above, and upon the earth
beneath, we shall see in them both, such great trouble and fear, as that a man
would think heaven and earth should even go together: so that the Sun
should be darkened, the Moon be turned to blood, the Stars fall from
heaven, and other wonderful signs appear. In very deed, there are some
which restrain this unto the latter day: howbeit, the Prophet means to
speak of all the reign and dominion of Jesus Christ, until his coming at
the last day to judge the world. And therefore we must apply all the signs
whereof the Prophet here speaks, unto our time. For if we considered of the
things which are come to pass, even since the Gospel has been preached in
these days, yet could not be possible but that the very thinking of them
would make the hairs of our head stand upright. Surely, if we had seen the
things that were done at the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, we should have
been very blockish if we had not been afeard: For if we did but rightly
consider of the things that are continually done even at this day, we should
have matter enough to wonder at.

And therefore it was not the meaning of the Prophet, to signify for a season,
the signs that should here appear at the coming of Jesus Christ: For,
although at his coming, he poured out his great treasures, to disperse them
abroad upon all men, yet for all that we shall see merueylous judgments, by
reason of the vntha^kfulnesse of men, who will not receive the thing that is
offered them. And to the self same purpose serves that saying of Jesus Christ,
when he spoke of the destruction of the Temple. For mark, Mat. 24.3.
the Disciples asked him, when all these things should come to pass, and what
sign there should be of his coming, and of the destruction of the world: for
they thought as fondly as the Jews, that the Temple should continue even unto
consummatio^ of the world, and that they in ye mean while should reign
peaceably like earthly Princes. Thus we see what the question was that they
asked, notwithstanding, that Jesus Christ had no speech of the last day. Now,
he answered them thus, you shall see (says he) merueylous terrible things:
For, you make this reckoning, that ye shall dwell here on earth peaceably, and
rule at your pleasure: howbeit ye shall find it clean contrary, because
there will sodeinely come deceivers: and besides, the Devil will do all he
can, to spread false doctrine in every place: There shall be pestilence,
wars, and famine, so that a man would think that the world should be turned
vpside down. And when you shall see all these things, yet is not the end
come: For, Jerusalem shall be destroyed. Whereby he shows, that it is so
far of, that the Jews should have any peaceable life here in this world, as
that it cannot be chosen but that they must feel the judgments of God come
upon them for their unthankfulness: which shall soon after be dispersed
throughout the face of the whole world. And consequently, he goes on and
says, That after the troubles in those days, The Sun should be darkened,
and the Moon lose her light, that the Stars should fall from heaven, and all
the powers of the heavens be moved. Which words agree just with the saying of
the Prophet: as if he should have said, That great troubles shall not only be
seen here below, but also, if a man did look up unto heaven, he should see a
general confusion. And yet must we not for all that but come fort our selves:
For although we see both in heaven and earth, many troubles, and breaches, so
that if we went all the world over, we should see nothing else but all accursed,
yet must we take pleasure and delight in the maker of all these things. This
then is the sum and effect of the meaning of the Prophet. And this is at this
present spoken even unto us: For although God visits us, and bestows his
Gospel upon us, yet does he not it to this end that we should in such sort
live here, as it pleases our selves, in all ease and delight, and be void of
war, famine, and pestilence: But we are advisedly to consider, that when
such things come to pass, and that we see so great and general a confusion,
so that we cannot tell which way to turn us: we must even then, I say,
prepare our hearts, patiently to abide those afflictions, and not think them
strange: because they light upon us for our unthankfulness. For, the meaning
of our good God is, to show him self a gentle and loving Father: and if we
patiently suffer these things at his hands, it will appear, that he calls
not us his good Sons for nothing: But if we be so rude and vnmannerlie, as
that we will not take, and acknowledge him for our Father, is it not meet that
he should correct us for such a contempt. For, let us understand, that he
has as great authority over us, as any father has over his child. Howbeit,
he is a Father for ever: and therefore, when as he afflicts us (be it never
so grievously) yet must we not despair for all that: But we must understand
that he does it because we are unthankful.

We see then in sum, how we are to consider, of the judgments of God, and
that whatsoever the Prophets have foretold, is fulfilled even before our faces.
And now, let us come unto the comfort which the Prophet sets down
hereupon: which is, That whosoever calls upon the name of God, shall be
saved.

If he had said no more, but that which went before, we might then in deed,
have been meruellously astonished: because, it were altogether to discomfort
us: but he sets down eftsoons a comfort withal, That if we call upon the
name of God, we shall be saved, even amiddest the greatest troubles and
dissentions that may be: yea, for although hell were ready to swallow us up,
yet have we this assured refuge, that if we trust in our God and call upon
him, we are out of doubt to be saved. When any man is grieved and troubled,
then this is the coming of Satan, to make him distrust, to the end he might
not come unto God, and call upon him. Howbeeit here is a great comfort which
we ought to lay hold on, to the contrary, in that God appoints us no set
time to call upon him: so that whenever we are cast down, as it were, into
the bottomless pyt of hell, yet may we even then call boldly upon him. For, as
the Propet says, That he which shall call upon the name of God, shall be
saved: even so contrariwise, he that calls not upon him shall be damned: yea,
although he were as in a Paradise. For, if the very Angels did not call on
him, God might reject them: which is impossible to be done. Now, we may hereby
see, that it is impossible for us to continue here in this world, one minute of
an hour, without we did call upon the name of God.

And therefore, we ought to call this lesson oftentimes to mind: For the
Prophet pronounces judgment against all those which call not upon the name of
God, in saying, That whosoever calls upon the name of God, shall be saved:
and thereupon necessarily ensues, That he which calls not upon him, shall
be damned. And for so much as we are so cold and so easily withdrawn from the
calling upon the name of God, The Prophet (by the saying going before) his
meaning was to declare, that we must not leave of calling upon his Majesty, no
not when we are in the mydst of all the greatest troubles which may come unto
us: For, although heaven and earth should conspire against us, yet must we even
then call upon the Majesty of our God, both with heart and mouth, and with all
power and strength. Howbeit, it is not enough that we say with open mouth, a
Pater noster, in Latin, or else, Our Father which art in heaven in our mother
tongue, except it be said with the right affection of the heart grounded upon
faith. For otherwise, we may say over this prayer, ten, twenty, and thirty
times: and yet they shall be but words wherewith to beat the air. I will not
speak of the entermedling of the Aue Maria amongst, thinking by such silly
gawdes, that they truly call upon the name of God as he requires. For
surely, such kind of people are far from the true calling upon the name of
God: but are even like Witches, and Sorcerers, who can not forget their old
Deuilish superstitions. And therefore we must not marvel overmuch at such
relikes of Satan: Romans 10.14.
because they never had, nor yet have, any faith in Jesus Christ. For how shall
they (as Saint Paul says) call upon him whom they have not believed? And
this place is worthy the noting: Because Saint Paul tells us, that when the
calling upon the name of God is spoken of, that we must seek after him as
after our Father: since we know that all the benefits which we have come from
him, and that he is ready to receive us, so soon as we turn unto him. For
else, what courage might we have to crave any thing at his hands, if we were
not sure of this? And therefore, let us be fully persuaded, that when we in
truth, call upon the Lord our God, that he will receive us.

We see then by this, what a fantastical imagination the Papisticall
fondlinges have. For, thus they say, That we must in no wise presume that God
will hear us when we call upon him: and their reason forsooth is this,
for so much as we know not whether we be in the state of grace or not: For this,
say they, were too too great presumption to think. Why, what is then to be
done? Forsooth, They tell us that we must pray doubtfully: and that it is
sufficient, if we remit all to their mother holy Church: to wit, that we must
have this answer always ready in our mouths, I believe as the holy Church
believes. Thus we see how, that they would have our faith to be doubtful and
uncertain. Now, Saint Paul tells us, that God lyketh not of this gear:
For, he says, That the Gospel is not preached unto us, to make us stand in
doubt, but to assure us of our salvation. And therefore we may easily judge
what Popish faith is, wherein we were nusled in the time of ignorance.

Wherefore, let us understand, that God has bestowed a singular grace upon
us, in pulling us out of that darkness of error and superstition wherein we
were, and has given us his Gospel to bring us into the way of salvation. When
we then shall consider of all these things, we ought to sigh and groan, seeing
that God of his great goodness, has chosen us amongst all the rest of the
nations, to bestow the knowledge of his most holy and blessed word. Now, this
is the mischief that is in Popery (as has been alredie said) when as they
say that we may not in full assurance call upon God, for that, say they, is
presumption, and therefore that he is to be called upon, doubtfully. Neither
are they the simpler and common sort of people which do maintain this: But
even the greatest and chiefest Doctors, and such as are thought to have all
the holy scriptures imprinted in their hearts. In deed they will not be over
earnest, in defending of their Mawmets: although, to say truly, they take
very great pain to maintein them: But when any occasion is given unto them,
to vomit out their blasphemies, they will be so stout, as that a man would
think they were Bedlem like. And why so? Forsooth, because the Devil would
have them hinder us, from calling of the name of God as we should. Even so
then, as many as pray unto God as the Papists do, let them be assured, that
God misliketh of them. For (as has alredie been said) we must not pray unto
God after this manner, as to say, repeat, and oftentimes mumble up, the Lords
prayer. Because all they that so do, are no better then Sorcerers and Witches.
It is true in deed that we should not, from the heart, make over long
prayers: For when we do pray, we should forsake our selves, and forget our
own nature, the Devil, and all his entisementes, to the end we might the
more readelier come unto our Lord God. And after this sort it is that we must
deal.

Moreover, let us be well assured of this, that if we know not rightly to call
upon the name of God, we have nothing. Let us therefore thoroughly consider of
this saying, That we are all damned, as many as call not upon God. For, it is
written in Genesis, speaking of the cursed line of Cayne, Gene. 4.26.
That they builded them selves houses, and strong Towers, and yet for all yt
they had not the true calling upon the name of God: But, it is said, That
after Adam had begotten Seth, that the name of God was a fresh called upon. And
therefore, God at that time was worshipped and honored: For after that Seth,
had been once taught the worship of God, he himself also soon after taught
his children to do the like. Now, we see, that about the worship of God it is
only said, That the name of God was called upon. This then is the most
principal point that we ought to hold. For, although this name of Christian,
flies about amongst us, yet do we but abuse it, if we call not upon the name
of God. Neither can we (as Saint Paul says, and as it has been heretofore
touched) call upon him without we have first, believed in him.

In very deed, the farther from blows, the bolder we are. For we shall see a
number of Scoffers (when they are upon their Ale Bench) that will be then, as
good Christians as any in the world: and a man would think them to be the true
Champions of Jesus Christ, and had gotten at his hands whatsoever was possible
to be had of him. And besides, some of them would promise to work wonders,
whenever the time should come: and (to hear them speak) a man would
suppose, that if Christianity were utterly lost, it should be found in them:
But if they be narrowly sifted, and the bottom of their hearts searched, we
shall find nothing less in them, then that they promised, and would be the
first that would forsake God. And why so? Forsooth, because they have not this
consideration with them selves, to think what they are: For, whenever every
man shall look well unto him self, he shall find a sea of sins, whereof
he can no way be ryd, without by sighing and groaning we run unto God, and
call upon him in our necessity.

Moreover, we are to understand, that the Sermon, which S. Peter made in the
City of Jerusalem, is at this present made unto us, to the end we might
profit our selves thereby: and let us also note, that he brought not in the
place of the Prophet Ioell for naught. And therefore, let us be sure to trust
unto this promise, That whosoever calls upon the name of God, shall be saved.

And according to this holy doctrine, Let us fall down before the Majesty of
our good God, and acknowledge our offenses, beseeching him so to bless us with
his grace, as that we may so confidently call upon him, as that our prayers may
be acceptable in his sight, so that we, being delivered from all superstition
and idolatry, might truly worship him, to the end we might take him for our
Father and Savior, and he likewise at last acknowledge us for his children.
And so let us all say, O Almighty God, and heavenly Father, etc.

The fourth sermon of the descending of the holy Ghost.
Acts. second. 22 Ye men of Israel, hear these words, Jesus of Nazareth, a
man approved of God amongst you with miracles, wonders, and signs, which God
did by him in the midst of you, as ye your selves also know.

23 Him, after you had taken by wicked hands, being delivered by the
determinate counsel and foreknowledge of God, have ye crucified and slain.

24 Whom God has raised up, having loosed the sorrows of death, because it
was impossible that he should be holden of it.


AFter that Saint Peter had in his Sermon declared, that the promise contained
in the Prophecy of the Prophet Joel was accomplished, by the descending of
the holy Ghost upon him, and upon his companio^s the Apostles, for a
testimony, and as a pledge which the Lord God meant to communicate unto his
Church, and unto every faithful member thereof: and yet that there must needs
fall out great troubles, and that the faith of the Christians might be proved
and tried: After all these things, I say, he brings the Jews to Jesus
Christ. For fith the holy Ghost was given, they could not choose but
acknowledge ye coming of Jesus Christ: Because it was said, That the
Prophecy of Joel should not be accomplished until the latter days. And
therefore, when as we see the holy Ghost thus poured out, it is a sure token
that God has sent Jesus Christ, to the end he might make an end of our
salvation. Now, this is an excellent manner, and a very conueent order of
teaching, which we are here to note, to wit, That, look how many graces of his
holy spirit, God gives us, are even so many means to bring and guide us to
Jesus Christ, whereby we might learn all wisdom of him: For he is the very
fountain, out of whom we must all draw the same. And to say truly, First of
all, for so much as he was the word of God from the beginning, he is also the
life and light of men. And because he has received most perfectly, John. 1.
4. John. 1. 16.
all the graces of the holy Ghost, for so much as he was made man, we are to
receive from out of his fullness, grace, for grace. Wherefore, by him it is,
that we must have favor before God: For if we would draw near unto his
Majesty without this mean, we were never able to have access unto him. And
therefore must we go the direct way unto Jesus Christ, For, since we know that
he has most perfectly received the graces of the holy Ghost, we must be all
partakers of them by him and through him. And so, Saint Peter uses here a
very good reason, to admonish the Jews, that the Redeemer was come, to wit,
that in as much as the holy Ghost was poured out, that it was in the latter
days. And besides, he says, Ye men of Israel, hear these words: Jesus of
Nazareth, a man approved of God, amongst you, with wonders, miracles, and
signs, which God did by him in the midst of you, as you your selves also know:
him, I say, being delivered by the determined counsel and providence of God,
you have by wicked hands crucified and slain. This is even he, by whom God
has wholely given him self unto you, and yet have ye put him to death. And
yet notwithstanding ye must needs confess that it is the very self same
man which was promised you in the law. He came to be your Savior and
Redeemer: and this you can neither will nor choose but acknowledge, because he
remained not in death: For God gave him victory over death, and he overcame
it. Thus we see in the first place, what it is that Saint Peter tells unto
the Jews, that he might bring them to ye knowledge of Jesus Christ.

And it is to be noted, that he speaks of nothing here, but of the death,
and resurrection of Jesus Christ. For first of all, it can not be otherwise,
but that the Jews must needs understand that Jesus Christ was the Son of
God. And this is it whereby Saint Peter means to prove it, in that which he
here propounds. Now, there are two things, which we are to understand of
Jesus Christ.

The first is, That we must needs believe, that he is the Messiah, to wit, the
anointed of the Lord, promised in the law, and the very same, of whom the
Prophets have written: and that it is he who suffered death for our redemption:
and yet was not overcome of it, but gloriously rose again, tryumphing over all
his enemies. And thus much for the first point. Now, for the second, when as
we know that Jesus Christ dyed for us, we must needs acknowledge what he is,
and the benefit which we are to receive by him: Here are then two things
thoroughly to be considered of us: For, if we have to deal with a Jew, we
must begin to instruct him in the principles of Christianity, and tell him
that Jesus Christ was borne of the Virgin Mary, and that it was he whom God
had promised them, and whom in very deed his predecessors had put to death:
and that he appointed them the very time when he should come into the world.
And besides, that he had given him a testimony that he was his Son, by
approving it with the signs and miracles which he did in the midst of them:
and likewise, that after he was ascended into heaven, he sent the holy Ghost,
according to the saying which long ere that, was foretold. Thus must we deal
with a Jew, to bring him to the knowledge of Jesus Christ.

Moreover, we must let him understand, that when the kingdom of the Messiah is
spoken of in the scripture, that it is a spiritual kingdom, to the end he
should not be deceived, to think him to be an earthly King, as all the Jews
imagined. And this is it which caused them to refuse Jesus Christ, for so much as
he reigned not over the people, as they thought he should have done. Now,
for the first point, we have nothing wherefore to stand against the Papists,
but for the second. For they grant unto us that Jesus Christ is the Son of
God, and the same that was promised in the law: and that he was put to death,
and rose again. And herein we easily agree. But they are to be taught to what
end he came: For they do not acknowledge him to be the same man in deed that
he is. We know, that we must believe, that our salvation comes by Jesus
Christ alone, and by his death and passion. And the Papists, clean contrary,
attribute it unto their works, and merittes, and other their inventions: and
think, by that mean to be sanctified. Wherefore, they seek in their works
the thing, which can no way be found, but in Jesus Christ. Thus we see that it
is not needful for us to teach the Papists any thing as concerning the
person of Jesus Christ, but only to show them what his power and virtue is,
wherefore he came, and what benefit we may reap thereby. Now, Saint Peter
has here taken upon him, to set forth these two points: For the Jews,
knew not that Jesus Christ was the Messiah sent from God, and therefore much
less knew they his power, and why he came. And therefore he tells them that
he showed himself to be the Son of God amongst them, in as much as he rose
again: so* that by his resurrection they might know him to be the very same,
because he was delivered from death and overcame it: and therefore, that life
and salvation, must be had in him and by him. And this is it which Saint Peter
means to declare in this first place: he will also show us what fruit we
have by his resurrection, which we mean to declare hereafter, as it comes
in order to be handled. Now, seeing we at this present, understand the purpose
of Saint Peter, and the order of his Sermon, let us follow it: and learn to
acknowledge, that so soon as God bestows any benefit upon us, that it is,
because we are the members of Jesus Christ, and not for our works, nor yet for
any other thing that we are any way able to offer unto him. And therefore let
us have no more these royling imaginations in our heads, as to be persuaded
this way and that, but let us come to the acknowledging of our sins, and be
sorry for them: as we see Saint Peter goes about to bring the Jews theretoo,
here in this place, when as he speaks of the death of Jesus Christ. For, in
the first place he accuses them, saying, Ye have slain him.

Now, we may very well see, that he means not by this speech to flatter
them.

And indeed S. Peter did cast this in their dish, as we say, to the end he
might prick their hearts, and wound them to the quick: as hereafter we shall
see, that it so stuck, and grieved the^ at the hearts, as that they were
therewith converted. Thus and by this mean must men be won to come to be
humbled, and brought to the acknowledging of their offenses. For, if we
continually preach unto them pleasant and delightful things, they will do
nothing else but toy and tryfle, and be Gods fellows, and play with him even as
they would do with a mortal man. We see how it fared with the woman of
Samaria, when she spoke unto Jesus Christ, and that he told her of the water of
life, whereof (he said) if she drunk, John. 4. 11.
that she should never thirst, she mocked him like a naughty pack as she
was. But after he had once brought her to the acknowledging of her sin, and
told her that she went to seek her husband, and remembered her of her wicked
life past, she was more mild in her speech then she was at the first. For when
he simplye and plainly laid before her, the graces of God, she laughed him to
skorne, and said, why, where shall we have a Bucket wherewith to draw the
water, seeing the well is so very deep? but when he had said unto her, Thou
art an harlot: thou have had five husbands, and he whom thou now have is not
thy husband, she then acknowledged her sin, and said that Jesus Christ was
an holy Prophet. And therefore until such time as we tremble at the horror of
our sins, we will never give place unto the word of God, And that was the
cause that made Saint Peter accuse the Jews of the slaying of Christ, not that
he took any pleasure in thus reproouing of them, but to the end they might
understand that their condemnation was at hand for their sins: and on the
other side, that they had forgiveness of them by Jesus Christ, if they would
acknowledge him and come unto him. Now, here in this place have the ministers
of God a rule set down unto them, to wit, that they must touch men to the
quick, and tell them of their sins, that they might understand that God is
their Judge, and will not leave their obstinate sinning unpunished: and by that
mean be brought back unto him by repentance: which they will never do except
they be reproved and roughly handled. And therefore let us suffer GOD too rule
and condemn us, to the end he might pardon us. We shall find a great number
of men that would be very glad the Gospel should be preached, so that it might
be for their gain, and serve their carnal desires, and be as it were a cloak
for their villainies. Now, this must not be the end of our preaching: For our
Lord Jesus Christ said, That when the holy Ghost should come, that he should
rebuke the world of sin: that he should sit as a Judge in the place of
justice, and judge the world. John. 16. 8.
And therefore we shall never be able to deal faithfully with the Gospel,
without the world be brought to this condemnation, and that every man may
know what it is, for every of us to rebuke himself.

Wherefore, let all such as flatter themselves, groan and be heartily sorry: and
let al such as take their pleasures, be afeard and tremble: and let all those
who persuade themselves to be righteous, look more narrowly unto themselves,
to the end we might all be brought to this acknowledging of our sins, by
which we shall grow to be penitent, and so consequently come into the favor
of God. Thus we see why it is that S. Peter uses such a bitter reprehension
unto the Jews, whenas he says:

That they had crucified and slain Jesus Christ. And afterward says, being
delivered by the determined Counsel and foreknowledge of God. As if he should
have said, Although he was delivered by wicked hands, and that you have put
him to death, yet was it not done without the will of God. Now, it is not for
naught that S. Peter added this saying, by the determined Counsel and
foreknowledge of God: For the Jews might have replied and said, If it be so
that the same Christ Jesus of whom thou so much speak of, be the Messiah,
why has he suffered himself to be thus tormented and put to death? And this
is a thing that will hardly persuade them: For we see even at this day how
they mock and scorn at it, saying, If Jesus Christ had been the Son of GOD,
how is it possible that he would abide the shameful death of the cross? And
thus do the wicked vomit out this blasphemy, by reason of the object of the
cross, because they think to be a thing derogatorie from the Majesty of the
son of God. And therefore S Peter preue^teth these fa^tasies, which might be
a let unto ye Jews to believe his doctrine. And tells them that none of all
this gear came by fortune (as might have been judged) but even by the will of
God. Now if we rightly considered of the power of God, we should be clean
void of al these fond imaginations. For, we know, that God is not without
wit, and reason, and that whatsoever he did, he did it merely for the
salvation of mankind. His resurrection also, is diligently to be observed of
us, for as the death of Jesus Christ might give us occasion of offense, if we
considered of it only by it self, even so, in his resurrection we see the
woonderful power and glory of God, which might make us not to be offended
whatsoever troubles and fantasies arise. And therefore S. Peter said, not
without cause, that that which Jesus Christ suffered, was done by the
foreknowledge of God. For it must needs come to pass, that Jesus Christ must
be the offered up sacrifice, unto God his Father, to blot out the sins of the
world. Wherefore, when we see the Counsel of God tend to such an end, let us
understand, that whatsoever is done, is done for our benefit, and never enquire
why Jesus Christ suffered, because we see therein, the infinite goodness of God:
we see (as S. Paul says) ye love which appears unto us: Tit. 3.4.
in yt he spared not his only begotten son, but delivered him to death for
our sakes. On ye other side, we see how obedient Jesus Christ was to god his
father: let us not therefore be so presumptuous, as to enter into these foolish
thoughts, and say, why does God this, or that? For, we know that whatsoever
he has ordained, is grounded upon the fatherly love which he bears us. And
so, when we look at this, we the^ see why it is, yt Christ Jesus suffered.
This therefore, is the reason, wherefore S. Peter says, ye God had decreed this
in his unchangeable counsel. Moreover, he was co^te^ted yt this should be done
by the hand of the wicked and ungodly. Wherein we see, that it is in the wicked,
to hurt the godly: but that they ca^ do nothing without the sufferance of God:
neither can we have a more excellent spectacle heerin, the^ the very person of
Jesus Christ. For we cannot choose but know, that whatsoever he suffered, was
long ago foretold by the Prophets. It is said, that he was nailed on the
Cross, because it was so foretold. Thus we see how these theeuish Romanists
crucify him (to wit, the soldiers unto who^ the execution was committed)
because it was so prophesied. They gave him very sharp and bitter drink, to
drink: John. 19.24.28.
they parted his garments: and all this they did, because it was so written. To
be short, there was nothing done in this, but that which God had before
ordained. Thus we see that the wicked can do nothing without God give them
leave. For we see, that these ungodly ones could go no farther then God had
licensed them. And therefore whatsoever is said of Jesus Christ is to be
applied to our use, for he himself has said, that the little sparrowes shall
not fall on the ground without his ordenance. If so be then that the providence
of God extends it self unto these small fowls, Mat. 10.29
it must needs follow, that nothing comes to pass without his appointment,
he says after that, that the hayres of our head are numbered, wherein, he
shows the fatherly care which he has over us, and besides, because we are
the members of Jesus Christ, and touch him very near, he would have us
understand, that he takes us for his children. For although the world be as it
were the house of God, and he the Goodman of the household, yet does he
singulerly reverence and like his Church, and has a special care thereof. And
therefore we see, what we are to think of the providence of god, to wit, yt
S. Peter would have no fantastical things set down, nor yet have us search after
subtilties, with edify not. His meaning then, is not to proceed after any such
sort: but shows that God has so well provided for our salvation, as that we
need not seek for any other mean, but that only which he has appointed.
And besides, he would have us understand, yt we are so sure under ye hand of God
and his protection, as that nothing can be done against us, but that which he
has determined, For if it were not so, what should become of us, if we were
guided by fortune (as mad men think we are) surely our estate were more
accursed then the estate of brute beasts. But whe^as we understand yt god is ye
governor of al things this ought greatly to comfort us, and we might thereon
very well stay our selves. Wherefore we see it to be a necessary virtue to know
ye providence of god. And therefore we are to consider, yt as Jesus Christ
suffered nothing, but by Gods permission, even so, whatsoever shall betide us
comes from God, this then is it with we are to observe here in this place. Yea,
and we are thoroughly to consider of this word counsel Indeed there are some men
which will speak of the providence of God, but it shall be but a foolish
imagination thereof, for they think that he himself takes his ease in heaven
above, and gives fortune or nature leave to rule here below. Now, we are
contrariwise here told, ye God ordeyneth al things, and disposes every thing
at his will and pleasure. True it is that the same is unknown to us, neither
can we comprehend it: but we must be only contented to understand that he is
the Governor thereof: neither must we as I have already said) do as some
foolish fellows do, who say. And if God knows what shall come to pass: it
is not for us to set down any order, and therefore to what end should we use
counsel and advise? Thus we see what reason these fantastical fellows would
yield unto their follies, which are over great arrogancies, for God to leave
unpunished. For, although god calls us not into his secret counsel to declare
unto us his will, and determination, yet let us know yt he governs us by his
hand, and that the wicked can do nothing against us, except the Lord gives
them leave. And yet there remains a certain order in nature: and the meaning
thereof is not, but yt we must use advise: for God has said unto us, yt he
would have us live by the bread which he gives us to eat, and that our
diseases should be healed by physic. Wherefore, it were over great arrogancy
for us, to refuse the means, which God gives us, to cure and help our
infirmities, And he that thinks to get honor by this mean, shall bring
himself to utter destruction. For when we say, that the providence of God
provides for all things, yet must we not refuse the mean which he has
appointed. Saint Peter says a little after this, that it was impossible for
the flesh of the body of Jesus Christ to turn to corruption. And why so?
because that God only had so ordained it: and not that it could do naturally
so. For when he was conceived in the womb of the Virgin Mary, he took upon
him our nature, and was made like unto us, sin excepted. And by that reason,
his flesh was subject to corruption even as ours is, if God had not in that
sort prevented it. Heb. 4.15.
If a man had seen the bones of our lord Jesus Christ, they might well enough
have been bruised and broken: and yet we see yt it was impossible for the^ to
be so, because that God had in such sort appointed it, and that they were not
naturally so: here we see, what we have to note, concerning that which might be
alleged out of this place: not that we are to deal in speculatio^s, and to
invent a thousand sophistical or brabling questions, wherein the papists are
cunning: but let us in all hu^blenes consideratly stay our selves upon this,
that GOD does not only foresee all things, but desposeth them also at his
will and pleasure. And therefore, let us learn to commend our selves unto
him, John. 12.31.
whenas we abide the grievous assaults of the devil and of the world, whereof
he is said to be the Prince: and when we think that it cannot be chosen but
that the wicked will oppress us, John. 12.31.
let us shroud our selves under the wings of our good God, that he might give
us wherewith to resist them: and so, being armed with his power, we may be
able to put by all the temptations that may come unto us. For, although all the
Devils, and wicked ones would rise up against us, he knows well enough how
to bridle them, and hold them fast bound, so that we (as we have before
said) run unto him, and rest under his protection. Thus we see that we must
look upon the providence of God by faith, and not after our own reason.

Now, in that we have said, that the wicked do nothing but that which God
ordeineth: a number might reply and say, what good sir, and if it be thus, it
might be said, that God should be the cause of the evil, and the wicked
were to be excused. For answer hereof, we must in the first place understand,
what the will of god is, yea and that he sets down unto us in his law. We
know that he has forbidden stealing. If then I go and steal, What? Do I
then his will? Surely, when the wicked go about to do any mischief, they go
not to do ye will of God, for they know well enough that God utterly misliketh
al wicked dealing. And therefore when they do any evil, they withstand the
will of God.

Wherefore, it follows that God would not have them do any evil: but
suffers them to do it: and for ye cause they are in excuseable, for so much as
they do contrary to his commandment. And therefore we must not say that God
is the cause of evil: for he commits not the faults which we commit. For
we see, that he gives the Devil leave to punish such are worthy thereof.
The Devil commits evil, and has none other regard but to do mischief,
and yet God makes him to serve him to another clean contrary end. God
suffers a Thief to rob a true man of his goods. John. 1.21.
And why does he so? Forsooth to prove his patience, that it might be known.
We see what Job says in all his troubles, The Lord has given, and the Lord
has taken, blessed be the name of the Lord. And yet thieves robbed and spoiled
him. What means he then hereby? Does Job accuse God of theft? No forsooth,
you must not so take it: for he knew that thieves were wicked, and that they
came not thither but against the will of God, and to the intent to do
mischief: howbeit he had a further reach, and considered that it was not done
without the providence of God.

And therefore Job attributed not the wicked deed unto God: but he knew what
men were in their kind. He saw that the Chaldeans and Sabeans, were the
scourges of God, They robbed, and reaued, they killed his servants, and drove
away his Cattle, to be short, they impouerished him and left him nothing: and
yet he continually praised God, because he right well knew, that it was not
done without his ordinance. And even so must we do: For if the wicked
trouble us, we must not look unto them, but our faith must ascend a great
deal higher, to wit, we must understand that the providence of God is above
them al. After this sort then must we judge, and not enter into vain
speculations. We see now at this present, that the ungodly crucified Jesus
Christ, and yet was it not done without the ordinance of God. Howbeeit God
wrought it to another end. It was the will of the wicked to bring Jesus Christ
to naught: and it was the will of God, that his blood and death should be an
everlasting Sacrifice, and our redemption to be made, and accomplished thereby.

And therefore when we behold this, we have occasion to glorify GOD: and he
that does not so, his own conscience reprooueth him. Now, S. Peter says,
that Jesus Christ rose again, whereby to show (as we have already said) that
we must always join his resurrection with his death: For if we look into
his death only, we shall see him altogether full of all shame and reproach,
and disfigured like a Leper. But when we come unto his resurrection, we see
how mightily the hand of God exalted him, giving him al power both in heaven
and earth, Wherefore, Mat. 28.18.
so soon as we have said that Jesus died: let us by and by understand, that
he rose again. He died according to the weakness of his flesh but in that
he rose again, he showed himself to be the very son of God.

Thus we see the meaning of Saint Peter his words when he says, Whom God
raised up, being delivered to death. Now, 2. Cor. 13.4.
in that he says, The sorrows of death, he means not the sorrows of the
bodily death, which Jesus Christ suffered, but the horrible anguishes wherein
he was because he was to be our pledge, and bear the punishment of all our
sins. Wherefore, he suffered not only in body: but also in spirit: and yet
was he not for all that overcome: But because we cannot at this present, go on
with the declaration of the sorrows of his death, as is very behouefull: we
therefore will reserve it until the next time.

According to this doctrine, let us fall down before the majesty of our good
God, and acknowledge our offenses, beseeching him so to touch us with the
confessing of them, as that although we have heretofore given the reine to our
affections, yet yt it would please him to hold us in, that we might be
obedient unto his word: and so in pardoning of our offenses past, not
rigorously judge us, but accept those graces and thanksgiving which we yield
unto him, for all the benefits which he has bestowed upon us. And so let us
all say, O Almighty God and heavenly Father. etc.

A Sermon of the latter day.
Second to the Thessalonians. Chapter first. 6 IT is a righteous thing with
God, to recompense tribulation unto them that trouble you.

7 And to you which are troubled, rest with us in the Revelation of our Lord
Jesus from heaven with the angels of his power,

8 In flaming fire, rendering vengeance unto them that know not God, and that
obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ.

9 Which shall be punished with everlasting damnation, from the presence of
the Lord, and from the glory of his power.

10 When he shall come to be glorified in his Saints, and to be made
marvelous in all them that believe (because our testimony toward you was
believed) in that day.


ONe of the principallest Articles of our faith is this, that our Lord Jesus
Christ must appear from heaven. Now, it cannot be, that his coming should
be unprofitable: and therefore it necessarily follows, that we must look and
wait for our redemption and salvation from thence. Neither must we stand any
whit in doubt thereof, because if we should so do, it were even enough to
make whatsoever our Lord Jesus Christ has done and suffered, of none
effect. For, why came he down into the world, why took he our flesh upon
him, why suffered he upon the Cross, why rose he again, and why ascended
he into heaven? Forsooth he did all this, to this end and purpose, that he
would gather us together into his kingdom, whenas he shall appear. And
therefore this his coming, is as it were to seal and ratify all whatsoever
he has done and endured, for our salvation.

Now this were even sufficient to stay us, for the resisting of all the
temptations in the world: but because we are so frail and inconstant, as that
we cannot believe the thing which God himself says, Saint Paul now uses a
strange kind of Argument, the better to confirm us in this hope, whereunto
he has exhorted us in the person of the Thessalonians: which is, That GOD
will not be so lightly set by, by the contemners of his Gospel, who make no
reckoning of his heavenly Majesty: neither will he suffer his creatures to
lift them selves up against him, and to withstand him. Thus we see, by how
much more we should be confirmed, in the hope of our salvation, seeing that
God has an interest therein, and is his own cause. And this is a point which
we are diligently to observe. For although (as I have already said) God
exceedingly assures us yt he has great care of our salvation, yet our nature
is so wonderful mistrustful, as that we continually stand in doubt. But when
it is set down unto us, ye god will defend his own right, and not suffer us to
tread his majesty under foot, this is a doctrine which should make* us full
assured and resolute.

And besides, GOD shows us such favor in joining his glory with our
salvation, as that there is an inseparable bond between the one and the
other. For, do not we see an infallible assurance, that our Lord Jesus will
come to give us rest and quietness, because it cannot otherwise be but that
God will mainteyn his majesty against the pride and enmity of men? And
therefore let us diligently mark, that Jesus Christ cannot mainteyne the glory
of his father, but yt he must eftsoons declare himself to be our redeemer. And
these things (as I have said) cannot be sundered. Wherefore we herein see
the infinite love of our God toward his faithful ones, whenas he conioyneth
himself in ^uch sort with them, for as he cannot possibly forget his own
glory, no more can he also forget our salvation: and as he will show his
power to be revenged of al such as resist him, even so will he likewise
punish all those that have unjustly afflicted his chosen people. Thus we see,
what S. Paul his meaning is, when as he says that Jesus Christ will come to
render vengeance to al those which have not known God, and obeyed his Gospel.
As if he should have said Behold your enemies which persecuted you. Now, you
were in doubt whether God regarded your afflictions, and whether he had
compassion of you or not, for the remedying of them. What? Think you that GOD
makes no reckoning to mainteyne and defend his glory? Now, as the Adversaries
afflict you for cleaving unto the Gospel, even so likewise will God, in the
defense of his own cause, be your Protector and defendor. And by the way, S.
Paul also gives us here in this place many profitable aduertisementes. For,
when he speaks of the vengeance which is prepared for our enemies, he
says, That Jesus Christ will come with the Angels of his power, and in flaming
fire. But to what end? Forsooth, to confirm his saying: to wit, that the
enemies of his truth (says he) might sustain their punishment, both before
God, and his majesty. As if he should have said, surely, you can no more
comprehend the torment which the faithless shall suffer: then we do see the
glory of God. For when we hear the glory of God spoken of, we know it to
be without end, and measure, and therefore we ought to wonder at it. Even so
fares it with the horrible vengeance which is prepared for all the
faithless: Seeing God must show forth his power upon them. For since his
Majesty (as I have said) is inestimable, therefore must their torment be also
incomprehensible for our cause, and thus much for this point.

Moreover, when S. Paul speaks of Infidels, and of the enemies of God, he
says, That they knew him not, nor yet obeyed his Gospel, Or that they were
Rebels, and this kind of speech imports a very profitable doctrine. For if a
man should ask the most wicked men that were possibly to be found out,
whether they would make war against God or not, they would surely say no: and
yet for all that, they do clean contrary to their words, because they will not
fully and wholly submit themselves unto the Gospel. And how is that? It is said
that we cannot obey God without faith: For mark how Saint Paul speaks
thereof as well in the Epistle to the Romans, as in the Acts of the Apostles.
Romans 1.8. Acts. 6. 7.
Since it is so, (says he) that faith is such a true and right obedience as
god requires and likes of, it necessarily follows, that all they which will
not believe the Gospel, are his enemies, and do what in them lies to set
themselves against him,

Now, if they say they have no such meaning, it is all one, and the case so
stands for all that. We are hereby taught that our service cannot please God,
without we first believe the Gospel, and accept of all therein contained, for
our humbling, To be short, faith is the chiefest thing that God requires at
our hands. In very deed we are to note this by the way, that faith simply
leads us not to consent unto that which is taught us, but that we must
withal, bring our hearts and affections with us: For we must not only accept
of that, that is said unto us, with our mouths, or in a fantastical manner,
but it must be imprinted in our hearts, and we must also understand, that it
is not lawful for us to stand against our God.

And therefore, let us with a true desire crave to stick unto the doctrine
which is offered us. Faith then is in the heart, and there takes root, and is
no simple and bare knoweledge: For if we were once brought to believe that the
doctrine of the Gospel is true, and yet we in the mean while could find no
savor in it, but were grieved and weeried with it, were this to be obedient
unto it? No surely. Let us learn then to obey God, and take not the doctrine
of the Gospel to be good, and holy only, but let us also love it: and not
only love it, but also reverence it: accordingly as David speaks of the Law,
where he says, Psalm. 19.11.
That he thought it to be sweeter then honey, and more precious then gold or
silver. And therefore, we must have the doctrine of the Gospel in such an
estimation and prise, and chiefly, it must be even so sweet, and pleasant unto
us.

Now, when we shall thus do: then (as I have said) will God like of our
obedience. This then is the most worthy service which he desires at our
hands. For else, it is a wise thing for us, to do this or that, because that
whatsoever we shall take in hand to do will stincke before the face of God,
until such time as we believe the Gospel. And herein may be seen the
miserable estate and condition of the Papists: for they exceedingly torment
themselves with their religions, as they call them: they think that god is
greatly beholden unto them, whenas they have played ye masking Idiots, as they
do: and when they have babbled out their Pater Nosters, heard a number of
Masses, trotted on Pilgrimage, and spent their money abhominably, they think
that God should allow all this gear for current. But what? Forsooth they want
the principal matter, and that is Faith: For admit that these things in
themselves were good and godly, yet if men have not faith, God will account
them all, as fond and foolish.

And therefore we see; that the more the Papists go about to think to serve
god, the greater condemnation they heap upon them selves, and provoke his
anger to light upon their heads. And therefore they are here called the
enemies of GOD, because they will not be subject unto the doctrine of the
Gospel, well Good sir, will they say, you see that our meaning is to serve
God, and this, and that we do, to the same end. Ye say well, But behold how
God inuiteth you unto himself, he tells you that all your felicity and
blessedness rests in his only mere favor and mercy, and would have you
seek for no salvation but in Christ Jesus alone: he has told you that he
has sent his Son unto you, that you might feel the fruit and effect of his
passion: and that in his name and for his sake all your trespasses are pardoned
and forgiven you: and that you should look for none other Advocate but him,
to bring you unto his Majesty: and desire to be renewed by his holy spirit.

Thus you see after what manner the Lord speaks to you. And you puppetly
Papists, what do you? Surely there is nothing but pride and presumption in
you: For you bend all your force against all the promises which God has made
you, and think to gain by your own industry, the thing which is promised you
in Jesus Christ: For you trust in your own merits and works, you look
after such Patrones and advocates as you like best of, and in the mean while,
Christ Jesus is shut clean out of the doors: without doubt, faith you have
none: and that which is worse, ye rebel against GOD, and in steed as you
think, of woorshipping and honoring him, ye proclayme mortal wars against
him. Wherefore, we are highly to magnify our good GOD for bringing us out of
so bottomless a pit, and showing us the right way how to serve him: to wit,
in sincerely conioyning us unto the doctrine of the Gospel, receiving the
promises which by it is made unto us.

Moreover, if we do perceive that men are once humbled, this is a right
preparatiue to bring them unto the true service of God, yea even to the full
and perfect obedience which GOD likes of, as already has been said, Here
then we see one point, That infidelity is an enemy to GOD: For there can be
no obedience, without it be begun by faith. Now, Saint Paul says, that
they which obey not the Gospel, know not God. Wherein we see that ignorance
shall not excuse, although many there are which would feign make it their
defense: and they think it sufficient if they have not manifestly and of set
purpose offended therein, making this reckoning, that GOD ought to forgive them
every whitte. Yea forsooth, But mark that Saint Paul namely says, that
Jesus Christ will come to destroy all those that have not known God.

Let us therefore understand, that we cannot choose but be confounded and
utterly overthrown, if so be we know not him who created us, and him also
who redeemed us And to speak truly, there is great reason in it: for why has
God given us wit and understanding, but to this end, that in knowing of him we
should worship him, and yield him that honor which belongs unto him.

We see how desirous we our selves are to be esteemed and honored, and yet
will we thrust him out at the Carts arse, as we say, and who made us? for
what purpose do they this? Is it not a thing clean against nature? but let us
by ye way mark that the ignorance of Infidels and incredulous Papists,
proceeds not of mere simplicity, but of very malice, pride and hypocrisy,
which causes them to be so clearly void of wit, and discretion. And how so?
because without all doubt, if we might once come to the knowledge of God, we
could neither will nor choose, but humble our selves before him: For it is
impossible for us, to be able to think what God is, except we be lively
touched with some fear, which may make us yield unto him* And therefore, so
long as we are Rebels, and his enemies, it is a token that we never knew him:
for this knowledge of God, is too too lively a thing, to say, there we see
him, and yet be as obstinate and rebellious as Infidels. And if any man say,
that they are ignorant, I grant: but let them take this withal, that they
are also cursed hypocrites. Is there either one or other of us, that has any
thing in him, able to excuse him? No surely, for if we had but the seed of
nature in us, given by God, the very beholding of heaven and earth, were
enough to make us think, that there were some one who created all these
things: God reuealeth unto us as it were in a glass his majesty and glory:
and yet there is none of us all that will yield unto it. Surely, the most
ungodly, and such as make a scorn of GOD, whenas they be in any pain or
grief, will call upon him, and yet think no whit at all indeed of him: and
hereunto does GOD drive them, that they might be without all excuse,
insomuch that they (as I have already said) which are most incredulous, are not
yet so ignorant, but that they play the very Hipocrites. They would gladly
cover and cloak it: Howbeeit they close up their eyes for the very nonce. We
are proud also and malicious: for if we did bear that honor unto God that
we ought, we would have another manner of care to seek to know him and his
will.

And therefore, whenas we are so lazy, and cold, it is a token that we care
not for him. So that by that mean our desire is, to walk altogether in the
dark. Why so? what is then to be done? Forsooth, when we come near unto
GOD, and that he rebukes us for our offenses, we should learn to be
offended with our sins and reform our lives. Howbeeit, we are contented to
lulle our selves asleep in our miseries: and thus we see how we fly from
his brightness.

We are therefore here to note, that we are not punished without good cause,
although we be ignorant: for we cannot justly say, that we are simple, but
rather hypocritical, proud, and malicious. We see then why S. Paul says.
That they which had sinned without law (to wit, they which had no understanding
of the word of God) should notwithstanding die without law, saying further,
that God had ingraue^ a law in every man's heart: for although we had neither
Scripture nor preaching, yet does our consciences serve for a law to condemn
us: and this shall be sufficient at the latter day, well, we may have many
starting holes to deceive men withal, and we think it a good discharge: but
when we come once before the heavenly Judge, we shall come short of our
reckoning, for there we shall see all our excuses to be vain. Let us then
note out of the saying in this place, That the Lord will come to render
vengeance unto al those which have not known GOD and obeyed the gospel, to
wit, unto al incredulous persons. Now, by this we see, that faith is ye only
port or gate unto salvation, and life: because Jesus Christ will come to
confound al those which have not believed.

Moreover, we must understand, that until such time as GOD enlighteneth us,
we are altogether ignorant and blind. And why so? Forsooth, we have a fair
catch to know whatsoever is in heaven and in earth, and yet not know God, and
then to what purpose serves all our knowledge? And surely, we shall never know
him aright, until such time as he has enlightened us with his holy spirit.
Whereupon we see, that our ignorance shall not excuse us, to the end no man
should flatter himself, and become careless: and yet let us also note one
thing by the way, that when we are come to the knowledge of God, we ought of
very right submit our selves unto him, to the end he might keep us in awe,
that all our thoughts and affections might be guided after his will: so that we
may have such a faith unto the Gospel, as that we may say with David, Psalm.
19.1^.
that this doctrine is sweeter then honey, and more precious then gold or
silver. And thus much for this point.

Moreover, we here see, how GOD means to certefie us of our salvation. For
if Jesus Christ must come to do vengeance upon all those which have not
believed the Gospel, but resisted it: we must needs conclude, that the world
shall be judged by the Gospel. Now, it is there said unto us, that when we
have received the promises of God with a true and lively faith, we must not
stand in doubt of his favor and love to us ward, neither yet doubt that Jesus
Christ will not stand to the thing which he has offered for us and for our
redemption.

And therefore, all they which do believe in the Gospel, may without all
doubt rejoice, that Jesus Christ will come to be their Redeemer. And this
assurance (as I have already said) God makes us, so that we refuse not such
a benefit. As for the power and glory of Jesus Christ, which Saint Paul here
speaks of, it is (as has been before said) to this end that his coming
might be the more terrible to all incredulous and rebellious persons. And is
this a small matter, to say that Jesus Christ will come accompanied with his
Angels in flaming fire, and with an incomprehensible Majesty, thundering and
lightening upon all those that are his enemies.

By this we see that Saint Paul his meaning here, is to admonish all
faithless people, if they are to be helped, to beware how they continue still
without am^ndment. Notwithstanding, because we see that such as Satan leads,
and whose hearts he hardens, do nothing else but make a mock at the
threatninges of God, let us for our parts make our profit thereby: and when
we hear that Jesus Christ will come in such a fearful manner, as that he
will so fear and bridle us, that when Satan shall go about to spur and
prick us forward, to withdraw us from the obedience of the Gospel, we
might be able to think thus with our selves and say, how fares it with us?
how headlong run we into destruction? What mean we to provoke him against
us, unto whom all majesty, power, glory, and dominion is given, to cast down
even into the pit of hell, as many as resist him?

Now if we thoroughly considered of this, without doubt we would keep so good
a hand of our selves, as that all the fleshly lusts and temptations of the
world, should never be able to prevail against us. Saint Paul also meant to
make a comparison betwixt the first coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the
second. Why then do the wicked, and ungodly contemners of the Gospel, so
boldly lift up themselves, as that they become dissolute, and stark staring
mad. Surely, it is because they hear, that while Jesus Christ was here on
earth, he took upon him the state of a servant, Phil. 2.7.
yea and abased himself (and Saint Paul says) even unto this most shameful
and slanderous death. And because the enemies of God understand such an
infirmity to be in Jesus Christ, they take upon them to speak thus wickedly
and furiously of him: as we see it is even so: howbeit, they see not, that as
he suffered as he was man, that he likewise rose again through the power of
his spirit: For he then in such sort showed forth his glory, as that both
great and small ought to tremble thereat. 2. Cor. 13.4.
But if these faithless people are not able to understand the power that
appeared in the resurrection of our Lord Jesus Christ, let them give ear to
that which is here spoken: to wit, that he will come in glory.

For in his first coming, he appeared contemptible, because he would show
him self obedient in our behalfes, for that he was to make satisfaction for
our sins: But at his second coming, he will come to be our judge. He was
judged and condemned, that we might be delivered from the judgment seat of
God, and be pardoned of all our sins, Then will he not questionless come
in such humble sort: but will come with his angels in glory. And this is the
meaning which Saint Paul would have us note, to the end the wicked and
faithless might not take occasion to contemn this his last coming, under
color ye Jesus Christ once appeared as he was man, like unto us, and was
made like unto a worm of the earth, as it is said in the Psalm: and as
Isaiah says, he was disfigured from top to toe, all to wounded, and that
for our redemption. For since he accomplished that, which the justice of God
required, there remained nothing, but that he should show himself in this
glory, which was appointed for him: For we know (as Saint Paul says) That
he has given him a name above all names, Phil. 2.9.
that all the Creatures in Heaven, Earth, and Hell should bow unto him: that
every thing should tremble at his excellent Majesty, which also the despisers
of his Gospel should well know, to their pain though late first.

Thus we see what the Apostle Saint Paul his pretense is, when he says,
That his coming shall be fearful. Let us also eftsoons mark yt which
follows, That he shall come to appear meruellous, and to be glorified in his
Saints. Now it is not for nothing that Saint Paul sets down this saying:
for what are we, that we should be able to abide the presence of the Son
of God, whenas he shall come in flambing fire. And therefore, when he shall
come with an incomprehensible power. Alas, must not we needs melt before him,
as Snow before the Sun, and come to nothing. Lo, how we should be cast
down whenas we do but only hear the heavenly glory of Jesus Christ spoken
of: But Saint Paul shows us, that if we be of the faithful sort, that we
must not be afraid at the appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ, neither yet
wax sorrowful and melancholic at the brightness of his Majesty. And why so?
Because (says he) he will be glorified, and made wonderful in his
Saints. As if he should have said, that the mention which he before made of
the flambing fire, and of the horror and fear, was not to discourage the
faithful ones, as though they desired not the coming of our Lord Jesus
Christ, and as though they held not up their heads as often as they heard it
spoken of: because he shall come to redeem them. And this is a doctrine which
is very common in the holy Scriptures: to wit, yt our Lord joins these two
things together. That he will come to be revenged of his enemies, and to
deliver his people: that he will come to save al those that have served and
honored him, and to cast down and confound all those, who have hardened them
selves against him, and his word.

Let us now then keep in mind that this terrible description which here
before has been set down, is not to make us sorrowful and melancholic: But
rather to make us joyful and glad, whenas we see what love and favor God
bears us. Behold, our Lord Jesus Christ will come, and that terribly. And
wherefore will he do so? Forsooth, even to throw down headlong all his
enemies, and to take vengeance of all the shames and afflictions which we have
abidden, How so I beseech you? Are we worthy that the Son of God should
power out his Majesty, and show himself so terribly against all his
creatures for our causes? No, without doubt: But yet will he do so, for so much
as he loves us This then is it which I have already said, that we might be
comforted, when as we hear it said, That the Son of God will come so
horribly and fearfully. For herein, he effectually shows, the infinite love
he bears us, in that he spares not his power and Majesty to take
vengeance of all the wrongs which have been done to us.

Nevertheless, we shall never be able to feel the savor of it, without this
thing be observed, which Saint Paul namely sets down in this place: to
wit, that our Lord Jesus Christ will not come, to be only revenged of his
enemies, and of all such as have been enemies unto his Gospel but also, To be
glorified, and made wonderful in his saints, and in those which have believed.

Now, whenas Saint Paul did set down this, it is as much as if he had said,
that he would come to make us partakers of his glory: That whatsoever is in
him, worthy reverence and honor all that, I say, shall be communicated unto
us. To be short, S. Paul says, That our Lord Jesus Christ shall not come
him self alone, and keep his glory to him self, but to the end it might be
poured out upon all the members of his body. And for this cause we see it is
said in the Collossians, That our life lies now hid, Col. 3. 3.
but that it shall appear at the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ. And
therefore he shall not come perticulerly for him self, and for his own
glory alone, but rather that we might be partakers thereof: and not in such
sort neither, but that he always has a great prerogative over his children,
for it is good reason he should be the head of his Church. And to say the
truth, the glory which he communicates with us, is not derogatorie from his,
neither yet is it thereby made any whit less, howbeit we must be transformed,
as Saint Paul says to the Phillippians: Phil. 3.21.
and where we are now so full of infirmities as is lamentable, it cannot be
chosen but that our life must be made like unto the heavenly life of our Lord
Jesus Christ. And so, when Saint Paul spoke after that manner, he namely had
regard unto the state of the faithful, as it is in this world: For we are
noted, pointed at with the finger, and our tongues pulde out: we see how the
wicked and ungodly make a jest at the children of God: and it is meet we
should be made thus contemtible, to the end we might learn to look for no
glory here in this world. Howbeit, God will, when it pleases him, have us
exalted above them all: but his meaning, in the mean while, is, that we should
suffer such slanders and reproaches, that we might look up into heaven, and
seek for our triumph and victory, there. For, to what purpose were it, for us
to be glorified and made much of here in this life, and to have God in the
mean time to be dishonored? In very deed, the wicked with open mouth make a
scorn of God: and make no reckoning of them, which will not spit in his
Majesty's face. And would we then be honored by them? Surely, if we should
desire it, must it not needs be said, that we are too too faint hearted.
Wherefore, according to my first saying: that for so much as the faithful, are
at this present contemned, and naught set by: and that some laugh them to
scorn, and other some oppress them: so that their flesh is eaten to ye bones,
and troaden clean under foot, therefore the Apostle calls us back unto the
latter day, saying, That we shall at that time appear wonderful, even like
unto the Son of God him self: for which cause, let not us fear, but that
the glory which he will give us shall so terrefie our enemies, as that they
shall be made our footstool, according to that saying of the scripture.
Howbeet, Saint Paul, here namely sets down, who they are that must look
to be partakers of the glory of the Son of God: Psalm. 110.
and he declares the fruits of all those that have believed, in these
words, Saints. For he shows that they which are carried away with the
pollutions and corruptions of this world, must not look to have any part or
portion in this enheritance, nor yet be partakers of any thing which belongs
unto the Son of God.

Nevertheless, in this saying, They which have believed, he shows that
faith is the very right springhead and beginning of all holiness.

Thirdly, he shows, that if our faith be pure and right, that it is
impossible but that we must eftsoons be sanctified. Thus we see three points
which we are to observe. The first is, That if we foil, and tumble our selves
in our filthiness, and corruptions, we are quite cut off from the Son of
God: and therefore let us not look to be any whit the better for his coming:
but call to mind the saying of the Prophet, in these words, Desire not the
coming of the day of the Lord: Amos. 5.
For it shall be a day of terror and fear, and not of health and joy.

For, by reason there were in those days, a great number of hypocrites, who
cloaked them selves with the name of God, the Prophet tells them that it will
cost them dear. After the same very manner shall we see the most wicked at this
day, with open mouth and wide throat say, What I beseech you good Sir? think
you that we fear not God, and that we will not be as good Christians as the
rest? Thus, no doubt of it, will they say: and yet in the mean while, a man
shall see nothing in them but wantonness, and all ungodliness, and as religious
as Dogs and Swine. And examine their lives, and we shall find them
altogether disloyal, and faythlesse like Foxes, full of treason, perjury,
cruelty, and bitterness unto their neighbors: given to all kind of harm
and outrage, and full of all corruption, so that whosoever gives them most,
they will be sure to be no losers: They will keep open shop to take of all
hands, insomuch that they will not only sell their faith and credit, but
their honor and honesty also even in open sight: and will keep open fair
and market to utter all wickedness. To be short, they will show them selves
extreme impudent contemptuous persons, and yet forsooth, they will not stick
to brag, that they are the frowardest men in all the Church of God: and
think, that God will help them, as if he were greatly beholden unto them.
And therefore, as we see it to be thus at this day, even so the Prophet
speaking to those that were in his days, says, What? what kind of bragges
are these that you make, of the Lords coming? Why? think you to receive any
benefit by his coming? No, no: But be assured that it will be a terrible, and
a most fearful day to you. And so, according to my first saying, we have to
note out of this place of Saint Paul, that if we would have the coming of
our Lord Jesus Christ available to us, and do us good, and to be the
Redeemer of our salvation, we must learn to consecrate our selves to
holiness of life, and to separate our selves from the corruptions of the
world, and the flesh. And thus much for the first point. But to the attaining
hereof, let us note, that we must begin with faith: according to that which we
have lately said: For, to say truly, faith, Acts. 15. 6.
is the spring head of all holiness, as it is said in the Acts, where Saint
Peter says, That God cleanses the hearts of men by faith.

And this was spoken to this end and purpose, to show that whatsoever glorious
show we make, that we shall always be corrupt and stinking before the
Majesty of God, until such time as God cleanses us by the mean of faith. As
for the third point, we are admonished, that if we have a lively faith, it
cannot be chosen but that we must eftsoons be sanctified: to wit, that we
cannot but be reformed to the service of God, and be consecrated to honor him.
And how is that? Forsooth, because that we embrasing Jesus Christ by faith,
he will dwell in us, according to the saying of all the whole scripture: and
namely, Saint Paul uses these words to the Ephesians, Jesus Christ (says
he) dwells in your hearts by faith. Ephe. 3.17.
I beseech you tell me, do not these things hang ill fauoredly together,
That Jesus Christ dwells in us, and we in the mean while give our selves to
all villainy and filthiness? Do we think that he will dwell in a Swine
stie? And therefore we must consecrate our selves unto him.

Moreover, he cannot be with us, but by his holy spirit. And is not this the
spirit of holiness, righteousness, and cleanness. Will not this be a
strange medley, when as we will brag to have faith in Jesus Christ, and yet
live wantonly and wickedly, and be stained with all the corruptions of the
world? This is as a man would say, I hold the Sun, and it shines not: and
as if a man would turn vpside down, the whole order of nature: For it is more
like that the Sun should be without light, then that Jesus Christ should be
without righteousness. And therefore, let us make this observation, that we
take not this cloak of hypocrisy upon us, and say that we have faith in the
Gospel, and that we believe in good sadness, without our life and
conversation be answerable, and show that we have received Jesus Christ, and
that through the grace of his holy spirit, he consecrateth, and sanctifies
us to the obedience of God his Father. We see then, that we must not come with
fal^^ ensigns to usurp this name of faith, being a most holy thing. And
therefore let us take heed we profane it not: But if we believe in the Son
of God, let us effectually show, that we have done so. And then no doubt, he
will make us feel his power, and give us grace, patiently to tarry his coming.
And although we must in this world, suffer many injuries for his names sake,
yet shall we in the end be clothed with his glory, and righteousness, as he
has promised, which he will make us feel, so we receive it without doubting.

And now let us fall down before the Majesty of our good God, and acknowledge
our offenses, beseeching him, that after he has made us to feel them, that
he will deliver us from them: and because he cannot do it, but that there
must needs be an ill remnaunt left behind that it would please him to
support us, until such time as he has quite and clean rid us of all this
corruptible flesh of ours, and brought us to his heavenly kingdom, which we
wait for at the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ. And so, let us all say, O
almighty God, and heavenly Father, etc.

Jmprinted at London by Thomas Dawson for George Bishop. 1581.


