An excellent treatise of the Immortalytie of the soul, by which is proved,
that the souls, after their departure out of the bodies, are awake and do
live, contrary to that erroneous opinion of certain ignorant persons, who think
them to lie a sleep until the day of Judgment. *

Set fourth by M. John Calvin, and englished from the French by T. Stocker.

AT LONDON Printed by John Day, dwelling over Aldersgate. An. Do. 1581.

Cum Priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.

To the right honorable, Phillip, Earl of Arundell, Baron Matrauers and Clune,
The God of all glory, and consolation, grant ^ncrease of all heavenly and
spiritual gifts, ^owardes the aduauncing of his glory, and maintenance of his
Church: together, increase in true honor of right nobility here in this life,
and in the end perfect bliss and felicity in his heavenly kingdom through
Jesus Christ our Lord.
BEing now about a year passed (Right honorable) in company with a godly
Gentleman, my good friend, w^o entering into some speech with me concerning the
loosenes and dissolutenes of this age: in the end, after long dispute and
reasoning between us, ^e concluded, and verily thought, that a ^reat part, even
of such as bear the name of Christians, does suppose the souls of men to be
mortal: and thereupon, wished me, to take the pains to translate into English
this pamflet of M. John Calvin, trea^^ng of the IMMORTALITY OF THE SOVLE,
which he bele^ed to be most necessary to be understood of the greater number of
our Countrymen.

whereupon, after I had perused it, and thoroughly considered thereof, his
judgment seemed to me, to be both good and sound. For, at the time that
Master Calvin wrote this book, it should seem by his preface ensuing, that
there were many grievously infected with this monstrous opinion. That the Souls
of men dyed together with the bodies. Which soul and hellish error, I fear,
has possessed and poisoned at this day, the hearts and minds of a great
number, here at home within this land, not only of the godless, and
ignoraunter company, but even of too too many of some of those which make a
great and glorious glittering outward show, of being favorers o^ the glorious
Gospel of our Savior and redeemer Christ Jesus, as by their monstrous pride,
detestable Ambition, miserable covetousness, cruel extortions, filthy
gluttonies, cankred malices, and most beastly uncleanness now reigning,
manifestly appears.

Wherefore, seeing this pamflet, was a^ that time necessary to be published, for
the confuting of all such Atheistes, Epicures and belly Gods, as then lived, I
think i^ in my poor opinion, that this present mos^ necessary and needful.
But here, me thinks I hear some men say, that it is impossible for any, in
so great light of the Gospel to be of this mind: whom I fear I may with
grief of heart justly answer that there are too too many such. For, if a man,
thoroughly look into the lives and conversation of the multitude, yea, and that
even of the outward pretended professors of the Gospel (for I do not see how
they are to be more fitly termed) we shall then find it to be ouertrue: of
which detestable hipocrysie the Lord God in the fulness of time, will without
all doubt, be terribly and fearfully aduenged, if it be not spedely, and
earnesty repented of, and all perverse and crooked ways eftsoons, reformed
and amended. And questionles, seeing Satan in those days so lustely bestyrred
him self, surely, he now, most terribly roareth, and rages to deface the word
of the Lord, (which as the Apostle witnesses) is the power of Salvation, to
all those that in truth believe it: And he in very deed the earnestlyer, and
busilier trauelleth herein, because he perceives that his lease is by many
years, nearer at an end, then at that time it was, and therefore goes about
hand over head (as we commonly say) to make hauock of his Lords enheritaunce,
as usually all wicked leasees do, a little before the expiration and full
term of their years.

wherefore (right honorable) at the godly motion of that my friend, I took
upon me to english this Treatise, for the benefit (I trust) of all those my
Countrymen of this our English nation, which shall diligently read the same.
And for so much, as I am of necessity enforced to seek for aid of such a
Patron, as I might assure my self to be of some singular towardnes of perfect
wisdom (I mean not of such wisdom as worldlinges dream of, but of that
true wisdom, which is the knowledge and obedience of and to the Majesty of
the word of God) whereby, this Argument might find such one as were of power
able, in knowledge wise, in zeal and affection willing and forward, to
withstand the adversaries of this pestilent Doctrine, in which wisdom,
consists the very strength of the young men, and the right understanding and
honor of the aged: I have at this present taken bouldnes to choose your
Lordship out from amongst the residue of the Nobility of this noble realm of
England, to address this my poor travel unto: assuring my self that you
will be most willing to suffer the same to march under your ensign, against
all the enemies thereof. And therefore, if the worthynes of the matter herein
contained, and handled by Master Calvin, may so excuse the unworthiness of my
simple style in the translating hereof, as that your honor vouchsafe to accept
the one with the other, and bear with the one for the other, your noble
courtesy shall the rather confirm all the true professors of the Gospel in
that vndoubed opinion which they have already conceived of you, by reason of
the good beginnings of your godly proceedings, already in this behalf, in the
^ewe and open sight of the world manifestly declared, and give the^ occasion,
continually to glorify God for so virtuous and gracious Nobility, and
incessauntly pray unto his Majesty, for the good increase and long prosperitye
of all such: and I my self also having good cause to think my travel most
blessedly bestowed, will acknowledge my duty always bound unto your good
Lordship for the same.

And besides, there is no doubt, but that he which has begone this good work
in you, will likewise perform it, until the day of Jesus Christ: so that,
your perseueraunce therein, will afourd you a most firm and sure ground work,
for the upholding and continuing of your noble house, in a prosperous and
flourishing success, without the which perseueraunce, unto the end, and in the
end, there is no acceptance with the Lord of all our doings whatsoever: For as
it is said in the 18. of Ezechiell his prophecy and 26. verse. When a
righteous man continues not in his righteousness, but turns away from it, and
commits iniquity, he shall even dye for the same: he shall even dye in his
iniquity which he has done. Thus humbly craving pardon, least I have troubled
your Lordship ouerlong, I leave you to the protection of the most high. London,
the second of June. 1581.

Your Lorships most humble and duetifull to be commanded in the Lord Jesus
Christ. Thomas Stocker.

The Preface of John Calvin to a very friend of his.
ALthough in deed it is very true, that certain godly honest men were a great
while sithence earnestly in hand with me, to write somewhat for the confuting,
and repressing of the foolish, and confused opinion of some, who at this day
go about to maintain the sleep and death of the souls, yet could they not
hitherto win me to yield unto their petitions and requests, because it is
clean contrary to my nature to thrust my self in, to deal with matters of
controversy and debate. And surely, I had at that time great reason to excuse
me, partly, because I thought that in short time, this fond opinion would
find no companions, and therefore be soon forgotten: or else that a few
Cockbrayned and lightheadded fellows would only keep it in hugger mugger:
and partly also, because I had no lyking to deal against such adversaries,
with whose power, weapons, and Ambushes I was no whit acquainted. For, as yet,
I had never hard any speech of them, save only a confused kind of buzzing of
a thing, so that if I should have had to do with such as were not yet entered
into the open playnes, I must needs have played the part of one beating the
bush (as we say) on the blind side. Nevertheless, in the end it grew afterward
to another manner of matter then I thought it would have done: For, these
Ianglers were so busy and careful to maintain and increase their faction, as
that they had already drawn into their error, I know not how many thowsands of
people. And in deed to say truly, so far as I ca^ se this mischief waxes
worse and worse. For at the first beginning, there were but a few that made a
confused kind of prattle of the sleaping of the souls: and therewith they
would never let it be understood what they meant by this sleep. Now, sithence
that time have stepped out these boucherly soule-sleaers, who at the first blow
cut their throats, and yet (thanks be to God) do them no hurt at all.
Notwithstanding, I verily think, that the error of the first sort is not to be
borne withal, and besides, that this second kind of them, is lively to be
repressed: For, neither of both sorts, have any foundation, either of reason,
or yet of Judgment. Howbeit, it is no easy matter to persuade others thus,
except, Mauger their beards (as we commonly say) I openly refute these babbling
Gallauntes, and so discover their leasings, which can no way be perceived but
by their wrytings. Now, as I hear say, they hear and there let fly (I know
not in what short sceduls and pamfletts) their leasings and dolteries, unto
which I could never as yet once come to the sight of the^. Only I have
received from a friend of mine certain aduertisements, which he by adventure met
withal, and set them down in writing as they came to his hands, or as he
could here and there get them. And although one of my excuses, is as it were
half taken from me by reason of these aduertisementes, yet, remains the
other half still to my self. But, for so much as they draw unto their error
great store of people by reason of their troublesome speeches, and mighty
prattle, wherewith they so greatly deal, as if they had caused printed books
to have been spread all the world over, I know not how I can be guiltles of
treason against the truth of God, if in so great a necessity I hold my
peace, and dissemble the matter. And truly, because I hope my travel will be
very profitable even to the most simple and ignorant, who may set themselves
occupied about this matter and Argument, I will not be a feared to render unto
all honest and godly men a reason of my faith: And yet it may be, that it is
not so well furnished with all kinds of defense, able at full to give the
attempt, to the enemy: neither yet so strongly bulwarked, as to keep them from
approaching thereto, nevertheless I hope, not altogether unarmed and defenceles.
Howbeit, if the importunity of these dream sowers, would have given me some
more leisure, I would with all mine heart, have entered into this combat, which
can no way bring with it, so great gain, as pain: considering especially,
because I think that the exhortation of the Apostle, might if it were at any
time needful, be sufficient in this behalf, to wit, that we should be of
discreet Judgment. And although these men will not suffer us to use the
discretion which we gladly desire, yet will I have as great regard as I can,
modestly to dispute of the matter. Nevertheless, I would (if it had so pleased
the Lord our God) that some other mean might have been found, for the soddayne
cutting of, of this mischief which too too much increases, least it eat in
farther and farther, like a Cancker. Although this be not the first time only
of the beginning thereof. For we read, that the Arabians, were the first
Aucthors of this error: who said: that the soul dyed together with the body,
and that they should both of them rise again at the Judgment day. And within
a while after, John, Bishop of Rome defended the same, which the Sorbonistes of
Paris made him recant. Now, when this error had long time after that, been
repressed, the Anabaptists began lately to revive the same, and blow abroad
certain sparks thereof: which, sparkling far and wide, in the end, fell out
into hot fiery flames: which, I beseech the Lord God to quench, even at the
first day with this gladsome rain which he especially reserueth for his
Church. Now then, by the assistaunce of God his holy spirit, I entend to
dispute hereof without bitterness of mind, without tying my self to any man
particularly, and also without desire to scoff and slander, so that no man
shall be able in truth to complain, that I have hurt him, or yet by any
means possible, once offended him. Though we may in deed, at this day see
some men, very hoatly given to reprehend, sting and find fault, whom if a man
should touch but with the typp of the finger, would by and by cry out and say,
that we break the unity and quietness of the Church, and utterly violate
charity and Brotherly love. But to these men, this is mine answer in the
first place: That we acknowledge no unity but such as is founded in and upon
Christ, neither yet allow we of any other charity, then of that, whereof he is
the bond. So that, the principal point and beginning to preserve charity, is
this, that our faith remain holy and sound amongst us. And over and besides
this, I say, that this disputation may very well be decyded with out any breach
of charity, if they bring with them such ears, as I determine to bring a
tongue.

And as for you, right worthy Sir, there are many causes to induce me to
dedicate this my labor unto you: But the chiefest is this, Because amongst
these troubles of vain opinions, by which a company of fantastical brains
disturb the quiet of the Church, I se you most wisely and soberly abide
steadfast and sound.

Orleans. 1534.
John Calvin to all faithful Readers greeting.
AS I perused this disputation, I perceived upon the very point of the handling
of the controversy, certain bitter, and sharp kind of words, which possibly,
may grieve and offend some delicate and fine ears. But because I know that
many good and godly men have suffered some part of this sleep of the souls, to
enter, and possess their hearts, either by too too much lightness of belief, or
else for want of knowledge of the scriptures, which was in deed the cause, why
they were not upon the soddaine, thoroughly armed to withstand the same, I would
not have them offended, nor yet take so much occasion as they might, to be
displeased with me, because they fall not obstinately, and maliciously herein.
And therefore I mind here, purposely to give warning unto all such, to the end
they should not construe any thing that I have said, to be spoken as it were,
to put them in any heat. But let them understand thus much, That so often as I
boldly, and freely, speak, that I direct my speech to that wicked and
obstinate generation of Anabaptists, from whose springhead, as I have already
said, this poysonfull water run^eth: and therefore do I not so roughly deal
with them as they deserve. For, I am determined so to behave my self toward
them, as that if they shall heareafter spurn against me, they spall find me a
constant defender of the truth, and although I be not all the greatest
clearke, yet dare I ^houldly, by the grace of almighty God promise this, that I
will be found invincible. Neither have I but in modest sort, uttered my choler
against them, for to say truly, I still cease from outrageous and spightfull
words: and have almost in every place so tempered my style, or vain of
writing, as that it is rather an apt order of teaching, then a forcible
drawing: and yet is it for all that, such, as may draw those which ^il not
wilfully be carried away. For in deed my intent is to bring them back again
into the right way, rather then to move and provoke them to anger. Wherefore, I
exhort and beseech all the Readers hereof, in the name of God the Father, and
of his son Jesus Christ our Lord, to bring with them to the reading of this
Treatise, a perfect and sound judgment, and also a right and pure heart, as a
seat ready prepared for the manifest receiving of the truth.

I know well enough what favor the thing may have, for the pleasing of some
men's ears: Howbeit, we are thus to think, that there is but one only voice
of life, and that in deed, proceeds from the mouth of the Lord. Wherefore,
our ears out of all doubt, ought to harken unto that voice, so often as there
arises any question of the doctrine of salvation, and not to listen to any
other whatsoever. Now, the word of God is no new, or strange thing: but such
as has bin from the beginning, is now, and shall be for ever.

And therefore they are very grossly deceived, who find fault with the newnes
of the word of God, being now, after long oppression, or burial, through
perverse usage, and negligence brought to light, and on their side, in my
opinion, they offend as greatly, who like Reeds, suffer themselves to be
carried away with every wind, yea and more then that, to be shaken and bowed
with the least blast that may be. Is this to learn Jesus Christ, when as we
will give ear unto all kinds of doctrine, how true soever they be, without
the warrant of God his word? For, if we receive the doctrine, as from a mortal
man, shall not leasings also as easily prevail and take place with us? And
what brings man with himself, but only vanity? Now, this is not to follow
the example of those, who after they have once received the word of God,
deeply sound and search the scriptures, to know whether it be so or no. This
is then a good example if we would fellow it: But we receive the word, I know
not how negligently and coldly, or rather contemptuously, so that if we have
learned but three words of it, we forthwith swell with an opinion of wisdom,
and yet never burst: thinking our selves by and by to be Princes, and great
rich men.

And upon this imagination, we shall find a mighty number cry mainely out, and
keep a great coil, against the ignorance of all ages: and yet themselves as
ignorant as they, against whom they so proudely cry out. But what shall a man
say, or do to this gear? They would be taken forsooth for Christians, and so
in deed are called, because they have had a lick at the wikes of the lips of
some of the principal points, or Articles, of common places. And for so much as
they think it a great shame to be ignorant in any thing, they will shamelesly
answer to every matter, as if they were all oracles which come out of their
mouths. Wherefore, from thence do spring so many schisms, errors, and
opinions, such a number of offenses, and hardness of our belief: so, that by
this occasion, the Infidels prostitute them, and blaspheme the name, and word
of God. And in the end (which is the very ground work of all mischief) whenas
they obstinately continue the maintenance of any thing, which has lightly
passed their mouths, they fourthwith run to defend their error by the holy
scriptures. O good and merciful God, when they are once grown to this point,
what is it that they will not turn vpside down? what is it that they will not
deprave, or corrupt to make it yield, yea forcibly wring and wrest it, to their
minds and purposes? And therefore the Poet said very well, that fury causes
contention and debate. Is this, I beseech you, the way to learn, to turn over
the leaves of the scriptures, to serve our fond appetits, and be subject to our
minds? Was there ever a foolisher thing then this? was there ever greater
folly? O most pernicious pestilence: O dronklieu darnell, the most certain and
sure enemy to mankind, which means to ouergrowe and choke the good and true
seed. But yet let us be abashed to see that so many sects should come from
those which first professed the Gospel, and received the word out of the dark
Truly this threat greatly troubles me, where it is said The kingdom of God
shall be taken from you, and given to another nation, that shall bring fourth
the fruits thereof. And here I mean to end my complaynt: because my book
would be over great, if I should make such a declamation, as appertains to
the froward dealing of these days. Wherefore, my brethren, let us, after so
many examples be admonished, or at the least, yet in the end, become wise. And
let us wholly depend upon the mouth of God, and still look unto his word:
neither let us add, or entermeddle any thing of our own, to or with his
wisdom, to the end our Leaven mar not the whole lump, and make the salt
that is in us, unsavory But let us show our selves to be such obedient subjects
to our God, as he would have us be: to wit, humble, simple, and plain, not
cleaving to our own wisdom and very zealous to learn: yet let us know
nothing, or be willing to learn any thing, save only that which he shall
teach us, And besides, let us flee whatsoever is strange, and not contained in
his law, as a deadly poison. I will meet also with those kind of men, who
would feign find fault with my meaning, and say, that I raise up terrible
styrres, and controversies, about a matter of nothing, decyding these quarrels
with cruel dissentions. For I am sure there are great store of these people,
who will not stick thus to deal with me. And therefore I answer them thus:
That seeing the word of God, is of set purpose, obstinately assailed: that the
least iotte thereof is by no means to be abidden, to be driven to the wall:
and this is not a matter of nothing, or of so light regard, to see the light of
God thus furiously put out, through Satan's obscurity and darkness. Moreover,
this cause is of far greater weight, then many take it to be. But by the way,
he that cannot away to see the errors and foolish opinions of others, is not
therefore as they enterpret it, by and by to be said, that he opinatiuely
disagreeth, even to the effusion of blood. For, I reprove nothing else, but the
foolish curiosity of such as strive about these questions, which are nothing
else, in very deed, but a tormenting and vexing of the mind. Nevertheless after
they had revived this dounghill opinion, it was meet their rashness should be
reproved, to the end they should not prevail against the truth. Now, I knew
not whether I was able to do it or no, yet my will was very good: and
whatsoever goodness is in it, I have also with good will delivered it:
Wherefore, if there are any others that can better deal in it, Let them in
Gods name bestow their travel to the common benefit of their poor Brethren.
Basile. 1536.

OF THE IMMORTALITY OF THE SOVLE. What the state and life of souls is after
this present life.
AS I will bestow no great pain and cost, finely, and curiously, to handle
this disputation. Even so likewise will I take such a good order, as that the
readers may simply and plainly understand what my intent and purpose is. And
surely, whatsoever he do that will take upon him to dispute upon any matter,
although in very deed, it greatly a^^^eth, that the thing which is to be dealt
withal, be very substantially understood of him that shall write thereof, and
so, many festly, and easily delivered unto the Render, to the end that the
first man pass not his bounds, and made far from the matter, or that the
other straye and err not in the self same field of the disputation, without
keeping any sure and certain course: yet notwithstanding, this, in all
controversies, ought most chiefly and diligently to be observed: considering,
that the care which here I have, is not only to instruct: but I have also to
deal with such an adversary, who out of all doubt (as it is the common
disposition of most men) will in no wise, but against his will, yield himself
vanquished: neither yet will he grant himself overcome, so long as he may
have any thing, wherewith, wranglingly, quarrellingly, and shiftingly,
pleasantly to make sport, and feed his own humor. And therefore the best way
to shut him clean up, that he be not able to escape, is this, to have the
principal point of the controversy, so clearly manifested and opened, as
that he may be brought hand to hand to the Combat, as it were even at the
first chop.

The controversy then, which now we have in hand, is of the soul of man, which
some in deed do grant to be somewhat. But yet they think that after a man is
dead, that the soul sleapeth until the day of Judgment, at which time it
shall awake out of sleep, without either memory, understanding, and feeling
whatsoever. Others there are which grant nothing less then that it is a
substance, but say that it is only a power of life, which is ledd by the
moving of the pulses, or of Lunges and lytes, and because it cannot be without
a body, therefore they feign that it dies and pearisheth together with the
body, until such time as the whole man be raised up again. Howbeit we say and
maintain the soul to be a substance, and that it lives in very deed, after
the body is dead, having sense and understanding: both which, we are very able
to prove by evident testimonies of the scriptures. Let us leave all man's
wisdom, which imagines very many things of the soul, and yet understands
neither rightly nor yet truly thereof. Let us also leave the Philosophers, who
as they are wonted almost to disagree in all things, having neither measure
nor end in their controversies: so likewise strive they one against another
herein, in so much that we shall hardly find two of the^ to agree together, of
whatsoever opinion a man would be satisfied and resolved. And as touching the
powers of ye soul, Plato in very many places has notably treated, but above
all the rest, Aristotle has most cunnigly disputed thereon. Howbeit, if a man
would know of the^, and of the whole company of those wise men, what the soul
is, and whence it has her beginning, he shall but lose his labor, albeit in
very deed they have a more pure and sound opinion hereof, then these Roysters
which boast them selves to be the disciples of Jesus Christ. But before we go
any further, they must cut of all occasion of stryuing about these words,
which we indifferently call ye spirit, and the soul, and whereupon at this
time stands our question, at which they may if they will snatch and catch:
for we do oftentimes speak of them distinctly, as of sundry things. And it is
an usual thing in the scripture, to take these words diversely, wherein many
are deceived: For they regarding not the diversity of the significatio^s,
snatch at that which first comes in their brain, and defend it obstinately.
Oftentimes they have read this word, soul, for the life: and this opinion they
have, that it ought to be always so taken, and do bitterly uphold it. But if
a man object this saying of David unto them, Psalm. 49.19
Their soul shall be blessed in life, Will they interpret it, That life is
blessed in life? Also if a man allege unto the^ that place of Samuel: By thy
life, 2. Sam. 11.11.
and by the life of thy soul, Will they they say, that there is nothing meant
by these words? we know then that this word, Soul, is oftentimes taken for
life; as in these places: Psalm. 119 Nun.
My soul is in my hands. Also, Wherefore tear I my flesh with my teeth, and
carry my Soul in my hands. Job. 13.14.
Likewise, Math. 6.25
Is not the soul far more precious then meat? Also, Thou fool, Luke. 12.20.
this night shall thy Soul be taken from thee: and such other like, which
these Soul murderers have ever in their mouths. And yet for all that, they
have nothing whereon greatly to brag. For they must consider, that this word
Soul, is taken there by the figure Metanomia, for the life: for so much as the
Soul is the cause of the life, and that the life is vpholden by the Soul: and
this figure even young boys do learn amongst their rudimentes in the
School. But who would not marvel to see the foolish arrogancye of these
roysters, who are fully persuaded of some great matter in themselves, and would
have others make great account of them, and yet they must be taught their
figures and forms of speaking. We also know by an other like reason as it
were, that the soul is taken for the will and desire: because it keeps the
seat of the will and desire. 1 Samuel 18.1.
And in this sense it is said: That the Soul of Jonathan was fast knit to the
Soul of David: Gene. 34.6
and that Sichem his Soul longed sore for Dina Jacob his daughter. Acts. 4.32
Saint Luke also says: And the multitude which believed were of one heart and of
one soul. Moreover, who sees not yt there is great strength in these Hebrew
phrases, Psalm 115. and 104. Luke 1.
My soul bless thou the Lord, my soul does magnify the Lord, say unto my
soul, I am thy saving health: For by these, is somewhat more expressed, the^
if it had been simply spoken without addition. As bless the Lord, I magnify
the Lord, say unto me I am thy health: Sometimes it is simply taken for a man
that has a Soul: Gene. 19.
As When it is said, that threescore and sixtene Souls went down with Jacob
into Egypt. Ezech. 18.4 Leuit. 20.6 2.6.
Likewise, The soul which has sinned shall dye. Also, The Soul which shall
go after Coniurers, and Southsayers, shall dye the death. etc. Many times it
is taken for the breath, which gives breath unto man, wherein rests the
lively motion of the body. As I take these places, 2. Sam. 2.
Heaviness and sorrow have taken hold on me, Acts. 20.
although my whole soul remains in me: Also, his Soul is in him. And
again: That the soul of the Child returned into his body. Moreover, 1. King.
17.22.
ye scripture uses this manner of speaking, that ye soul does depart, whereas
we commonly say, he yeldeth up the ghost. As when it is said of Rachell; Gene.
35.18.
And at the departing of the soul (for Rachell dyed) she called the name of
the child Benom. We know also that this word spirit amongst the Latins, is
called breath, and wind: which we may likewise see by the word that the
Grecians use. We know that it is taken in the prophecy of Isaiah for a vain
and tryfling thing: Isaiah 26.18.
We have been with child says he, and suffered pain, as if we had brought
forth wind. And many times it is taken for that which the spirit of God
regenerateth in us. For when Saint Paul says: Galat. 5.17
That the spirit lusts contrary to the flesh, he means not that the Soul
sighteth against the flesh, or reason against Lust, but that the Soul it
self, in so much as it is governed by ye spirit of God, fights against it
self, because as yet she is void of the spirit of God, and given over to her
own lusts.

Moreover, we know that when these two words ye Soul, and the Spirit are
joined together, that by the Soul is meant the will, and by the Spirit, the
understanding. Isaiah. 26.9.
For thus says Isaiah: My soul has longed for thee all the night: and I will
seek thee early in the morning with my Spirit which is within me. 1. These.
3.13.
And thus does Saint Paul understand it: When he beseeches the Thessalonians
to have their whole Spirit, Soul and body, kept blameless in the coming of
our Lord Jesus Christ. For he means to have all their thoughts and wills
sound, and not to give over their members as instruments of iniquitye to
sin. Heb. 4.12.
And that which the Apostle writes to the Hebrews must be taken in the same
sense. That the word of God is quick, and mighty in operation, and sharper then
any two edged sword, which enters through even unto the dividing asonder of
the Soul and spirit, and of the joints and the marow, and discerns the
thoughts and intentes of the heart. Nevertheless, some there are which in this
last place had rather understand by the spirit, this being, wherein do
consist reason and will, and which we are now disputing of: and by the Soul
the vital motion, and the senses which the Philosophers call, Superiors and
Inferiors. But seeing that both the one and the other do signify in many places
an Immortal essence, which causes the life of man, let them not take any
occasion, to strive about the words: but let them take the thing as it is, by
what name soever it be called, and meant. And presently we will show, how true
the same is.

Now, we will begin at the first creation of man, wherein we shall right well
perceive, what manner of one he was made from the beginning. The holy history
tells us, what the determination and council of God was, before he created
man, in making him after his own Image and lykenes. These words ca^ no way be
meant of the body, wherein although a wonderful work of the Lord God
appears above all the rest of the bodies which he created, yet we se not any
Image of God to shine in him. Gene. 1.26
For what is he which thus says? Let us make man after our own Image and
lykenes It is even God himself who is a spirit, who cannot be represented by
any bodyly shape. For like as a bodyly image which represents unto us the
face of a man, ought lively to set before us all his lyneaments, and
proportions, that by the cou^terfaiting, or engrauing, we might conceive
whatsoever might be seen in him, which the same represents: Even so this
Image of God must through the same lykenes, set before our senses a certain
understanding of the knowledge of God. And I right well know what a number of
them prattle, saying, that the Image of God is lykened unto the rule and
government which is given unto man over the living creatures: because that
therein, man is somewhat like unto God, who has dominion over all things. Into
the which error Chrysostom him self fell, when as he erred by over great
vehemence in co^futing the opinion of the Anthropomorphites. But the Scripture
can in no wise abide to be thus dallyed withal. Wherefore because that no man
might ordain any such Image to be in the flesh of man, Moses says that the
body was first made of ye slime of the earth, and yet for all that in such sort
as that it no ways represented the Image of God. For it is after said, that
life was breathed into the body which was fashioned of the dust of the earth,
because that even then the Image of God began to shine first in man, when as
he was fully furnished in all parts. But it may be objected and said, what?
do you think that this breath of life is the Image of God? No surely,
although I might very well say so, as well as a great many of others: and it may
be yt I should not speak greatly amiss. This observation uses S. Hilary upon
the 63. psalm. and S. Augustine in his book of the spirit and the letter.
cap. 39 Basi. Hex. conges. 8.
For, what hurt were it if I said, that there is a difference set down in the
word of God, whereby this breath of life might be distinguished from the souls
of beasts? for from whence have the souls of the rest of the living creatures
their beginning? Let the earth (says God) bring forth a living soul. etc. And
likewise, let that which is of the earth return again unto earth. But the
soul of man is not of the earth, but from the mouth of the Lord, and that by a
secrett and hidd power. Howbeit I will not, I say, stand upon this, because I
would not have them to strive with me about it: but this only would I obtain
at their hands, that the Image of God is without the flesh: For else it were
no great commendation to man to be made after the Image of God: which
notwithstanding is so greatly commended, and so often repeated unto us by the
holy scriptures. For what needed it I beseech you, to bring in God deliberating
with himself, and as it were sitting in counsel, if he had gone about to have
made a common and ordinary thing? For as concerning all other things, he only
said, let them be, and by and by they were made, but when he came to this
Image, as if he had meant to show a singular proof of his workemanshipp, he
called to counsel his wisdom and power, and was fully resolved in himself,
before he once set hand to the same. Has Moses then so curiously to no
purpose, affected this manner of speech, which being borrowed from the common
use of men according to their slender capacityes, who are as it were very young
children, to set before us the Lord God, whose greatness and wisdom no
creature is able to comprehend? But has he not rather in so speaking, most
gloriously commended the Image of God, which shyneth in man? And he is not
satisfied with once speaking thereof, but repeateth it oftentimes. Now let the
philosophers or else these tryfelers, bring with them what doltish mockeries
soever they will, we are sure of this, that nothing may bear the Image of God,
but that which is a spirit: For in very deed God is a spirit. We must not
proceed here, by conjectures and ghesses, to enquier wherein this Image
resembles his sovereign creator: Colos. 3.10
seeing we may very easily learn that, from ye Apostle: who commanding us to
put on the new man, which is renewed in knowledge, according to his Image that
has created him, manifestly declares what the same Image is, Ephe. 4.14.
or wherein it consists. And he says also in another place, put you on the
new man, who is created according to the Image of God, in righteousness and
holiness of truth. All which things, when as we will speak in one word, we
say, that man according to the spirit, was made pertaker of the goodness,
wisdom, Ecclesiasticus. 17.1. Wisd. 2 2^
and righteousness of God. The Aucthor of the book of Ecclesiasticus, and the
Aucthor of the book of Wisdom, have also followed the same course. The first,
dividing man into two parts, to wit the body made of the earth, and the Soul
which he lykeneth unto the Image of God, briefly comprehends, that which
Moses has made a long discourse of God, says, he made man according to his
own Image. The second, meaning to show by declaration, whereunto the Image of
God was like, says that man was made incorruptible, as being created after the
Image and lykenes of God. I would never have pressed our adversaries with these
Aucthoryties, had they not charged us with them before. Which notwithstanding
we ought to think reverently of, although not as Canonical, yet at the least,
as autentique and holy, and received by the co^sents of many. But let us there
leave them: and hold this Image of God in man, which can have no abiding place
but in the soul.

1. Pet. 2.11.25.
Howbeit, let us now hear, what the scripture more manyfestly says of the
Soul. When S. Peter speaks of the salvation of souls, and says that the
lusts of the flesh do fight against the soul, and commands us to cleanse
our souls, calling Jesus Christ the Bishop of our souls: what should he
mean by it, if there were not souls to be saved, which should be assailed
with wicked, and ungodly desiers, and should be cleansed and governed by Christ
their Bishop? Job. 4.19.
And we read also in Job. How much more the^ ^n them which dwell in houses of
claye, and whose foundation is nothing but dust, which thing if we consider
more narrowly, must needs be understood to be spoken of the soul, which
dwells in this earthly body. For he calls not man an earthly vessel, but
says that he dwells in an earthly vessel: as one that meant to say, that
the best part of man (which is the soul) was contained within this earthly
mansion. 2. Pet. 1.13.14.
Thus also says S. Peter, I suppose this to be meet and just that so long as
I am in this tabernacle, I stir you up by putting you in remembrance:
knowing that shortly I must put of this my tabernacle.

Surely if we be not too too blockish, we may understand by this manner of
speech, that the tabernacle is one thing, and that which is taken out of the
tabernacle, to be another thing. The Aucthor of the Epistle to the Hebrews
sets down the like manifest distinction between the flesh and the spirit,
Heb. 12.9.
when as he names those our fleshly Fathers of whom we were begotten: and
calls God, the only father of spirits. And a little after, calling God, the
father of the heavenly Jerusalem, Heb. 12.23
he makes the Angels, and souls of the righteous, the Citizens. Neither do
I see how we can otherwise take this saying of S. Paul. 2. Cor. 7.1.
Since we have these promises, let us cleanse our selves from all filthynes of
the flesh and of the spirit. For it very well appears, that he makes no
difference there between the flesh and the spirit, as he is wont to do else
where: when as he attributes filthynes to the spirit, by which title he
means in other places, mere purity. I will yet bring in another place,
although I see that they which mean to wrest, will forthwith fall to their
gloses. 1. Cor. 2.11
For when it is said, what man knows the things that are in man, but the
spirit of man which is in him? Again, no man knows the things of God, but
the spirit of God.

It may well be said, that man knows the things which are in himself, but
he means in one word, that part, wherein the power of the thought and
understanding consists. And also, Romans 8.16
when he says that the spirit of God bears witness to our spirit, that we
are the children of God, uses he not the very same proper kind of speech? But
what? I could convince them even in a word? For we know how many times Christ
him self by his own voice condemns the error of the Saduces, Math. 22.23.
a part of which error was, that there was no spirit: as S. Luke writes in
the Acts. The words are these: The Saduces say yt there is neither
resurrection, Angel, nor spirit: Acts. 23.8.
but the Pharysies confess all these things. I fear me that they will go
about to cavil and say that these things are to be understood of the holy
ghost, or else of the Angels: Which objection is easily answered. For he has
placed the Angels aparte by themselves: and it is certain that the Pharysies
had skarcely any knowledge of the holy ghost. And they which understand the
Greek tongue know this best: For S. Luke said spirit, without putting to any
Article: which thing without doubt he would have added, if he had spoken of the
holy ghost. Now if this stop not their mouths, I know not by what means they
may be drawn or ledd, without it so fall out, and say: that the opinion of the
Saducies is not condemned, in that they deny a spirit, nor the opinion of the
Pharysies allowed, which say the contrary. Howbeit ye very words of S Luke do
mete wc this Cavil. For after he has set down the confession of S Paul, that
he was a Pharisy, he adds this opinion of the Pharisees. We must then say,
either that S. Paul used a subtle and wicked dissimulation (which ought not to
be received in the confession of faith) or else that he was of the same opinion
with the Pharysies touching the spirit, Now if we must believe histories, this
was as certain and sure amongst the Apostles, Ecclesiast. History. 10. 4. c.
13.
as the resurrection of the dead, or any other Article of our faith. I will not
be ashamed to bring in here the words of Polycarpe, a man who both in his words
and doings in very deed looked for Martyrdom: In the same c. 19.
being also a disciple of the Apostles, and so sincerely taught others that,
which he learned of them, as that he would never suffer any Leaven to be
mingled amongst it. This holy man then amongst many excellent words which he
spoke in the midst of the fire, said, that the same day, he should be present
in spirit before the face of God. In those days also Melito. Bishop of
Sardis, a man of like sinceritye, In the same c. 24.
wrote a book of the Body and of the Soul, which if we had had at this day, I
needed not now to have taken pain in this matter. This opinion was so notably
received in this blessed time, In the same of the resurrection of the flesh
that Tertullian put it even amongst the common and chiefest conceits of the
mind, which nature commonly takes hold of. And although we have already
brought in many reasons, which are able (as I think) to convince yt which they
straue about, to wit, that the Soul or spirit of man is a substance
distinguished from the body, yet that which we will add forthwith, shall make
the same a great deal more certain. For I come to that which I did set down
in the second place, to wit, that the soul lives after that the body is
dead, having both sense and understanding. Now whosoever thinks that I do
here affirm any other thing then the Immortalytie of the soul, is greatly
deceived. For they which confess that the soul lives, and therewithal take
from her all her senses, do imagine a soul, which has no part at all of a
soul, or else devise a soul of their own heds: considering that her nature
(without which she can no way stand) is to move her self, to feel, In the
same of the flesh of Christ.
to have strength and to vndersta^dt and (as Tertullian says) that the sense,
is the soul of the soul. Let us therefore learn this Immortalytie of the
soul out of the holy scriptures.

When our Savior Christ exhorts his disciples not to fear them which kill
the body, Math. 10.18. Luke. 12.5.
and have no power over the soul: but to fear him, who after he has slain
the body, is able also to send the soul into hell fire: does he not mean that
the soul lives, after yt the dody is dead? And truly God has very lovingly
dealt with us herein, that he has not suffered our souls to be at the
disposition of those which would so soon kill them, or at the least though
they cannot, yet do their best. The Tyrants torment, cut in pieces, burn,
and hang, but it is the body only, for God only has power over the soul to
cast it into hell fire. So then either the soul abides after death, or else
this must needs be an untruth: That Tyrants have no power over the soul.
Unto this they answer (as I hear) that the soul truly is slain for the
time, when as the body is dead, but that it pear^^heth not, because that in
time to come i^ shall rise again. Now if they think to go away with this,
they must and grant that the body pearisheth not, for so much as it shall rise
again. And because that they are both reserved until the day of Judgment,
therefore neither of ^oth pe^risheth. And yet our Savior Christ confesses
that the body is slain, and testifies that the soul abides whole and sound.
John. 2.19
This manner of speech he uses of his own death, when he says, destroy ye
this Temple, and in three days I will raise it up again. But this he spoke of
the Temple of his body: by which reason he took the soul out of their power,
which also, as S. Luke writes, and as David foretold, Luke. 13.46. Psalm. 30.6.
when he drew near unto his death, he commended, into the hands of his
Father. S. Stephen likewise after the same manner says: Acts. 7.59.
Lord Jesus Christ receive my spirit. Have they here any thing, whereat to
iangle, that Jesus Christ commended his soul unto his Father, and S. Stephen
his, unto Jesus Christ, to be preserved until ye day of ye resurrection: John.
19.30.
but these words have a another meaning with them, and specially the words of
S. Stephen. S. John also says moreover of Jesus Christ, that when he bowed
down his head, he yielded up the ghost. Which words must not be referred to
the breath, 1. Pet. 3.1^
or to the moving of the Lunges.

S. Peter likewise manifestly declares no less, the souls to be and to live
after death, when he says: That Christ preached to the spirits that were in
prison, and not only unto the spirits of the faithful, remission unto
salvation, but also unto the spirits of the wicked utter destruction. For thus
do I enterprete this place, which has so greatly troubled many men's wits:
and I hope so to persuade all good and godly men. For when he had spoken of the
humility of the cross of of Christ, and he had showed that all the faithful
ought to fashion themselves to be like unto him, that they might not despair,
he forthwith speaks of ye resurrection, that they might understand and know
the very end of all tribulations. For he says that Jesus Christ was not
overcome of death, but having overcome it, showed himself triumphant. Which
thing he declares by these words, when he says: that Jesus Christ was in
very deed, dead in the flesh, but yet quickened in the spirit. And so also
means S. Paul, when he writes, that he suffered in the humilitye of the
flesh, but was raised up again by the power of the spirit. Now to the end
the faithful might understand that the self same power belongs unto them,
he goes on farther and says that Jesus Christ has bestowed this power upon
others, and not only on the quick, but also upon the dead: and besides, not
only upon his servants, but also upon the faythles, and despisers of his
grace. Moreover, let us understand that this is a maimed kind of speech, and
wants one of his two branches: of which sort are many examples in the
scriptures: and chiefly when many sentences are gathered together under one
conclusion, as here is done. Neither yet let any man think it strange, that
the holy Fathers are shut up in prison, who looked for the redemption that
should be obtained by the son of God. For because they beheld a far of, the
light as it were under a cloud or shadow, as they do which behold some
shimmering of the day even in the twy light, and perceive the coming of the
day before the dawning: nor as yet had not the blessing of God revealed unto
them, wherein they might repose themselves, he calls their hope a prison or
dungeon. The meaning then of the Apostle is this: That Jesus Christ preached in
spirit unto the spirits which were in prison: to wit, that the power of the
redemption obtained by Jesus Christ, appeared, and was manifested unto the
souls of the dead. Here wants the other branch which belongs unto the
faithful, who have known and tasted of this fruit: and sets out the other
brau^ch of the faythles, who have received unto themselves this message unto
their destruction. For they did see that there was but one redemption, from the
which they were shut out, and therefore what thing could they else look for,
but utter desperation. I see already how these men murmur and grudge, that I
have devised this gloss of mine own hedd, and that they are not bound unto any
such laws. Well I will not tie them to my laws, but I will only ask them
this question, are not the souls which are shut up in prison, 1. Pet. 4.6.
souls? It is most manifest, which has bin set down by the same Apostle: For
this cause also was the Gospel preached unto the dead, to the end they might
be judged as other men in the flesh: but yet that they should live with God in
the spirit. We see that the flesh is delivered to death, and the spirit to
be kept in life. For seeing there is a relation between death and life, it is
euydent that the one dies, Eccle. 12.7
and the other lives.

We learn this same also of Salomo^, who describing ye death of man, Eccle.
1.27
makes a division of the soul far from the body. when as he says, until
the dust returns into the earth from whence it came, and the spirit
returns unto God, who gave it. I know very well that this Argument troubles
them not much, because they say that life returns unto God, who is the
fountain of life, and so by that means it is no more any thing. But the words
themselves cry mainely out, that there is great wrong offered them, so that it
shall not be needful to confute this jolly subtilty, which is neither worthy
the reading nor yet the hearing. This then is their meaning, that the souls
return unto their fountain of life in a dream. And there is a saying in
Esdrars aunswerable unto this, I would not bring in this Author before them,
but that I know they make it their Buckler. Let them now harken what their
Esdras says: 4. Esd. 7.32
The earth shall restore those which sleep in her, and those also which dwell
with her in silence, and their secret places shall deliver those souls which
are committed unto the^. By the secret places, they mean the providence of
God, and by the souls, the thoughts. This is their jolly gloss, that the
book of this present life might offer up ye thoughts before the face of God.
And thus a man may very well see, that no other reason makes them thus to say,
but that they have no better to say for themselves, as if so be it were a shame
for them to be silent. Now if it were lawful for a man to wrest and toss the
Scriptures after this manner it were an easy matter to turn all things vpsyde
down. Although I have many other things to bring in against them, yet will I
bring forth nothing here, of mine own: considering that the Author himself
may defend himself from slander. 4, Esd. 43.
For it was said a little before, have not the souls of the righteous called
for these things in their secret places? how long live we thus in hope? when
shall the fruit of the Air of our reward come? what souls are they which
thus call and hope? They must digg here another mine if they entend to escape.
Luke. 16.22.23.


Let us now come to the story of the Rich man, and of Lazarus. The one of
which, after he had passed many griefs and calamities of this mortal life,
was in the end carried into the bosom of Abraham, and the other fell into
everlasting torment and pain. The one is tormented, and the other comforted.
There is a great bottomless deapth between the joys of the one, and the
grievous torments of the other. Are these dreams or fables?

But because they would have some way to escape, they make a parable of this
story, and say, yt whatsoever the truth speaks of Abraham, the rich glutton,
and of Lazarus, is but a fained thing. This is all the reverence they bear
unto God and to his word. But I ask this of them, let the^ bring forth but one
only example out of the holy scripture, where, in a parable, any man is called
by his name. I pray you tell me what is meant by these words. There was a
poor man named Lazarus etc. Either must the word of God be a false lie, or else
this must needs be a very true story. The ancient Doctors also had great
regard to this: For S. Ambrose says, that it is rather a story then a parable,
because there is a name put in. S. Gregory is of the same opinion. Tertulyan,
Ireneus, Origin, S. Cyprian, and S. Jerome, do take it for a history. Amongst
whom, Tertulyan thinks that by the Rich man is meant Herod, and by Lazarus,
John Baptist. And see what Ireneus says: The thing which is recyted unto us
by the Lord of the Rich man, and of Lazarus, is no fable. And Cyrill aunswering
the Arria^s, who out of this place made it their buckler for the refuting of
the divinity of Christ, refelleth not this as a parable, but expounds it as
an history. But this is a greater mockery, that for ye stre^gthning of their
error, the more they pretend the name of S. Augustine, and because they might
the better wrangle, say, that he yielded to the same opinion. I think they do
it for this cause, for that he has said in an certain place, that we must
understand by Lazarus, Jesus Christ, and by the Rich man the Pharysies: and yet
his meaning is none otherwise, but that this story is to be transferred into a
parable, if the person of Lazarus be attributed to Jesus Christ, and the person
of the Rich man unto the Pharysies. This is also the custom and manner of all
such men as have once conceived an opinion of any thing, to suffer themselves
afterward, violently to be carried away with the same. For, when they see they
have no sure ground to stay on, there shall not be so small a tittle of a
letter which they will not lay fast hold on, to wrythe and wrest it to serve
their own turns. Notwithstanding, to ye end they might not still groyne and
grunt, S. Augustine himself says in another place, that he receives it for
an History. Let the^ now go and sell their cou^terfett wares at noone day. And
yet shall they not be able to fly any whither, but that they shall always
mashe themselves in these very snares. For, admit we did grant it them to be a
parable (which they shall never be able to obtain at our hands) What other
thing can they gather hereupon, but that there is some show of truth in this
co^paryson? Now if these great Divines know not this, let the^ go learn at
the first principles of the Gramarians, and they shall find that a parable is
a similitude taken from the truth. For when we hear that a man had two sons
unto whom he divided and lotted out their portions, there must needs be a
man, sons, an enheritaunce, and a division of portio^s. Moreover this is
always the nature of a parable, first we must conceive of the bare matter as
it is propounded, afterward we are ledd to the end of the parable, to wit, to
the thing it self whereunto the parable is applied. And herein let them follow
Chrysostom as their Patron. He always thought this to be a parable, and yet
he oftentimes drew out of it the truth. As when he proves out of it, that the
souls of the dead are in certain places, he shows how horrible hell fire
is, and the destruction that comes of pleasures. And least I should here lose
much speech, let common reason teach them, if they have any, and they shall
soon understand what the strength and reason of a parable is.

And because we would gladly satisfy all men as much as in us lies, we will
here speak somewhat of the rest of Souls which are departed from the bodies
in an assured faith of the promises of God, and surely the holy scripture
means nothing else by the bosom of Abraham, but this rest. In the first place
we call that, rest, which these waste divines, call sleep. Neither would we
refuse this title of sleep, were it not, that by their lying, they have
wonderfully corrupted, and almost utterly defaced it. Moreover, we understand
not by reast, slouthfulnes, or slumber, or any such other like dronken thing,
as they attribute unto ye souls, but tranquillity and a good assurance of
conscience, which although it be always joined with faith, yet is it never
sound, or altogether perfect, but after death. The Church no doubt, hears
from the mouth of God, Isaiah. 32.17.
the blessings of the faithful, being yet but as a stranger here on earth,
to wit: My people shall walk in the beauty of rest, and dwell in a peaceable
habitation, Isaiah. 26.12.
in the tents of surety, and in a plentiful peace. And again giving thanks,
she sings blessings unto the Lord: Give unto us O Lord peace: For thou also
workest all our works in us. When the faithful have received the Gospel they
have this peace, when they see God to become their loving Father, whom before
they thought him to be their Judge: and in stead of children of wrath, they see
them selves to be the children of Grace: that the bowels of God his mercy is
poured upon them: so that they now look for none other thing at the hands of
God, but all goodness, Job. 7.
and mercy. But because that the life of man is a warfare upon earth, they
which feel the stings of sin, and the dregs of the flesh, must have
trouble in this world, and be comforted in God: and in this sort they shall
never be without an unquiet, and troubled mind. But when as they shall have
put of the flesh and the lusts thereof (who as home enemies do trouble their
peace and reast) they shall in the end be at quiet and rest in the Lord For
thus says the prophet: Isaiah. 57.1.
The righteous pearisheth, and there is no man that once thinks of him in his
heart: good and godly people are taken away, and no man considers thereof: for
the righteous is conveyed away from the wicked. let peace come unto him, and
let him rest in his bed which walks in his ways, does he not call them unto
peace? But because they were at peace with God, Ezechiel. 1.27.28.
whose peace was domestical, and at defiaunce with the world, he brings them
unto the highest degree of peace. And therefore Ezechiell, and S. John, when as
they would describe the throne of the glory of God, Apoc. 4.3.
they compassed it with the Raynebow, which we know to be the sign of a league
that the Lord made with men. Gene, 9.12 13. Apoc. 14.13.
Which thing the same S. John has more manyfestly taught in another place
saying: Blessed are the dead which dye in the Lord. Surely the spirit says,
that they do rest from their labors. This is then the bosom of Abraham. For
he it is, who with so ready a mind embrased the promised blessing in his seed,
so that he nothing doubted, but that the word of God was both strong and true.
And as if God had now fulfilled in deed ye thing which he had promised, that
blessed seed, he looked for it, with as an assured faith, as if he had handled
it with his hands, and had felt it with all the powers of his mind and body.
John. 8.36
And so our Lord Jesus Christ witnesses: that he saw the day and was glad of
it. Thus we see what the peace, rest, and sleep of Abraham is, so that this
honest name be not defaced with the foul mouth of these sleapers. For what
sweeter thing can a conscience have, wherein it may rest it self safely, then
in this peace: which opens unto it the treasures of the heavenly grace, and
makes it dronken with the marvelous sweetenes of the Lords cupp? But what, O
you my masters the slepers, when you hear this word to be dronken, do you
not think of your blockishnes, of your heavy hedds, and of your gross and
carnal sleep? For these griefs and discomodityes wait upon drounkennes. And
you according to your grossenes do even thus understand it. But they which are
instructed of God, know that by this manner of speech sleep is called peace of
conscience, which the Lord gives unto his, in the house of peace: after the
which manner also drunkenness is called plenty, wherewith the Lord fills his
in the house of abundaunce. If Abraham enjoyed this peace being yet in the
midst of the thronges, trauelles, and dangers of his enemies: yea carrying
with him his own flesh, which is an home enemy, then the which nothing is
more hurtful: how much greater must we think his peace to be in respect, when
he shall be quite out of danger of the blows, and darts of his enemies. Will
any man now marvel, why it is said that the elect of God do rest in ye bosom
of Abraham, who are passed out of this life unto their God: namely because they
are received into the seat of peace with Abraham the Father of the faithful,
August. de ciuita. Dei. lib. 19.
where they have the full fruition of God, without werysomenes?

And therefore it is not without cause that Augustine says in a certain
place: Like as, says he, we call life everlasting, the end of the blessed
ones, 1. Cor. 14.
so also may we call it peace. For he that can give no better nor greater thing
then him self, who is the God of peace, can give no better then it. Therefore,
when we shall heareafter speak of the bosom of Abraham, let them not put it
over to their sleep: For the truth of the scripture reprehe^deth and
overthrows their vanytie. This rest, say I, Math 5.8, 9.
is the heavenly Jerusalem, that is, the vision of peace: wherein the the God
of peace gives himself to be seen to his peacemakers, according to the
promise made by Christ. But so often as the holy ghost speaks of this peace
in the holy scriptures, he so familiarly uses the figure of sleep and rest,
as that a man can find nothing oftener. Thy faithful shall rejoice says
David, and be glad in their beds: Psalm. 149.5. Isaiah. 26.19.20.
Also thy dead shall live, and thy slain shall rise again. Awake, and give
praise ye inhabitants of dust: for the deaw of the field is thy deaw, and
thou shall bring the land of the mighty ones to destruction. Go my people,
enter into thy tents, and shut the doors unto thee, and hyde thy self for a
while, until such time as wrath be passed over.

But the Hebrew tongue usurps this word to the signification of all surety
and trust. David also says: I will lay me down to sleep and take my quiet
rest. Ose. 2.18.
The prophet likewise says: In that day will I make a league with the beasts
of the field, with the fowls of the air, and with all creping things: I will
destroy upon the earth, the bow, the sword, and war: and they shall sleep
without fear. Leuit. 26.6
Moses also says: I will make peace in your borders, and there shall no man
be afeard. Joel. 11.18 19.
But in the book of Iobe it is said: Thou may then be of good comfort,
because there is hope, and entrench thy self, and sleep quietly: the^ may
thou lie down, and none shall make thee a feared, and many shall make suit unto
thee.

The souls of the living do sleep and are in peace, which repose themselves
upon the word of the Lord, and desire not to pass beyond the will of their
God: but being ready to go whither soever he shall call them, they hold them
selves under his hand and conduct. which thing is commanded them, Aba. 2.3.
though his truth tarry, yet wait for it: Isaiah. 30.15.
likewise, In hope and quietness shall your strength be. Now since it is so that
they desire something which they see not, and look for something which they
have not, it appears that their peace is imperfect, contrariwise, seeing they
are certain of that which they look for, and desire in faith, that which they
do desire, it is most certain that their desire is peaceable. This peace which
leads the faithful to the place of peace, does death increase and advance
to the uttermost, having delivered them from the war of this world, and as it
were crusshed it in pieces. And having their eyes and hearts wholly fixed upon
God, there is nothing better, or more blessed, whereon they may cast their
eyes, or set their desire. And yet for all this they want something of that
which they desire to see, which is, the most excellent and perfect glory of
God, whereunto they always desire to come. And although their desire be not
impacie^t, yet is not their rest full and perfect.

For a man may very well say him to be at rest who is at that place where he
desires to be, and his desire has neither measure nor end, until such time
as he be at the place whither he intended to go. Now if the eyes of the chosen
do look unto the excellent and perfect glory of God, as unto their mark,
their desire is always a foot and on the way, until such time as the glory
of God be accomplished, which ye great day of judgment will fully accomplish.
Psalm. 17.17
The^ shall that saying be verified: I shall be satisfied whenas I shall be
awakened with the sight of thy countenance.

And now to the end we may pass over the reprobate, unto whom what may
befall, we have not greatly to do withal, I would have them to answer me
simply and plainly, what hope they have of the resurrection, Colo. 1.18. Apoc.
1.5. 1. Cor. 13.20.21.
without it be that Christ rose again? For he is the first borne of the dead,
and the first fruits of those that rise again. For as he dyed and rose
again, so also must we dye and rise again in him. For since it has so fallen
out that by death he has overcome death, whereunto we were ordained, it is very
certain that he dyed of the same death as we dye, and has suffered in the
same death which we do suffer. The truth of the scripture makes this
manifest unto us, whenas it calls him the first borne of the dead, and the
first fruits of those which rise again. And it has so taught us, that the
faithful might acknowledge him for their guide even in the midst of death,
and when they behold their death sanctified by his death, they need not to
fear the curse thereof. which is the thing that Saint Paul means, when he
says, Phil. 3.10.11.
that he is made like unto his death, until such time as he might come unto the
resurrection of the dead. For this co^formity he prosecuted, which he began
in this world by the cross, until ye time that he had by his death fulfilled
it.

And now you my masters ye sleapers, examine your hearts awhile, and consider
with your selves how Christ Jesus dyed. Do you in your conscience think that he
slept, when as he waked for your salvation? He speaks not thus of himself:
John. 5.26
As the Father (says he) has life in himself, so also has he given to his
son to have life in himself. And he that has the power of life in himself,
how it is possible for him to lose it? And I trust they will not say yt this
belongs to the deity. For if it be given to him that has it not, it is then
given to his humanity, to have life in it self, and not to his deity. For
seeing that Jesus Christ is the son of God and man, that which is by nature as
God, the same is by grace as man: to the end we might al receive of his
fullness, grace for grace, when men do hear that life is in God, what hope may
they conceive thereof, whenas they may also very well know, that their sins
do set a cloud betwixt God and them?

But here is the only true and great comfort, that the Father has anointed
his Christ with the oil of gladness above all the rest of his fellows: That
Jesus Christ as man has received of his Father, gifts in me^, to the end we
might find life in our nature. And for this cause, we read that the multitude
glorified God after that the child was raised up again, for so much as he had
given such power unto men. And this knew Cyrill right well, who agrees with us
in the explaning of this place. Now, when we say yt Jesus Christ has life in
himself, in that he is man, we do not say that he is the cause of life to
himself: but only this, that the heavenly Father, has poured all fulness of
life in ye manhood of his son Jesus Christ, which thing might be given us to
understand by a familiar similitude. The fountain from which all men do draw
water, and from which the small Creekes and Arms do run and flow, is said
to have water of it self, and yet comes not as of it self, but from the
spring which daily feeds it, and from the flowing streams, and is sufficient
for all men to draw out of: Eue^ so then, Jesus Christ has life in himself,
to wit, the fulness of life wherewith he lives, and quickens his: and yet
has he it, not as of himself, as he witnesses in an other place, that he
lives because of his Father.

And whenas he had life in in himself, as God, yet when he took upon him the
nature of man, he received this gift of his Father, that he might also have
life in that behalf in himself. These things do most certainly assure us,
that Christ could not be destroyed by death, no not as he was man. And although
he was truly and naturally put to death, whereof we must all dye, yet held he
always this gift of his Father. This was a true death, and a true separation
of the Body and Soul, yet the Soul never lost her life, which being commended
unto his Father, could not choose but be saved. And this is the meaning of the
words of S. Peter his sermon, by which he affirms, that it was impossible
for Jesus Christ to be holden down with the panges of death, Act. 2.24.27.
that the scripture might be fulfilled saying, Psalm. 16.10
Thou shall not leave my soul in grave: nor yet suffer thine holy one to see
corruption. In which prophecy, although we grant that the soul is taken for
life, Christ asks, and looks for two things at his Fathers hand: that he
would not leave his life to destruction, nor yet suffer him to come to
corruption, which was fulfilled. For his soul was sustained by an heavenly
power, that it should not be destroyed: and his body was kept whole and sound,
until he rose again. S. Peter has knit up all these things in a word, when
he says, that Christ could not be held down by death, to wit, that he could
not be subject to the government of death, neither come under the power of
death, either yet be overcome of death. When as S. Peter in this sermon, let
the disputation of the soul alone, and followed only the incorruption of the
body: He did it because he would make the Jews to see that they were
vanquished, even by their own testimony, that this prophecy appertayned
nothing at all to David, whose sepulcher was amongst them, and they very well
knew that his body was rotted: neither could they deny the resurrection of our
Lord Jesus Christ.

Jonas. 2.12
We have also another Argument of the Immortalitye of his soul, when as he
ordained Jonas to be a figure of his death, in that he was three days within
the Whales belly. For so must he likewise be three days and three nights in
the bowels of the earth. Now Jonas cried unto the Lord out of the belly of the
Fish, and was heard. This belly is death: his soul the^ was saved in the
midst of death, Gene. 22.10.
so that he might cry unto the Lord. Isaac also, who was a figure of the Lord,
and being saved from death, Hebr. 12.17 19.
was delivered unto his father, opens unto us, as the Apostle witnesses, the
truth in a figure, by the manner of the rising again. For after he was laid
upon the Altar, as an oblation and sacrifice prepared for the purpose, and
bound upon it, he was soon after vnbou^d by the commandment of the Lord; and
the Ram that was tied by the horns in the bushe, was laid in Isaac his
place.

What is now meant by this that Isaac was not put to death, but because that
the son of God has made the soul which is proper to man, Immortal? And ye
Ram which is a beast without reason, and that was laid in his room, is the
body. And in that Isaac was bound, the same represents the soul, which
makes an open show of one dying in the death of Jesus Christ, and shows it
also daily in the common death of men, wherein all things in the opinion of
men do pearishe: and yet for all that the soul of Christ was losed out of
bonds, and so shall ours also be losed, before they come to pearishe. Come off
now, some of you my masters the sleapers which are void of all shame, and
brag that the death of the our Lord Jesus Christ was but a dream: or else let
him take part with that deuilishe heretic Appollinaris.

Surely this good Lord Jesus waketh, so long as he so willingly bestows
himself about your salvation: But you sleep your sleep, and being
o-ouerwhelmed with the cloud of blindenes, can not hear those which keep
watch. Moreover, this does not only comfort us, that the son of God our head
is not perished in the shadow of death, but his resurrection also does assure
us, that he is appointed to be Lord over death, Colos. 3.3.
and has raised up so many of us from death, as have any part or portion in
him: Gala. 2.20.
in so much that S. Paul has not sticked to say, that our life is hid with
Christ in God. And in another place he says: I live, yet not I now: but Christ
in me. What can be said more of them, except they cry with open mouth, that
Christ sleapeth in these souls that sleep? For if Christ has lived in the^,
he is the self and same which dies in them, If the life of Jesus Christ be
ours, he then which would have our life to end by death, violently plucketh the
son of God from the glorious right hand of his father, and puts him to a
second death. But if it be possible for him to dye, then undoubtedly must we
dye: But if his life has no end, surely our souls which are ingraffed into
him ca^dy no death. But what needs us to take all this pain? Are his words
strange, when he says: John. 14.19.
because that I live, you also shall live. If we live, because he lives, then
if we dye, John. 6.56
he shall no longer live. Is his promise strange, when he says, that he which
shall be knit unto him by faith, shall dwell in him, and he in him.

Let us then clearly dismember the Lord Christ, if we will take away their
lives from them. 1. Cor. 15 22.
This is our confession, which we have well fenced with his weapons, to wit,
that we are all truly dead in Adam, but yet we live ^n Jesus Christ, S. Paul
hand^eth these things with an honorable style in the Epistle to the Romans:
to wit: Romans 8.10
that if the spirit of Jesus Christ dwel^eth in us, that the body is surely
dead by reason of sin, but the spirit lives because it is justified. Romans
7.23.24.
He calls the body, a Lump of sin, which from the nativity of the flesh
remains in man: And the spirit, that part of man which is spiritually
regenerate. Wherefore as a little before he lamented his misery, by reason of
the dregs of sin which remained in him, he desiereth not simply to be taken
out of this world, and to be nothing, so that he might escape this great
misery: but also desiereth to be delivered from the body of death: to wit,
that the Mass of sin might be abolished in him, to this end, that the
spirit being cleansed, might be at peace with God: openly declaring hereby,
that the best part of him was kept captive through ye bonds of his body, and
that it should be delivered out of it by death.

I would to God we were able to understand with a true faith, what the kingdom
of God is, Which is amongst the faithful, even whiles they live here in this
world, and to taste thereof in good earnest: for it should be very easy withal
to understand life everlasting already begone. He which can not deceive us,
has made us this promise, for thus he says: John. 5.24.
He that hears my words has everlasting life, and comes not to
condemnation, but passes from death to life. If a way be made to everlasting
life, why hinder they it by death? And in another place, John. 6.49 46.
This is the will of my Father, that whosoever believes in the son shall not
pearish, but has everlasting life, and I will raise him up again at the last
day. He says furthermore in ye same place, John. 5.5^ 57.
Whosoever eats my flesh and drinks my blood, has everlasting life, and I
will raise him up again in the last day. Not as your Fathers eat Manna and
dyed: but he that eats this bread shall live for ever.

Brag not here of your goodly gloses concerning the last day. He promises us
two things: life everlasting, and this blessed resurrection. Although you hear
two things, yet only embrace you but one of them. There is also another
saying of Jesus Christ, which is yet more against you, when he says: I am the
resurrection and the life, John. 11.2
he that believes in me, yea although he were dead, yet shall he live: And
whosoever lives and believes in me, shall never taste of death. For the son
of God meant not only to show this, but also yt it might never come to pass
that they should dye. He says in another place, he that keeps my word, shall
never see death.

This is an invincible Argument against them: that whosoever keeps the word
of God, shall never see death. And this alone might be sufficient for
Christians, thoroughly to arm their faith against ye peruersenes of these
sleapers. We believe this, and we look for it. But as for these men, this is it
that they must look for, even to sleep a sound sleep, until such time as
they be wakened by the sound of the trumpet, which shall suddenly come upon
these sleapers, as a thief in ye night.

And if God be the life of every faithful soul, as the soul is the life of
the body, what is the meaning, that the soul, all the while it is in the body,
causes it to move, and is never so idle, nor her strength so weakened, but
that she does her duty some manner of way, and shall God leave his business
undone, as if he were weary of working? If there be so great power in the soul,
as to support, move, and drive on, this mass of earth, how great in respect
shall the power of God be in the soul, which by nature is lively, and very apt
and ready, to stir and move it? And yet there are some which dare say, that
the soul vanishes away: and others, that after it is separated from the body,
yt it uses not her power and strength. How then, will they answer unto the
psalm of David, where he describes the beginning, midst and end of the life
of ye blessed. For there he says, They shall go from virtue to virtue, and
shall see the God of Gods in Sion: or according to the Hebrew, from abundance
to abundance. And if they continually believe until the time they come to see
God, and by this belief pass to the sight of God, how do these men bury the^
in a slomber of drunkenesse, and deep idleness?

The very self same thing does S. Paul also more manifestly witness, so that
if they would even burst, yet shall they never be able to resist the spirit of
God. 2. Cor. 5.6 7.
Hear what he says, Surely we know that if our earthly house of this
tabernacle be destroyed, we have a building with God, an everlasting habitation
in heaven, which is not made with man his hand. And therefore we groan,
desiring to be clothed with our heavenly mansion, that we might be found
clothed and not naked. And in very deed, we that are in this tabernacle, do
groan being burdened, because we desire not to be vnclad but to be cladde, to
the end that this mortality might be swallowed up of life. And a little after,
wherefore we are always of good cheer, and in good hope and do know that so
long as we are at home in the body, we are absent from the Lord (for we walk
by faith, and not after the outward show) nevertheless, we are of good
comfort, and had a great deal rather, to be absent from the body, and to be
present with the Lord.

Here they find a starting hole, and say, that the words of the Apostle are
to be referred to the day of judgment, wherein we shall be cladde, and wherein
mortallyty shall be swallowed up of life. Wherefore the Apostle (say they)
concludes thus, that we must all appear before the judgment seat of the
son of God. But wherefore refer they this clothing rather unto the body,
the^ unto the blessings which are plentifully bestowed upon us after death? who
forces the^ to take this word, life, for resurrection seeing yt the meaning of
the Apostle is easy and plain: to wit, we desire to be delivered out of this
prison of the body, but not to the end to wander vncertaynely without
houseroome.

For there is a far better house, and a more blessed dwelling which the Lord
has made ready for us, always provided that he finds us clad, and not
naked: Ephe. 6.10
For Jesus Christ is our clothing, Psalm. 45.12.13.14.
and that strong armor wherewith S. Paul armeth us. And it is written that
the king shall desire the beautye of his spouse, who is mighty in gifts: and
glorious within his closet. Moreover, the Lord has set a mark upon his, whom
he will acknowledge both in death and in the resurrection Wherefore look they
not rather to that, which he had before spoken, and whereunto he has adjoined
this saying? Although our outward man, says he, be corrupted, yet is the
inward man, renewed from day to day. But that the Apostle adds this
conclusion, to appear before the judgment seat of the son of God, binds
the^ more straightly: where he had before said: that whether we be present or
absent, we earnestly strive both at home and abroad to do the thing that might
best please him. Seeing yt at home, is meant the body, what is signified by
abroad? To the end then that we put nothing to, the words them selves without
any expositor say thus much, that we do our best to please the Lord, both
within the body and also without the body: and besides, that we shall feel the
presence of the Lord, whenas we shall be separated from this body. Then shall we
no more walk by faith, but in open sight, because that this mass of earth,
wherewith we be oppressed, seperateth us very far of from our God.

But these sleapers babble clean contrary, and say, we shall be a great deal
farther of from God by death, then whiles we are here in this life. For of whom
is this written: Psalm.
They shall walk, O Lord, in the light of thy countenance. Likewise The
spirit it self witnesses unto our spirit, Romans 8.16.
that we are the children of God. And many other such like sayings. They take
away from them the light of Gods countenance, and the testimony of the
Spirit. So that if this be true, then are we blesseder now, then when we be
dead. For although we live now under the Elements of this world, yet
notwithstanding our dwelling and abiding place is in heaven, according to the
saying of Paul. Phil. 3.20.
But when that Lethergy and forgetfulness of all things, shall by death take
away the souls, they then lose whatsoever sweetness they have of spiritual
taste. Howbeit the holy Scriptures do teach us a great deal better. Wise. 9,
That the body which is corruptible, makes the soul worsse, and the earthly
tabernacle holds down the sense thinking many things.

Now then, if the body be the prison of the soul, and the earthly habitation a
manacle to bind it sure: What shall become of the soul when it is delivered out
of this prison and losed from these bands? Is she not then set at liberty, and
(as a man would say) at her own choice? In so much that it may well be said,
that look how much she decreaseth the body, so much increases she her self.
Will they, nill they, this is out of all doubt, that when we have cast of this
burden of the body, that ye fight, which is betwixt the spirit, and the flesh,
and betwixt the flesh and the spirit, is at an end. And besides, the
mortifiyng of the flesh, is the quickening of the spirit. Therefore whenas the
soul has voyded these excrementes she is then in deed spiritual: and
yeldeth her obedience unto the will of God, neither feels she the tyranny of
the flesh resisting her, but reposeth her self in this quietness, thinking upon
none other thing, but upon God.

And thus forsooth may a man well say that she sleapeth, when as she is able to
raise up her self without being pressed down with any wayght? and that she
slombreth, whenas she is able to understand many things both by feeling, and
thinking, without any let? This does not only bewray the error of these
fa^tasticall fellows, but also their malice against the works and power of
God, which the scriptures testifye unto us that he works in his holy and
faithful ones. We acknowledge god to be as it were borne in his chosen, and
still to grow up from day to day, Pro. 4.18.
which thing Solomon teaches us when he says The way of the righteous shines
as the light, and shines more and more until the perfect day. Phil. 2.


And S. Paul also affirms the same saying, he that has begone a good work
in you, will also perfect the same, until the coming of the day of Jesus
Christ: Now, these men do not only intermeddle with ye work of God for a
time, but also dash it clean out. And they which before went from faith to
faith, from virtue to virtue, and enjoyed ye taste of blessedness, when as they
bestowed themselves in the remembering of God: these do rob them of faith,
virtue, and of all remembrance of God, and place them in their beds as
sleapheddes, and altogether drenched in drowsines. For how enterpret they this
their going on? Do they think the souls go forward in perfection, whenas
they grow fat with sleep: that they might be offered fair and fat before the
face of God, whenas he shall sit in judgment?

Surely, if they had but one grain of wisdom, they would not thus grossly
Iumble of the soul: But look how far the heaven is distant from the earth,
so far separate they the heavenly soul from the earthly body. Phil. 23.
When S. Paul then desires to be losed from the body, and to be with Christ,
do they think it to be likely that he meant to sleep, and for none other
cause desired to be with Christ? But this was namely his desire because he was
fully assured that he had another mansio^, a house not made with man's hand,
whenas the earthly house, and Tabernacle of his habitation should be destroyed?
Is not this to a very good purpose? Is not this then to be with Christ, Mat.
22.32 Mar. 12.27
whenas we give over our own life? Do they not tremble at the voice of the
Lord, who calling himself the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, answers
forthwith that he is the God of the living and not of the dead? And therefore
he is none of their god neither yet are they his people. But they say, that
these things shall then only come in very deed to pass, whenas the dead
shall at the last day be raised again to life: considering that these are the
words, have you not read that which has been written of the resurrection of
the dead? But yet have they not wound themselves out by this mean. For when
Christ had to do with the Saduces, who denied not only the resurrection, but
also the immortality of the souls: he confuteth these two errors, with this
only saying. For if God be the God of the living and not of the dead, and
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, were out of the world, when God spoke unto Moses,
saying that he was their God: it must needs follow that they lived another
life.

For they must needs be, over whom God makes himself God. Luke. 20.
Whereupon S. Luke adds, For all things live unto him, not meaning that all
things live by the presence of God, but by his power. This the^ remains.
That Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob do live. Romans 14.8.
Hereunto agrees that saying of S. Paul, whether we live, or dye, we dye unto
the Lord, we are the Lords whether we live or dye. For therefore died Christ,
and rose again, that he might be Lord over the quick and the dead. Can we set
up any thing more fyrmelye whereon to settle and establishe our faith, then to
hear that the son of God is Lord over the dead? For he cannot be Lord but
over some that are, seying that there must be some subjects, where there is a
government.

We see also the souls of the Martirs which are in heaven, yield a testimony
hereof before God and his Angels, Apoc. 6.10
who cry with a loud voice under the Altar, how long Lord will it be before
thou take vengeance upon the inhabitants of the earth, for our blood? unto whom
were given white garments, and was said unto them, that they should rest yet a
little while longer, until such time as their fellow servants, and their
brethren (which should be slain as they were) were accomplished. The souls of
the dead do cry, and white garments are given unto them.

Now (I beseech you) you sleapie and drounke^ spirits, how expound you these
white garments? be they cushions, or pillowes forsooth, for the^ to sleep
upon? You here see right well, that white garments are unfit to sleep in.
Then must you needs grant, that the souls which are so apparrelled, do
wake. If then this be true, it is out of all doubt, that ye white garments do
signify the beginning of glory, which God of bountiful liberality gives unto
Martyrs, until the coming of the great day of Judgment. Daniel. 7.9 Math.
17.2 Math. 18.3. Mar. 16.5. Acts. 1.10 Acts. 10.30. Luke. 15.22.
For this is no new nor strange thing in the scriptures that a white garment,
signifies glory, pleasure, and joy. For the Lord appeared in a white garment
to Daniell. The Lord Jesus appeared in this apparel upon the mount Thebor. The
Angel appeared in a white garment unto the women at the sepulcher of Jesus
Christ. In this manner appeared ye Angels unto the disciples looking up into
heaven, after the ascension of our Lord. In such form appeared the Angel unto
Cornelius. And the rich robe that was brought unto ye son, after that he had
consumed all his substance, when he returned unto his Father, was a token of
gladness.

Moreover, if the souls of the dead cry out with a loud voice, the^ sleep
they not. When begin they then to be saped with this sleep? Neither will
this objection serve them, that the blood of Abell cried for revenge. I
confess in deed that this is a common manner of speech, to wit, that the
deed it self speaks, that the shedding of blood cries for revenge. And it
is without all doubt that in this place, the affection of the Martyrs is
represented by the cry, because their desire herein is expressed without any
figure, and their request also is herein set forth: when as they say: How long
O Lord, will it be, Apo. 20.6
before thou be avenged etc.

Wherefore S. John in his book makes me^tio^ of two resurrectio^s, as also of
two deaths The first is of the soul before Judgment. The second by which the
body shall be raised up again to glory. For thus he says: Blessed are they
which have part in the first resurrection: in them the second death has no
place. And therefore this is a terrible thing unto you to you I say, which will
not acknowledge this first resurrection, which is the only open way, to enter
into the blessed glory.

This also is a mighty strong weapon against them, even the answer which was
made unto the thief calling for mercy. For thus he prayed, Remember me O Lord
when thou come into thy kingdom. Luke. 23.42.43.
And this answer he had. This day shall thou be with me in paradise. He which
is every where, promises to be good to the thief, and promises him heaven:
For he has delight and pleasure sufficient, who takes pleasure in the Lord.
Neither puts he him of to many years, but even the very same day calls
him to ye blessed pleasures of his kingdom. The cavil of these drowsy heads,
wherewith they sport themselves with the word of God, they canuasse to and fro.
For say they, one day is as it were a thousand years in the sight of God. But
they never call to mind, that God frames himself to the capacities of men,
when as he speaks unto them. Neither do they read, that one day in the
scripture is put for a thousand years. who would abide such an expositor, who
hearing that God would do something to day, would think of a thousand years,
or more? For when Jonas denou^ced unto ye Niniuits: Yet forty days and Niniuie
shall be destroyed: 2. Pet. 3.8.
might they carelessly look for the Judgment of God, until forty thousand
years were come and gone.

Neither has S. Peter spoken it in the same sense, that a thousand years are
but as a day before God. But when as certain false prophets, did count the
hours and days, because they went about to reprove God of lying, when as he
fulfilled not his promises at the first, according to their Imaginations: he
admonishes the^ yt God is everlasting, with whom a thousand years is scarsely a
moment. But because they feel themselves to be yet entangled, they stiffly
contend and say, that this word, to day, signifies in the scriptures the time
of the new Testament: as this word, to morrow, signifies the time of the old.

Hebr. 13.8.
To this purpose wrest they that which is written in ye Epistle to ye Hebrews:
Jesus Christ that was yesterday, and to day, is the same also for ever.
Howbeit, they are greatly deceived. For if he was only yesterday, then he that
was not before the beginning of the old Testament, had sometime his beginning:
Colos. 1.15
Where shall Jesus then, that eternal God be, the first borne also of all
creatures, as touching his humanity, Apo. 13.48
and the Lamb slain from the beginning of the world? Besides, if by this
word to day, is meant the time that is between the day of Judgment, and the
humanity of Jesus Christ, then have we woone this point of them, that the
thief shall be in paradise before that day, wherein the souls, as they teach,
shall wake out of their sleep. And so by their own confession, we shall wring
this from them, that the promise made unto the thief is accomplished before
the day of Judgment, which they say is not to be accomplished, until after
the day of Judgment.

But if they draw this word unto the time that follows after Judgment, why
does the Author of the Epistle to the Hebrews, add, for ever? And that they
might feel with the hand their darkness, and acknowledge even by the eyesight
their ignorance, if in this promise, Jesus Christ looked unto the day of
Judgment, it ought not to have been said to day, but in the world to come. As
when Isaiah went about to show the misery of the resurrection, he calls Jesus
Christ, the father of the world to come. Now seeing the Apostle has said, to
morrow, and to day, and for ever: Whereas we say, it has been, is, and shall
be (which three times declare unto us eternity) what other thing else go they
about by their cunning subtilties, but even to corrupt and pervert the sense of
the Apostle? Isaiah. 30.33.
we may learn out of the prophet Isaiah, that the nature of this first word,
contains an everlasting time: who says, that hell fire is prepared for the
wicked from yesterday: considering that we know by the words of Christ, that
fire is prepared for ye Devil and his Angels from the beginning.

They then which are of an upright and sound judgment, do here right well see,
that there is nothing left for them to be deceived, by so open a truth.
Nevertheless, they yet moyle and say, that paradise was for that day so
promised to the thief, as death was denounced unto our first parents, the
same day that they tasted of the tree of knowledge, both of good and evil. But
let it be that we granted the^ this, yet for all that we will draw this from
them against their wills, that the thief was yt day delivered out of the
misery, whereunto Adam fell, wherein he transgressed the commau^deme^t that was
given him: and so everlasting life was restored to the thief. Moreover, when
as I shall hereafter speak of death, I will sufficiently declare, as I think,
after what sort our first parents dyed the same day, in which they estraunged
themselves from God.

And now must I turn my talk to those, who remembering the promises of God,
do rest in them with a quiet conscience. And therefore, my brethren, let not
this faith be shaken of from you, no not although hell gates should lift
themselves up against you, seeing you have God for your pledge. who can not deny
his truth. For his speech is not dark, which he delivers unto his church,
being yet but a stranger here below in this world, when he says: Isaiah.
60.19.
Thou shall have no more sun to shine by day, neither shall the brightness of
the Moon shine to thee: For the Lord shall be thine everlasting light, and thy
God thy glory.

So that (as they are ordinarily wonted) if they will stretch this unto the
last resurrection, it shall be an easy matter for us to refell their vanitye,
by every word of the chapter: seeing that the Lord has now promised his
Christ, and that the Gentiles shall be now adopted, and called unto Faith. Let
us always call to mind that saying which the spirit of God has taught us by
the mouth of David: Psalm. 92.12 13.14.
The lust shall florishe as the Date tree, and shall be multiplied as the
Cedars in Libanus. For they that are planted in the house of the Lord, shall
florishe in the Court of our God. And in their age shall bring forth fruit,
and be fresh and in good case. Neither marvel you at this, because it seems
that the powers of nature do fail, when you hear that age shall be green
budding and fruitful.

But considering these things with your self, sing unto your soul after the
example of David: Psalm. 103.5
My soul bless thou the Lord, who has filled thy mouth with goodness: thy
youth shall be renewed, Psalm. 121.8
as the youth of an Eagle. Remitt all the rest unto the Lord: Who looks unto
our coming in, Joel. 2.23.
and our going out from this time forth for evermore. It is he which causes
the morning and evening dewes to rain upon his chosen and faithful: Of whom
it is said: Psalm. 68.21.
our God is the God of deliverance: and the issue of death is from the Lord
God. Jesus Christ has unto us, this goodness of the Father: when as he has
said: O Father, John. 17.24.
those whom thou have given me, I will that where I am, that they be also
there: to the end they might see the brightness which thou have given me,

Let us then hold this faith which is grounded upon all the prophecies, upon
the truth of the Gospel, and upon Jesus Christ himself: to wit, that the
spirit is the Image of God, unto whose lykenes, it has strength and
understanding, and is everlasting: and so long as it is in the body, it shows
the powers: and when it is delivered out of this prison, it goes from thence
unto God, the feeling of whom, in the mean while, it enjoys, whiles it
rests in the hope of the blessed resurrection: and this reast is to it a
paradise.

But as for the spirit of the reprobate, whiles it looks for the terrible
judgment upon it self, it is tormented with this looking for, which the
Apostle therefore has called fearful. And to make any father search, is to
plunge it self over head and ears in the bottomless depth of the secrets of
God: considering that it is enough to learn that which the holy ghost, who as
a a very good Schoolemaister, is contented to teach it: who says thus, harken
unto me, and thy soul shall live. How wisely is this spoken, in respect of the
vain arrogance of these men? The souls of the just are in the hands of God,
and the torment of death shall not touch them. They seem to the eyes of the
foolish to be dead, but they are in peace etc. This is the end of our
wisdom, which as it is sober and subject unto God, even so also knows it
very well that they which labor to go beyond it, do fall full low.

Let us now pull of those cloutes and rags,, wherein they have swadled up
these drowsy and sleapy souls: and mingle and lickour the Poppy, which they
have made them to soupe, to lull them a sleep. They carry about with them
certain places of scripture, which as they think do favor this sleep. and
soon after, as if this sleapines were clearly proved, they thunder them
against those, which forthwith will not yield unto their error. First of all,
they set down, that God has placed none other soul in man, but such as is
common to all other beasts. For the scripture attributes to al equaly, a
living soul: as when it is said: Gene. 1.
God created the great whales, and every living soul, also, there wet, Gene. 7.
of all flesh which had any life in it, by couples, into the Arc of Noah: And
such other like places. And although the holy scriptures had never made mention
hereof, yet are we clearly admonished by S. Paul, that this living soul
differs nothing from this present life, whereby the body receives strength
and force. Se what he says: That which is sowe^ in corruption, 1. Cor.
15.42.43.44.45.
shall rise again in incorruption: that which is sown in weakness, shall rise
again in strength: That which is sown in a fleshely body, shall rise again a
spiritual body: for as it is written: The first man Ada^ was made a living
soul: and the last Adam, a quickening spirit.

Now I confess in deed, that the living soul is not only attributed unto
beasts alone: be cause they also live: For their life is another manner of
life, the^ ye life of men. The soul that lives in man, makes him to have
sense, wisdom, reason, and understanding, and the soul that lives in
beasts, gives them only moving and feeling. Seeing then it is so that there
is reason, understanding, and will in the soul of man, which virtues are not
tied to the body: it is no marvel if it subsist without a body, and pearisheth
not like the soul of the beasts, whose souls have nothing but a bodily
feeling. For which cause, Paul was not ashamed, with ye heathen Poet, to call
us the generation of God.

Wherefore then let them now as they list, communicate unto a living soul with
man: Acts 17.28.29.
seeing that as touching the body, beasts, life is all one to men, and beasts:
yet can they not hereupon make unto themselves a degree. to confound the soul
of man with the beasts. neither yet must they thrust that saying of S. Paul
upon us, which is rather with us, then against us. The first man Adam was made
a living soul, and the last Adam a quickening spirit. For this answer was
objected to them which could not be persuaded of the resurrection. For look
upon the objection which they made, how shall the dead rise again? In what
body shall they come? The holy Apostle to meet with this objection, frames
his Argument thus.

If we learn by experience, that the seed which lives, grows, and brings
fruit, was first dead, why the^, may not ye body which was dead, rise again
as well as the seed? And if the bare and dry corn, bring forth greater plenty
of fruit after it is dead, and that by a wonderful power which God has put
into it: Why then may not the body, by the self same heavenly power, be raised
up again in a far better manner, then wherein it dyed? And to the end thou
might not still marvel: how is it possible, that man should live, without
he were fashioned into a living soul? Notwithstanding, although this soul
moves, and vpholdeth the wait of the body for a time, yet makes it not
Immortal, or inccorruptible. And whiles also that it puts forth her
strength, yet is she not able as of her self to do it, without the help, of
drink, meat, and sleep, which are tokens of corruption: neither makes it
the body to abide in a firm and constant condition, but that it is enclyned
as soon to one thing, as to another.

But when the son of God shall take us with himself into glory, Tertullian
so says and S. August. also in his 3. Epist. to Fortunatus.
it shall not be only a body with a soul, or quickened with a soul, but a
spiritual body, and such a one as our mind cannot conceive nor our tongue
express. We see then that we shall be none other thing in the general
resurrection, but yet much otherwise, if by your leave I may so say. And these
things are spoken of the body, whereunto the soul administreth life under the
elements of this world. But when the figure of this world shall pass away, the
participation of ye glory of God shall lift it up above nature. Hereby we see
what the true and natural sense of the Apostle is. And S. Augustine seeing
himself deceived (even as these men now are) in the exposition of this text,
acknowledged afterward his fault, and corrected it amongst his retractatio^s,
and a great deal more manifestly in other places. Chap.
And here I think it good to set down some part of his words. It is very
true (says he) that the soul lives either in a carnal or spiritual body,
and yet notwithstanding it lives not nor is not quickened until such time as
it has cast off the corruption. But in the spiritual body, when it is made a
quickening spirit, perfectly cleaving unto the Lord, it is so quickened, as
that it causes the spiritual body, to consume al corruption, and not to fear
any separation.

To be short, albeit I grant unto them all things concerning a living soul
(upon which title, as I have before said, I stand not) yet that seat of the
Image of God remains whole and sound, be it that they term it by the name of
soul or spirit, or by some other title. Neither is it a harder matter to
refell that saying which they bring out of the 37. Chapter of Ezechiell, where
the Prophet describing the order of the resurrection, calls the spirit from
the four winds, that it might blow life into the dry boanes. Whereupon they
verily think it a very good consequent that the soul of man is none other
thing, but a moving power without substance, which power vanishes away in
death, but is received again in the general resurrection.

As if it were not likewise lawful for me to infer after the same manner: to
wit, that the spirit of God is a wind, or vanishing motion: seeing that
Ezechiell in the first vision names wind or breath, in stead of the eternal
spirit of God. But it shall be an easy matter for any man without he be too
too blockish, to resolve this doubt, which these Gallauntes can neither mark
nor perceive, as learned and sharpewitted as they are. For in both these places
has been set down the very same thing which the prophets very often have set
down, who figure out spiritual things, that are beyond man's reach and reason,
by corporal and visible signs.

And therefore Ezechiell intended lively to set before our eyes, as by a vision
lively pictured, as well the spirit of God, as also the spirits of men, and
because the same was contrary to the spiritual nature, he has borrowed a
similitude from corporal things, which was as it were an Image or pattern
thereof.

The second objection which they make, is this, for although (say they) the
soul was endued with immortallity, yet notwithstanding because it sinned, it
has through that sin lost her immortality. And this punishment was ordained
for sin, and denounced to our first Parents, Genesis 2.
where it is said, You shall dye the death. And S. Paul says, Romans 6.
That death is the reward of sin. The prophet also cries out and says, Eze.
18.
That the Soul which sins shall dye. And these and such other like places
these drowsy sleapers allege for that purpose. But in the first place I ask
them, was not the Devil also paid with the same reward for sin?

And yet for all that he is not so dead, but that he waketh continually,
compassing here and there, seeking whom he may devour, still busiyng himself
amongst the children of unbelief. Moreover, I ask them, whether this death
shall have an end or not? If there be no end thereof (as in deed they must
needs so confess) these then, howsoever they are dead, shall feel
notwithstanding everlasting hell fire, and the worm which never dies. These
things therefore plainly show us, that although the soul be dead, yet it is
immortal, which we grant them, and say that it feels both good and evil:
and that this death is an other manner of thing then that which they would
have, to wit, yt it should turn to nothing.

Neither have the scriptures forgotten this, and that they should have found,
if they had bestowed their mind, and applied their wit unto them, rather then
aroga^tly, and after a proud manner, to stand to that which their drunken
sleapy brayn has told them. For when God pronounces this sentence against a
sinful man and says, thou art dust, and into dust shall return, to wit,
says he any other thing, but that that which is taken and framed out of the
earth, shall return unto the earth? And what becomes then I beseech you of
the soul? Goes it into the grave, to become rotten and stinking? But we will
handle these things hereafter a little more plainly, Why do they then go
thus about the bushe? we have already heard that that which is of the earth,
must go again to the earth. Now is there any reason that we should plunge
the soul of man under the earth? It is not said that man shall return unto the
earth: But the thing which is dust, shall return into dust.

And the thing that was made of the slime of the earth, is this dust. It is
that forsooth that shall return into dust, and not the soul, which God gave
unto man, as a thing taken from else where, the^ from the earth. After this sort
we read in the book of Job, Job. 10.9.12.
Remember O Lord, that thou have made me as the clay, and will thou turn me
into dust again? He speaks there of the Body: and a little after he speaks
of the soul and says, thou have given me life and grace, and thy visytation
has preserved my spirit.

And therefore this life shall not turn into dust. For the death of the soul
is far otherwise, to wit, Gods dreadful judgment, the burden whereof the
poor soul is no way able to bear, but must be utterly confounded, and
destroyed: as by the scriptures we are taught, and as they whom God has lively
touched, have by experience most fearfully felt. And to the end we might
begin at Adam, who first obtained this gentle reward, let us somewhat
consider what heart he had, or to speak more properly, what was in him at all,
whenas he heard this terrible voice, Adam, where art thou?

This is a thing easelier thought of, the^ spoken. Although in very deed a man
can not think of it, except he eftsoonnes feels the same. And like as the
mightynesse and excellency of the Majesty of God can not in words be
expressed: so also can not the terriblenes of his wrath be declared, how
grievous it is to those, upon whom it lights. For they very well see the anger
of God, and because they would avoid it, they are ready even to plounge
themselves over head and ears in a thousand bottomless depthes: and yet are
no way able to escape it. And who is he that will not grant this to be a death
in deed? Again I say, that a few words will serve them, who have been seared
with the hoate iron of conscience.

And therefore let them which have not had experience thereof, hear what the
scriptures say, whenas it is said, Deuteronomy. 4.
Our God is a consuming fire, who when he speaks in judgment, kills. And
such one knew they him to be, which said, Exodus 20.
Let not the Lord speak unto us, for fear we dye. Will thou then know what
the death of the soul is? It is even this, whenas it is without God, and that
he forsakes it, and leaves it unto her self. For since God is the light
thereof, she loses her life, whenas she loses his presence.

And to ye end we might show that by particularityes, which have been said in
general: since it is so that there is no light without God, which lighteneth
our night: it is most certain yt the soul being buried in her darckenesses,
must needs be blind. And then is she domb, seeing she cannot confess that
unto salvation, which she believed to righteousness. Deaf also she is because
she hears not this lively voice. Lame likewise she is, and that which is
worsse, she is not able to stand upright, when as she has not to whom she
may say, thou have held me by ye right hand, and guided me according to thy
will: and finallye she does nothing wherein is life.

For, hear what the Prophet says, Baruc. 3.14
whenas he will show that the spring and fountain of life wholly rests in
God: Learn where is wisdom, where is strength, where is understanding: that
thou may also know from whence comes long continuance, and life, and
where the light of the eyes, and peace is.

What would thou else more desire to come unto death? And to the end we
should not here stay in this godly way, let us consider with our selves what
life it is that Jesus Christ has brought us, and it will put us in mind with
what kind of death he has redeemed us.

Ephe. 5.
S. Paul teaches us both the one and the other. For thus he says, Awake thou
which sleapest, and arise from death, and Christ will enlighten thee. He
speaks in this place unto dust, but yet unto such as being wrapped up in
their sins, carry with them both hell and death. And in an other place he
says, Colo. 2.
And you when you were dead through sin he has quickened you together with
Christ, forgeuing you all your sins. And like as according to the saying of
S. Paul, Romans
we dye unto sin whenas lust is quenched in us: Even so dye we unto God,
whe^as we subject our selves unto our lust which lives in us.

But to speak all in a word, in living we dye, (which thing S. Paul speaks
of ye widow which lives in pleasures) to wit, 2. Tim. 5.
we are immortal unto death. For although the soul keeps her understanding,
yet is a gilty conscience as it were a very blockish and unfeeling
understanding.

Now therefore, whatsoever this death of the soul was, yet for all that it is
far of that the death which Christ dyed for us, is such one. For he has
accomplished by his death, whatsoever the prophets have promised of his victory
against death. For thus have the prophets said, Isaiah. 25.
he will destroy death for ever. It is likewise said, I will be thy death, O
death, and hell, Oseah. 13.
I will be thy sting. Also, Hebr. 2.
Death shall go before his face. The Apostles likewise declare ye things already
done: for thus it is said: he has overcome death: 2. Tim. 1. Romans 5.
But has enlightened life by the Gospel.

For if by ye offense of one, death reigned through one, much more shall they
which receive the abundance of grace, and of the gift of righteousness,
reign in life through one, that is Jesus Christ. Let them now abide and
withstand these lightenigs if they can. For since they say yt death came by
Adam, (which we also confess, but not in such sort as they imagine, but as we
have before said, whereinto the soul fell) we on ye contrary part say that
life came by Christ, which they are never able to deny: so that the point of
the whole controversy consists between the comparison of Adam, and of Jesus
Christ.

And therefore they must first of all reconcile this with that saying of S.
Paul, that whatsoever was only lost by Adam, has been also restored by Jesus
Christ: But look, how far the power of grace has surpassed sin: even so,
of a more far passing greater power has Ie-Christ been in making
restitution, the^ Adam was in the loss. For he plainly teaches, that ye gift
is far greater then the sin, although not upon many men, yet most
plentifully upon those, upon whom it abounds. And now let them answer if
they will, that it abounds, not because it has given life more abundantly,
but because it has blotted out many sins, seeing the only sin of Adam is
it, which has brought us to destruction. And this is the thing which I demand.

Moreover seeing he teaches in another place that sin is ye sting of death,
what death is it that can sting us, since his sting is rebated, yea altogether
consumed? And so, he handles none other thing in many Chapiters of the Epistle
to the Romans But plainly declares that sin is wholly abolished, because it
has no longer dominion over the faithful. Romans 8.1.
Wherefore if the law has power over sin, what other thing then do our
sleapers who kill those yt live in Jesus Christ, but draw them into the curse
of the law, which is clean dead? And therefore the Apostle boldly says, that
there is no condemnation with them that are in Jesus Christ, who walk not
after the flesh but after the spirit.

Surely they pronounce a fearful sentence against those whom S. Paul freely
acquiteth of condemnation, whenas they say, ye shall dye the death. What is
then become of grace, whenas death reigns as yet amongst Gods chosen? Now,
according to the saying of S. Paul, sin reigns in deed to death, but
grace, Romans 6.7.
unto everlasting life: and therefore if grace surmounteth sin, there
remains no place for death. Wherefore as by Adam death entered, and reigned,
even so does life also now reign by Jesus Christ.

Now then we know, that Jesus Christ being raised again from the dead, dies
no more: neither has death any more power over him. For in that he dyed unto
sin, he dyed only once for all: But in that he lives, he lives unto God.
And hereby we may see, that they themselves refute their error with their own
weapons. For when as they say that death is the punishment of sin, they
forthwith grant, that if man had not sinned, he had been Immortal. For that
which began to be, was not sometimes: and that comes through punishment and
not by nature,

Contrariwise S. Paul, that sin is swallowed up of Grace, so that it has
nothing to do with the children of God. And so we have gotten this point of
the^, that Gods chosen are now such, as Adam was before he sinned. And as he
was created incorruptible, Even so are they now, who are by Jesus Christ,
framed a new into a better nature. And that saying of the Apostle is not
against this: 1. Cor. 15.54.
That the written word shall be accomplished: death is swallowed up into
victory. For if they say it is so, that the word shall be made: then can it not
be denied: but that to be made, must also be taken to be accomplished. For
whatsoever is now begone in the soul, shall be accomplished in the body: or
rather whatsoever is only begone in the soul shall be accomplished together
both in body and soul. For, this general death, whereof as by ye common
necessity of nature we all dye, is a natural way for the elect to come to the
sovereign degree of Immortality, Augustine in his 43. Chap. of the difference
between the life of man, and the life of brute beasts.
rather then to any evil or punishment. And as S. Augustine says: It is
nothing else but a finishing of the flesh, which consumes not the things that
are fast joined and knit together: but makes a partition of them, when as it
brings both the one, and the other to their first original.

The third thing which they allege, Acts. 7.
is that which they so often speak of those which are dead, John. 11.11 2.
These. 4.3. Kings 11 21.43.
to wit: That they sleep. As it is said of S. Stephen: That he sleapt in the
Lord. Likewise Lazarus, our friend sleapeth: Also, sorrow not for them that
sleep. And this saying is so often repeated in the books of the kings, as
that a man shall scarcely find any phrase of the scripture more familyar and
common. But chiefly and above all, Job. 14.7.11.
they urge and make a great reckoning of the saying in the book of Job, where
it is said: There is hope of a tree if it be cut down, that it will yet
sproute, and the branches thereof spring, but when a man is dead, what is
become of him? As the waters pass from the sea, and as the flood decays and
dries up, even so a man after he be a sleep, ryseth not again, neither shall
he wake out of his sleep, until such time as the heaven be not.

Now, if we believe that the souls sleep, because that death is called a
sleep: In the first place, the soul of Jesus Christ was possessed with the
very same sleep. Psalm. 3.5.
For David so speaks of him self: I laid me down and sleapt, and rose up
again, for the Lord sustained me.

His enemies also used this wicked speech toward him: Psalm. 41.8.
Shall he that sleapeth, rise any more again? Wherefore, if it be not lawful
to think so basely, and vily of the soul of christ (as heretofore has
largely been handeled) we ought not to stand in doubt, that the scripture had
only regard unto the outward shape of the body, neither yet has deryued and
fetched this sleep from the consideration of men. For these two manner of
speeches, he sleapt with his fathers, and, he was laid or buried with his
Fathers, we take indifferently.

And yet by ye way, the soul is not laid or buried by the souls of the
Fathers. But the body is carried to be laid in the grave of the Fathers. Samuel
likewise in the story of the Kings, attributes this sleep unto the
Faythlesse kings, as may be seen in the two last books of the kings, as also
in the books of the Cronicles. And therefore when thou hear it said that a
wicked man sleapeth, think thou not once of the sleep of the soul, which can
not have a worse hangman to torment and vex it, then an ill and guilty
conscience. what becomes then of this dreamer or sleaper, who is thus vexed
and distressed? Isyiah. 57. ver. 20.21.
For the wicked are like unto the raging sea, which can not calm it self when
it lusts, whose flowing surges, cast up filth and stinking badgage: There is
no peace says the Lord, unto the wicked.

Nevertheless, David meaning to set forth the sharp pricking sting of the
conscience, Psalm. 13. ver. 3.
says: O Lord my God lighten mine eyes that I sleep not in death. Thus we see
that the bottomless depth of hell, holds wretched man besieged: and the
strength of sin torme^teth him: and yet he sleapeth, yea he does more then
sleep, because he abides all these things.

And therefore these simple and ignorant fondlinges, must be set again to
their A. B. C. seeing they have not as yet learned, that part, is sometymys
taken for the whole: and sometimes ye whole for part, which figure, is so
oftentimes used in the scriptures. Neither would I have any man believe me,
except I strst bring forth certain places, which plainly show, that so often
as this saying, sleaping, is taken for death, Job. 7.21.
it is spoken by a figure called Synecdoche. For, when Job says: Behold I
sleep now in the dust, and if thou seek me in the morning, I shall have no
more being: Is it to be thought that his soul should be overcome with sleep?

Now therefore, the soul is not to be turned into dust: Job. 21. v. 2.6.
nei- is it to sleep in the dust: As also it is said in another place: They
shall sleep both in the dust and the worms shall cover the^: Psalm 88. ver. 5.
And when David says: Like the slain lying in the grave: Art thou of the
opinion that Job and David (by these sayings) have put out the souls to be
eaten of worms. Isaiah. 14. ver. 7.8.


The prophet likewise teaches us eue^ the very self same thing who meaning to
describe the destruction of Nebuchadnezer, says after this manner: Isaiah. 14.
Verses. 18.19.
The whole world is at rest, and is quiet: The fur trees also rejoiced of
thee, and the Cedars of Lybanon, saying: Since thou sleapst, none has risen up
to come against us. And anon after, it is said: All the kings of the nations,
even they all sleep in glory, every one in his own house: but thou art cast
out of thy grave. All which things are spoken of a dead body: so that to
sleep is to be laid down as they are which sleep, Horace in his ^des.
who are laid upon the earth. The very pagane Poets were able to give
instructions of this manner of speaking. And therefore have in the old time,
called the place which was appointed to burye the dead, a Churchyard, which
signifies as much as a dorture, or a place of sleep and rest. Not meaning
thereby that the souls were there laid, to reast them selves, but the dead
bodies. I trust now by this time, that the smokes of these our Gallants are
already well vanished, wherein they have wrapped the sleapy souls, since it
has been proved, that in the whole volume of the scripture there cannot be
found, that this word, Sleep, so often as it is set down for death, is
attributed unto the souls and spirits. And besides, we have else where more at
large handled the reast of the souls.

For their fourth objection, they take great hold of the saying of Salamon, as
if thereby, they had some great matter to thunder out against us: Where it is
said in the book of Ecclesiastes, or of the Preacher: Ecclesi. 3. ver. 18.
I considered in mine heart upon the state of the children of men, that God had
purged them, yet to see to, they are in themselves like unto beasts. For, the
condition of the children of men, and the condition of beasts are even as one
condition unto them: For as the one dies, so dies the other: For they have
all one breath, and there is no excellency of man above the beast: For all is
vanity. All go unto one place, and all was of the dust, and all shall return
to the dust.

Who knows whether the spirit of a man ascends upward, and the spirit of
the beast descends downward, and to the earth? What and if Salamon answered
them here in a word? Vanity of Vanities, says the preacher, and all is but
vanity. For, what means he hereby, but to show that the mind of man is
vain, and uncertain of all things? Man sees that he dies as ye beasts do,
that life and death is with him, as with the beasts: and therefore he thus
concludes: that his state and condition, is like unto the state and condition
of beasts. And like as beasts have nothing remaining after death, no more
does man reserve any thing unto him self after he is dead. And thus we see
what the spirit, the reason, and understanding of man is. For the carnal man
perceives not the things of the spirit: For they are to him foolishnes, and
can neither understand, nor know them. For a man beholds with his carnal
eyes, looks at present death: and ascends no higher, but considers this
after manner: that the earth brings forth all things, and shall likewise
return to the earth: and in the mean while never looks to the soul. And
for this cause he adds this saying who knows whether ye spirit of man
asce^deth upward? So that when we come to the soul man's reason is driven to
such a straight in it self, as yt it will not understand any thing yt is sure
or manifest, be it that it stands, meditateth, or reasons.

Seeing then it is so, that Salamon shows the vanitye of man's mind, because
that in respect of the spirit, it is changeable and wavering, he no way
favors their error: but strongly and soundely vpholdeth our faith. For the
wisdom of God lays wide open, and tells us of that which surpasses the
capacity and measure of man's understanding: to wit: Gene. 9.
That the spirit or mind of the children of men looks upward.

I will also propound another like thing out of the self same Author, to the
end I might somewhat bend and pluck down their stiff necks. For thus it is
said: Ecclesi. 9. ver. 1.2.3.4.5.
There is no man that knows by any outward thing, the love or hatred of God
toward men: but all things are in an uncertainty: because that all things
fall out a like unto all: The self and same estate, is as well to the Just as
to the wicked, to the good, as to the evil, to the pure, as to the polluted,
and to him that sacrifices, as to him that sacrifices not.

And therefore if all things be in an uncertainty, for that which is to come,
shall then a faithful man, unto whom all things work for the best,
enterpret, that affliction is a sign of the hatred of God? no not so. For thus
it is said unto the faithful, you shall be oppressed in the world, but in me
you shall have consolation. And they trusting upon this saying, do not only
reast themselves in a constant mind upon whatsoever shall come unto them, but
do also glory in their troubles, confessing with Job: That although he would
slay us, yet will we put our trust in him.

How then are the things that are to come uncertain? Forsooth so far forth
as man can judge they are so. And yet for all that, every man that lives is
nothing else but vanity. For he goes on further and says, this is an evil
thing amongst all the rest that is done under the sun, that there is one
condition unto all, and also the hearts of the sons of men are full of
wickedness, and madness is in their life, and after that, they go to the dead.
There is no man which lives ever, and hops thereof: For a living dog is
better then a dead Lion. For the living know that they shall dye, but the dead
know nothing at all: neither have they any more a reward. For the remembrance
of them is clean forgotten. And speaks he not all these things by reason of
the beastlynes of those which look only down at their feet, having no hope
of the blessed life, nor yet of the resurrection? For although this were in
deed true that we are nothing after we be dead, yet notwithstanding there is a
resurrection, upon hope whereof, if they did cast their eyes, they would
neither be seasoned with the contempt of God, nor yet filled with wickedness: to
the end I might ouerslippe all the rest. And therefore let us conclude with
Salamon, that man's reason is not able to comprehend all these things. So that,
if we would have any certaynty thereof. Let us run unto the law, and
testimony, wherein is contained the truth and ways of the Lord.

For see what is said in that place, Eccle, 12.7
until such time as the dust returns to the earth whereof it was, and the
spirit returns unto God who gave it. And therefore, whosoever has heard the
word of the Lord, needs not to doubt that the spirit of the children of men
ascends upward. I do here simply take to ascend upward, is to consist and be
immortal: as to descend downward, is to tumble, fall down, and perish.

As for their first argument, they vomit it out, with open mouth, and strain
forth their wide wesauntes, to the end to awake the sleapers out of their deep
and sound sleep. For in it they think, stands the greatest part of their
victory. And at what time they mean to deceive and bleare their young
scholars eyes, this is it that they chiefly lay hold on, whereby to corrupt
their faith, and sound understanding. For, say they, there is but one
judgment by which every one shall receive his reward: The good ones, glory and
the wicked ones, hell fire. And before this day come, there is neither
blessedness nor yet misery appointed.

For the scripture every where bears thereof witness, for thus it is said:
Mat. 24.31.
And he shall send his Angels with the great sound of a Trompet, and they shall
gather together his elect, from the four wyndes, and from the one end of the
heavens unto the other. It is likewise said, Math. 13.
The son of man shall send forth his Angels, which shall gather all offenses
out of his kingdom, and they which have wrought iniquity shall be cast into
the fiery furnace, where shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth. And then shall
the just men shine as the sun in the kingdom of their Father.

Math. 25.34.41.46.
Also it is said, Then shall the king say to them that are on his right hand,
come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the
foundations of the world. And shall say unto them on the left hand, Depart from
me ye curssed, into everlasting fire which is prepared for the Devil and his
Angels. And these shall go into everlasting pain, and the righteous into
life eternal. The like saying is also in Daniell, Danie. 2.1
And at that time the people shall be saved, every one that shall be found
written in the Book.

And therefore they say, If all these things are written of the day of
judgment, how can it be that the elect should be called to the inheritance of
the heavenly kingdom, if they already possess it. How shall it be said unto
them, come hither, whenas they are already there? how shall the people be saved,
whe^as they are presently saved?

Wherefore, the faithful which now walk faithfully, look for none other day
of their salvation: according to that saying of S. Paul, knowing yt he who
has raised up Jesus from the dead, 2. Cor. 4.14
shall raise us up also with Jesus Christ. And in an other place it is said,
looking for the appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ, who will make you strong
even unto the end in the day of his coming. etc.

And admit we granted the^ all this: yet the^ by the way why do they of
their own brayn put to the thing that is not, to wit, sleep. For they cannot
show us one syllable of sleep amongst all the places which they allege. And
although they be awake, yet it may be, that they are with out glory.

Wherefore, seeing it is not only a rash but also a mad man's part, boldly to
conclude upon things which man his reason is not able to comprehend, of which
sort are these strange and obstinate opynatiuers, dare they defend sleep,
which they have not received from the mouth of the Lord. And therefore this may
suffice discreet and sound judgment, to the end they might know this sleep,
to be a shameless forgery or feigned invention, as in very deed it is, because
it cannot be proved by the manifest word of God.

Howbeit let us handle these places as briefly as we can, to the end the
simpler sort might not be troubled therewith, whe^as they hear it said, that
the salvation of the souls is prolo^ged and put of unto the general day of
judgment. First of all, we must understand this to be a most resolute and sure
thing, that our blessedness is still on the way going unto this great day, which
shall end our journey: In like case, the glory of the elect, and ye end of their
last hope does tend and has an eye unto the same day, because their blessedness
and glory shall then be accomplished.

For it is agreed hereupon emo^gest all men, yt there is none other perfect
blessedness, or glory, but ye only perfect coniunctio^ with God. And unto this
end we all bend, run, and show our selves forward, and all the scriptures and
promises of God send us thereto. For that which God once said unto Abraham by
mouth, belongs also unto us: where he says, Gene. 12.
I am thy very great reward.

Seeing then this reward is appointed for all those that have part with Abraham,
to wit, the enjoying of God, and the blessed possessing of him, besides which
reward, it is not lawful to wish any other, for when there is any question of
our hope, we must cast our eyes upon it. And thus far, if I be not deceived,
do our adversaries agree with us.

Moreover, I likewise trust that they will agree with us in this, that this
kingdom, whereunto the chosen and faithful are called, which in other places
is called salvation, reward, and glory, is none other thing but this most
blessed conjunction and union with God: to wit, for that they are fully in God,
and that God makes them perfect: and that on their behalf, they cleave unto
God, enjoy him fully and wholly and to speak it in one word, God and they are
one. For after this sort, whe^as they are in the fountain of all fulness, they
come even unto the last end of all righteousness, wisdom, and glory, upon
which blessings the kingdom of God verily consists.

For S. Paul shows it to be the last point of the kingdom of God, 1. Cor.
15.28.
whenas he says, To the end that God might be all in all things. And
therefore seeing god in this day, shall in very deed be all in all things, and
bring his chosen and faithful to a just perfection, it is not without cause
that this great day is called the day of our salvation, before which time our
salvation is not perfectly accomplished. For they whom God fills, are filled
with all riches, which no tongue ca^ utter, no ear has heard, nor eyes have
seen, nor yet understanding has conceived. Wherefore seeing these two things
are out of all question, our sleapers vaynely take in hand to prove, that the
holy servants of God who are departed this life, are not as yet entered into
the kingdom of God, because it shall be said unto them, come ye blessed of my
Father inherit etc.

Now this is easily answered, to be no good consequence, to say, that there is
now no kingdom, because as yet it is not perfect. But contrariwise, we say,
that the kingdom which is already begone, shall then be made perfect. Neither
would I have any man believe me herein, if I do not first of all manifestly
show by sure arguments of the scripture that this is true. 1. Cor. 15.
For this day, is called the kingdom of God, because that at that time he
shall in deed put under him, all contrary powers, subdue Satan with the breath
of his mouth, and destroy him through the brightness of his coming. 2. These. 2.
But he himself shall fully and wholye dwell and reign in his chosen.

For God cannot hereafter otherwise reign in himself, the^ he has reigned
from the beginning: whose Majesty can no way be either increased, or yet
diminished: But shall reign in such sort, as that he shall be openly showed
unto all the world. When then we pray to have his kingdom come, do we think
that he has now no kingdom? And besides, what say they then to this saying?
the kingdom of God is within you.

Wherefore, God reigns at this present in his elect, whom he guides and
governs by his holy spirit. He reigns also over the Devil, sin, and
death, when he commands the light to shine in darkness, by which, error, and
lying are confounded: and when as he will not suffer ye powers of darkness to
hurt the^, who have the sign of the Lamb in their forehead. He reigns also
(I say) even at that present, when as we pray, and say, let thy kingdom come.
And surely, he likewise reigns, when as he works power in his faithful,
and when he gives a law to Satan, appoynting him what to do. But then shall
his kingdom come, when as it shall be accomplished.

And then shall it be accomplished, whenas he shall fully show the glory of his
Majesty, unto the faithful, salvation, and unto the reprobate, shame and
confusion. Howbeit, is there any other thing that a man may say or believe of
the faithful and chosen? whose kingdom and glory, is to be in the glorious
kingdom of God: as to raygne as it were with God, and to be glorified with
him, and finally to be partakers of the divine glory. And although this
kingdom is not yet come, yet notwithstanding it may be seen in some measure.

For they which have in some measure the kingdom of God within them, begin
to be in the kingdom of God, and to reign with him, Math. 16.
against whom hell gates cannot prevail. For they are made righteous in god:
as it is said of them, Isaiah. 43.
All the seed of Israel shall be made righteous unto the Lord, and be also
blessed.

So that, to say truly, This kingdom is the building up of the Church, or the
aduauncing of the faithful, which thing S. Paul describes unto us: Ephe. 4.13
who by all degrees of ages might grow up unto a perfect man. Now these
Gallantes see here the beginning of this kingdom, and the increases thereof:
and so soon as they see these things with their eyes, they give no longer
place unto faith, neither can they believe that which is set before their
fleshly eyes.

But S. Paul tells them another matter, for thus he says, Col. 3.3.4.
Ye are all dead, and your life is hid with Christ in God. For when Christ who
is your life shall appear, ye also shall appear with him in glory. He says
that our life is hidd in God with Jesus who is our head: Now, he deferreth our
glory unto the day of the glory of Jesus Christ, the head of all the faithful,
and shall bring with him his members, as the head of them.

S. John also says the very self same thing. Dearly beloved, 1. John. 3.2
we are now the sons of God, but yet it does not appear what we shall be:
and we know that when he shall appear, we shall be like him: For we shall see
him as he is. Now, he says not by ye way, that we shall be made nothing for a
certain time, but because we are the children of God, who looks for
inheritance of our Father, he therefore sustayneth and vpholdeth our hope unto
that day, wherein the majesty and glory of God shall be made manifest in us all,
and we for our part, shall gloryfy our selves in him. Now, they will here
again marvel, whe^as they hear, the children of God who may not return
again unto their sound and perfect understanding, and feel this generation to
be immortal, which comes from God, whereby, we are made partakers of the
divine Immortalitye.

But let us go on with that which we have begone. Let them cry out as much
as they will, and say, that the blessed ones of God are not called unto the
kingdom before the great day of judgment, and that salvation is not promised
unto the children of God before that time. Yet this I say, that Jesus christ is
our head, whose kingdom and glory have not yet appeared: But if the members
should go before the head, it were a crooked kind of order.

And therefore, we shall now follow our Captain and King, whenas he shall
come into the glory of his Father, and sit in the seat of his Majesty. And yet
notwithstanding that which is in us from God, Math. 16. and 25.
to wit, our spirit, lives: because that Jesus Christ who is our life, is
living. For it were an absurd thing to say, yt our life were living, and yet
were utterly perished. And this life is in God, and with God: and is also
blessed, because it is in God. All these things do very well accord and agree
with the truth. For why is it said of them who are dead in the Lord, that they
are not yet delivered, or that they do not as yet enherite the kingdom of God?
It is because they live in hope of that which yet they have not, and have not
as yet attained unto the end of their felicyty.

Wherefore then are they not yet blessed? It is because they right well knowing
that God is merfifull unto them, and seeing a far of ye reward to come, do
reast themselves in the sure hope of the resurrection. And surely, so long as
we dwell in this earthly prison, we hope for the thing which we see not: and
against all hope, believe in hope: and that is the thing which Saint Paul
speaks, of Abraham: But, Romans 4.
when as the eyes of our understanding (who being now buried in this flesh,
have their sight troubled) shall be no more bleared, Heb. 10. ver. 27.
we shall then see the things we look for, and take pleasure in this hope.
For we are not a feared to speak thus after the manner of the Apostle, who says
to the contrary: That there remains none other thing for the reprobate: but a
fearful looking for of judgment, and violent fire, which shall devour them.
Seeing then that the thing which the reprobate look for is terrible, it is most
sure. that the thing which the chosen and faithful look for, is joyful, and
therefore of very right ought to be called most blessed.

And because my meaning is to instruct our adversaries, rather then to
constrayne them, let them give us the hearing, when as we shall draw the truth
out of a figure of the old Testament, and that not without good warrant. For
as S. Paul in the passing of the children through the re^^^a, 1. Cor. 10.1
handles by an Allegory the overthrow of Pharaon, and their deliverance
through the water: even so also let them give us leave to say that our Pharao^
is drowned in Baptism, our old man crucified, and our members mortified, that
we are buried with Jesus Christ, are delivered out of the captivity of the
Devil, and out of the tyra^nous government of death: albeit notwithstanding we
walk only in the wilderness, which is a dry and barren ground, Psalm. 142.
Except the Lord ^ay^^^ Manna from heaven to us, and makes the water come out
of the Ko^ke.

For our soul is like dry ground without water, which gapeth with drynes
before the Lord, and is pressed with want of all goodness, until such time as
he rayneth and droppeth the graces of his holy spirit thereon. And soon
after, they were brought into the land of promise under the conduct of Joshua
the son of Nawe, a land, flowing with milk and honey: That is to say, The
grace of God delivers us from the body of death by our Lord Jesus Christ.
Howbeit, this was not done without sweat, and shedding of blood. For then the
flesh chiefly stryueth and lays open her power and force against the
spirit. After we have made our abode upon the earth, we are then satisfied
with plenty. For we have white garments given unto us, and we recover our
reast. Howbe ^t Jerusalem ye chief City of ye kingdom, is not yet built and
set up. Neither does Salamon the king of peace, fully govern the kingdom as
yet.

And therefore the souls of ye faithful are at peace, after they are dead,
seeing they are g^tt^^ out of the thraldom of their enemy. For they are in the
midst of all riches: and as it is said: They shall go from plenty to plenty.
But when as the heavenly Jerusalem shall be lifted up on hye in her glory, and
the true Solomon, who is the Lord Jesus, even the king of peace, shall be
honorably placed in his Judgment seat, the true Israelites shall reign with
their true king and prince.

And therefore if we will borrow and fetch a similitude from worldly things,
we have war against an enemy, so long as we have to fight against flesh and
blood. Even then do we overcome our enemy, when as we are spoiled of this
sinful flesh, so that we be altogether with God. We shall triumph, and enjoy
the fruit of the victory, when as out head shall be lifted up in very deed
above death, to wit, when death shall be swallowed up into victory.

And this is our limit and end whereof it is written, I shall be filled, when
as I shall be awaked through the sight of thy glory. Now, all they who have
learned to obey God, and hear hts voice, may soon learn these things out of
the holy scriptures. All they also who have reverently, and discretly handled
the mysteries of God, have taught us these things, and as it were given them
us from hand to hand.

For the ancient Doctors have been bold to say thus much, Tertullian in his
book of the resurrection of the flesh
that the souls are verily in paradise, and in heaven: and notwithstanding,
have not as yet received their glory, or reward. For thus says Tertullian:
Both the reward and danger hang upon the coming of the resurrection. And yet
for all this, he teaches that ye souls, without all doubt are with God, and
do live in God before this coming.

And in another place, why should we not understand the bosom of Abraham to be
taken for a thing to receive the souls of the faithful, wherein is pictured
out the Image of faith, and the manner of both Judgments clearly showed.
Ire^eus also says after this sort, Seeing the Lord has passed through the
midst of the shadow of death, Ireneus in his ninth book against heresies.
where the souls of the dead were, and soon after, was bodily raised up
again, and after his resurrection, lifted up into the heavens. it is most
certain that the souls of his disciples, for whose love the Lord has wrought
all these things should go into an invisible place, which the Lord had
appointed for the^.

And that they should there remain until the resurrection, looking for their
own resurrection, taking again their bodies upon them, and perfectly rise up
again, to wit, bodily, and as the Lord rose again, even so should they also
come before the presence of God: For no Scholar is above his Master. etc.

Chrysostom also says, understand, what and how great a thing this is, that
Abraham is placed. And the Apostle S Paul also, when then shall this be
accomplished, that they might receive their reward? For if w^ come not to that,
the Father has foretold, that we shall no^ have the reward: For he deals
much like, for as a good father that loves his children very well, says unto
the children that are worthy of commendation, and do their duties well, that
he will not give them their meat until such time as ye other brothers be also
come. But art thou sorrowful, because thou receiuest it not all this while?
what shall become of Abell the^ who has overcome this long since, and is not
yet crowned, although he be placed?

What shall Noah do? And what shall the rest do that were in those days? For
we may see that they all tarried, and so must also the rest ^^^^y, which shall
come after thee. And anon after it is said: They ^^e prevented us in the
conflictes, but they shall not go before us in crowning: For there is but one
settled time for those that shall be crowned. And S. Augustine makes a
description, in many places of the secret receptacles, where the souls of the
faithful continue, until such time as they receive the crown and glory: But
in the mean while the reprobate are punished, looking for the just pain of
judgment. And in an Epistle which he writes unto S. Jerome, he says: The
soul, after the body is dead, shall be at reast, and in the end shall receive
the body into glory. Nevertheless, he reaches in an another place, that after
the ascension of Jesus Christ, the souls which l^ue in Christ, 2. Pet. 2.4.
ascend into heaven. And yet he is not contrary to himself. Jude.
For although it be true, that the wicked spirits are even now tormented. (as
S. Peter affirms) yet is this fire, whereunto the reprobate shall be cast at
the day of Judgment, said, to be prepared for the Devil. S. Peter has made
mention both of the one and of the other, when as he says: They are reserved
under everlasting chains unto the great day of Judgment. In which place, by
this speech of reservation, he means the pain, which yet they feel not: and
by the chains, is meant the pains which they presently feel. And S.
Augustine himself so handles it in another place, when he says: Thy last day
cannot be far of: and therefore make thy self ready for it.

For as thou passest out of this life, such one shall thou be found in the life
to come. And thou shall not be after this life by and by where ye saints
shall be, unto whom shall be said, come ye blested of my Father, inherit the
kingdom which is prepared for you from the foundations of the world. And who
knows not that thou shall not be there as yet? But thou may very well be
there where the rich proud man, being in the midst of his torments, sees
that poor wretch (sometime still of fores and blaines) in rest and peace a
great way from him. And thou being taken up into this rest, certainly look
most assuredly for this great day of judgment, wherein thou shall again
receive thy body, and be changed and made like unto the Angels.

Neither do I mislike of that which S. Augustine in another place, for
Instruction sake, deals withal, so he may meet with a sound and modest
Interpretor: to wit, that there are many degrees of the soul: The first is the
quickening of life, or life it self: The second, understanding: The third,
art: The fourth, power: The fifth, quietness: The sixth, entrance: And the
seventh, contemplation. Or if any man had rather say thus, The first is from
the body, The second to the body, The third about ye body, The fourth unto it
self. The fifth in it self, The sixth unto God, The seventh in God.

I have not thought it a miss to bring in here these words, to the end to
show the meaning of this holy man herein, ^ther the^ strayghtly to bind any,
much less my self to the necessity of this distinction. For S Augustine
himself (as I think) wishes it not, but meant to show as plainly as he could
that there is a going on of the soul, which it shall never fully attain unto,
until the day of judgment.

Finally, for this day of judgment, with which they so greatly de^fend
themselves, there is an argument come to my mind, which may pluck this error
clean up by the roots. For in our creed, which is the very effect of all our
belief, we confess the resurrection of the flesh, and not of the soul.
Neither is there any place left for their wrangling, whenas they will tell us,
that by this word flesh, is meant the whole man: We grant the^ that it is
sometimes so taken, but in this place we flatly deny it them, whereas words
which are very plain and easy to be understood are set forth unto the rude
and ignorant people.

In very deed the pharysies who were stout defenders and and mayntayners of the
resurrection, and who had always this word, resurrection in their mouths, did
not yet, notwithstanding, many times believe that there was a soul.

Yet do they still lay hold on us and force us to stick unto this dangerous
rock. For they now allege the words of S. Paul wherein he tells us yt we
(...) miserabler then all men, if the dead did not rise again. And thus they
frame their Argument, what needs say they any resurrection, if we be blessed
before the resurrection? But that which is more, what is that great misery of
christians, which surpasses the misery of all men, if this be true that they
are at rest, whiles the residue are so grievously tormented, and after so
wonderful a manner? And here I give them warning, that if I meant to dally and
shift (as they go about none other thing but to abuse the ignorant people) I
would find sufficyent passage enough to escape. For, who shall let me from
following of other good men, that have disputed, not of the last general
resurrection, in which, after the corruption of our bodies, we shall receive
again incorruptible bodies, but of the life which remains for us after this
mortal life, for it is an ordinary and common manner in the scripture, to let
us understand by this speech of the resurrection, what the blessed and
everlasting life is?

For when we hear it spoken that the Saduces denied the resurrection, it is
not referred to the body, but is simply spoken according to their opinion, that
after a man be dead, there is no memory left of him. And hereof is a probable
Argument, that whatsoever, wherewith S. Paul helps himself to stre^gthen
that, which he has said, should be overthrown in one word, if it were
answered, that it is very true that the souls live, and that the bodies
which shall turn to duste, can by no means rise again:

Let us now then come to examples, first as touching this saying, they which
are dead in Jesus Christ are lost, this might the philosophers have easily
confuted, who have mightily and constantly defended the immortality of the
soul. And as for this saying, What shall they do who are baptized for the
dead? It is very easily answered: For the souls live after death. And to this
which follows, wherefore are we also continually in danger? It may be
au^swered, that we lose this frail life, to recover Immortal life, wherein we
shall live a great deal better. We have already bestowed many words, whereof
the teachable have had no need. For, the Apostle himself says, that we are
miserable, if our hope in Jesus Christ stretched it self no farther then unto
this present life. which thing, Psalm. 73. ver. 2.3.
even by the testimony of the prophet is out of all doubt, who confesses: that
his feet had almost foultred, and his steps had well nigh slipped, when he saw
the prosperity of the proud and wicked.

And to say truly, if we look but down unto our feet, we will say those to
be blessed which have all things come to pass as they would wish. But if our
eyes look farther of, we will call them blessed, who have the Lord for their
God, in whose hand is the issue of death. Howbeit, we will bring some thing
which shall be a great deal more certain, by which we will not only repulse
their objections, but also declare the true, and natural meaning of the
Apostle, be glad without strife of words to as many as would meekely, and
curtisly learn.

For if there be no resurrection of the body, the faithful may of very right
be called accursed, yea, were there none other reason but this, that they are
so often vexed, hurt, beaten, and violently handled, and do suffer in their
bodies such extreme wantes, all which they think to be appointed and ordained
for an everlasting blessedness, because they are disapointed of this hope. For,
is there any thing, I say not, more miserable, but rather more ridiculous the^
to see and behold the bodies of those, who all the live long day, do nothing
else but sport and laugh, in the fulness of all delights, and pleasures: and
contrariwise, to see the bodies of feeblished Christians, dead through hunger
and cold, and pressed with all kinds of violences, if the bodies both of the
one and the other pearished alyke.

For this thing could I very well confirm by the words of the Apostle, which
he sets down anon after, when he says, wherefore are we continually in
danger? I daily suffer death for your glory. etc. Let us eat and drink, for
to morrow we shall dye. It were a great deal better for us, says he, that
this saying should take place in us, as to say: Let us eat, and drink, if
these torments and shames, which we suffer in our bodies be not changed into
the glory which we hope after. which thing should never be, without it were in
the resurrection of the body. Furthermore, although I should pass over this
defense, yet could I bring in another reason, that we are more miserable then
all men, if there were not a resurrection.

For although we be very blessed before the resurrection: yet is it no
blessedness without the resurrection. For we say, that for the same cause the
spirits of the Saints and of the faithful are very blessed, for so much as
they reast in the hope of the blessed resurrection: and therefore if there were
no such thing, all this blessedness should turn to nothing. wherefore, the
saying of the Apostle is most true, that we are more miserable then all men, if
there be no resurrection. And this doctrine is not against these words, that
the spirits of the Saints, are more blessed before the resurrection, but yet
it is by reason of the resurrection. They lay before us also that percell of
scripture which is written in ye Epistle to ye Hebrews, of ye aunci- Fathers,
where it is said. All these dyed in faith, and received not the promises, but
saw the^ a far of, and believed them, and received them thankefully, and
confessed that they were strangers and Pilgrims on the earth. For they that
say such things, declare plainly that they seek a Country.

And surely, if they had been mindful of that Country, from whence they
came, they were at leisure to have returned thither. But now they desire
another much better, which is an heavenly one. And now let us se how these our
sleapers frame their jolly Argument. For, say they, If they desire the heavenly
Country: Then do they not inherit it. But we frame it after this manner, and
say, If they desire it, then have they a being: for there can be no desire,
without there be some to desire. Now I would draw but this out of them: That
where there is a desire, there must also be a feeling of good and evil, which
desire must either follow the thing that seems good, or eschew that which
seems evil. Why, say they, this desire reasteth wholly in God.

Now tell me I beseech you, is it possible to think or devise a more ridiculous
saying? And to say truly, you shall see that of these two points, we shall
gain unto our selves one of them, either that God desiereth some better thing
then he has, or else that there is something in God which is not of God. And
this makes me think, yt these Gallauntes do buriest at an earnest and
w^^ghtie matter.

But now let us leave to speak of all this gear, and see, what the time, or
space of returning, means? let them therefore return with a good mind, and
hear a better thing then this fantastical opinion, which hitherto they have
held.

The Apostle speaks of Abraham and of his posteritye, who dwelt out of their
Country amongst strangers, And they differed not greatly, as it were from
banished men, or else as Seaiournes, because they had scarsely any Tents, or
Cabines to cover them withal, following the commandment which the Lord
gandue unto Abraham, which was this, That he should leave his parents and
kinsefolkes, and get him out of the land.

For God had promised them a thing which as yet he had not manifested and
performed. And so they saw the promises a far of, and dyed in a sure faith,
that it would one day come to pass, that God would fulfill his promises. By
which faith they confessed that they had no certain and sure abiding or
dwelling place on earth, but that they had a Country which was not on the
earth, and which they wished for, to wit, heaven. And in the latter end of the
chapter he shows that all they whom he there spoke of, received not the
last promise to the end they might not come to perfection without us.

And so if these our sleapers had observed the propriety of this saying, they
had never raised up so many troubles. Now it is a wonder to see how blind they
are in so great light. But yet this is a more strange thing, that they give us
bread in stead of stones: to wit, whiles they go about to overthrow the
cause, they maintain and uphold it.

Now, for the matter which is spoken of Thabita in the Acts of the Apostles,
Acts. 9.40
they think they have, by it, a suer pillar to lean unto. For she, being a
scholar of Jesus Christ, full of good works and a good Alms woman, was
raised again by S. Peter. And therefore say they, Thabita had great wrong, If
it be true that we say. That the souls which are separated from the bodies,
do live in God and with God: because she was taken away from the company of
God, and from that blessed life, to return into this sea of wickedness. As
though we could not return the self and same thing again upon their own
hedds. For be it, that she sleapt, or that she was nothing, yet was she
blessed, because she dyed in the Lord.

And therefore it was not expedient that she should return in that life which
she had finished. They them selves have snarled this knot, and therefore let
the^ first of all loose it again if they please. For it is good reason, that
they should be subject to that law, which they make for others. Notwithstanding
we will easily enough undo it. For, the state and condition which is prepared
for us after death, which S. Paul speaks of himself, is put over to all the
faithful, to wit, Philip. 1.21
that in death is advantage, and that the best being is with Christ. And yet
Saint Paul says of Epaphodite (who without doubt was one of the number of the
faithful) That God has pity of him, because he had delivered him from a
great sickness, Phil. 2.27.
and restored him to his health.

Now these Gallauntes who deal with the mysteries of God so indiscreetly, and
so irreverently, might say that this mercy and compassion, was cruel dealing.
But we say, and confess it, to be mercy: because the mercy of God has certain
degrees: For this it is said: Those whom he has chosen, he has sanctified:
Romans 8.^0.
and whom he has sanctified, them has he also glorified. Does not the Lord
then exercise his mercy, when as he more and more sanctifies us? Let us then
say thus much, If it be the good will of God (as S. Paul says to have Christ
to be magnified in our bodies by life, is not this mercy? what, is it for us to
appoint God a law to work miracles?

And it is sufficient, that the glory of the Aucthor shines in them, for what
matter were it, if we say that God, in the doing hereof regarded not the
commodities of Thabita, but the poor who wept, and showed the garments which
she had made for them, at whose prayers she was raised up again? For S. Paul
thinks this to be a reason good enough for him, that he lived, although it
had been better for him in deed to have gone to the Lord. And after he had said
that God had had compassion of Epaphrodite, he adds and not only of him, but
upon me also: to the end I should not be out of measure sorrowful. Now go
your ways, and quarrel with God, because he has again delivered unto the
poor a careful woman, for the relieuing of their necessity. For although we
see not the reason of this deed, yet has Jesus Christ very well deserved, to
be glorified, both by our life, and by our death: Seeing that he dyed and role
again, that he might (...) Lord, both of quick and dead. Romans 14.9.


They bring in David also for a mainteiner, and defender of their cause, who
notwithstanding is our very good patron: But they so shamelesly, and
sencelesly, allege him, as that I am ashamed and grieved to recite many of
their Arguments which they borrow of him. Howbeit, we will faithfully recite
those, which we have heard they do abuse. first they are not ashamed to
allege this place: I have said, ye are Gods, and ye are all the children of
the most high: Psalm. 82.6.7.
But yet ye shall all dye as men etc. Now harken to their exposition: in deed
say they, the faithful are Gods, and the children of God: But yet
notwithstanding they dye and fall even as the reprobate do: so that, the state
and condition of them both is all alyke, until such time as the Lambs shall
be separated from the Goats. Hereunto we answer them with the saying of
Jesus Christ: That they which are called Godds, are they unto whom the word of
God is delivered to publishe: to wit, the ministers of God. And also all
Judges. that carry the sword of God in their hands, from whose Majesty they
have received the same. John. 10.34.35.
And although the interpretation of Jesus Christ failed us, Exodus 22.
and the use of scripture would not serve our turns, yet the place it self, is
clear enough of it self, wherein, unjust Judges and such as bear with the
wicked are reproved. These men I say, are called Gods, because they represent
the person of God, having pre-eminence and authority over the rest. Howbeit
they are warned, that they shall have a Judge unto whom they must render and
yeald an account of their office.

Now, Psalm. 146.4.
let us hear the second place which they allege, his spirit departs, and
returns into his earth: and even the^ all their thoughts shall pearish. In
this place they take the spirit for wind: and that the man shall from thence
return into the earth, to wit, that he shall be nothing else but earth: and
all his thoughts pearish, yt they should remain, if man had a soul Howbeit we
are not so full of cunning: for we call every thing by his name: we call a
spirit, a spirit: which when it goes out of a man, man returns into his
earth, out of which he was taken, as we have at large declared. It remains
now for us to see what this saying means, and all his thoughts pearish. we
are hereby admonished, not to put our trust, which ought to be Immortal in
men. For, it should be uncertain, and very unstable, considering that the life
of man passes so soon away. For the manifestation of the meaning hereof, the
Prophet has said yt their thoughts pearish, That is to say, whatsoever they
imagine or take in hand so long as they live, is brought to naught, and turns
to nothing. As in a another place is said: Psalm. 112.10.
The wicked shall see it and be angry: he shall gnash with his teeth, and
consume away: the desire of the wicked shall pearish. And in stead of pearishe,
it is said in another place, shall be brought to naught: Psalm. 33.10
The Lord shall bring to naught the devises of the people: Likewise: Take
advise, and it shall come to naught. Which thing the virgin Mary means by
the drift in her song, Isaiah. 8.
saying: He has scattered the proud in the Imagination of their hearts.

And soon after, they bring in this third place: Psalm. 74.39
He remembered that they were but flesh, yea, a wind that passes and comes
not again. And they make ado and say, that this word spirit, is set down
for wind, as it is often times so taken: wherein they understand not, that
they do not only, abolishe the Immortality of the soul, but do also cut in
sunder the hope of the resurrection. For if there be a resurrection, it is very
certain, that the spirit returns and if it return not, then is there no
resurrection. Wherefore it were best for them to desire, that this folly might
not be imputed unto them, then opinatiuely follow it, because such a wicked and
wayward demand might be granted the^. And this we only say, to the end that
all men might see what an open way we have to escape, if we thought of nothing
else, but of the refuting of their Arguments. For we will of purpose confess,
that that this word, wind, agrees very well in this place. For we consent that
me^ are like unto the vauering and inco^sta^t wind which blows, now in this
corner, an other while in that. But if they think to draw this to serve their
turns, they err, not knowing the scriptures, whose manner is to show by the
circumstaunce of words, sometimes the fraylenes and weakness of the state of
man, and otherwhiles the shortness of this life. For when Iobe speaks of man,
he says: That he shoots forth, and blossommeth as a flower, and is cut
down: he vanishes also as a shadow, and continues not, and what other
meaning has he by this description, but that man is frail and transitory, and
like unto a withering flower. And Isaiah also is appointed to cry out and say:
Isaiah. 40 6, 7.
That all flesh is grass, and all the grass thereof is as the flowers of the
field: The grass withers, and the flower fades: But the word of the Lord
endures for ever.

Go to now, Let these men gather in a word, that the soul of Man withers and
fades: and let them be more sharp sighted, to see how blockish a preacher
this is, 1. Pet. 1.23
who proves by this, that all the faithful are immortal, because they are
gotten again by an incorruptible seed, to wit, by the word of God, which is
sure, and lasts for ever. Now the scripture calls all those which put their
trust in this life, a withering flower, and a wind that passes, who have made
unto the^ selves an everlasting abode here in this world, thinking to reign
without end: not looking to that end, by which their condition shall be
changed, and go into some place else where. Of which people also the Prophet
speaks, who have said: Isaiah. 28.15.
We have made a covenant with death, and with hell are we at an agreement:
Whereby he laugheth to skorne their vain hope, for he attributes not that
unto life, which unto them, is the beginning of an evil life. And affirms
that they have an end and do dye: so that it had been better for them that
they had never been, then (...) be after that manner. The like saying also is
in another psalm: Psalm. 103.13.
for it is said: That as a loving Father has compassion in his children so
has the Lord compassion on all those that fear him. For he knows whereof we
men are made: and he himself remembers that we are but dust. The days of man
are as grass, as a flower of the field so florisheth he: For the wind goes
over it, and it is gone, and ye place thereof shall know it no more. Now, if
they will by these words affirm, that the spirit pearisheth and becomes
nothing. I tell them again, let them beware they lay not open a place for the
Epicures, if any of them shall arise to corrupt the belief which both they,
and we have of the resurrection: For there is too too great a number of such
scoffers. For by the self same reason, they will frame this Argument, That the
spirit returns no more into the body, seeing it is said, that it shall not
know the place thereof any more. But they will say, That they make hereon a
false collection: because the places of the resurrection are very manifest
against this manner of reasoning. Yea and they themselves make an ill
collection, whose Argument is common with ye rest. And yt saying in the book
called Ecclesiasticus, is almost like, for there it is said: The number of a
man's days for ye more part is an hundredth years: and no man has certain
knowledge of his death. As drops of rain are unto the sea: and as a gravel
stone is in comparison of the sand: so are a thousand years, to the day
everlasting. Therefore is the Lord loving and patient with men, and powers out
his mercy upon them. And therefore they must needs confess, that the Proyhet
had another meaning then that which they dream of: That God of his goodness,
has compassion of those, whom he has allowed to be his, and that only
through his mercy: and that if he pull back his hand never so little from them,
they return into dust, from whence they were taken. And a little after he
makes a short description of the life of man, comparing it unto a flower,
which springing to day, is no better then grass the next morning. So, that if
it were to be said, that the spirit of man pearisheth, and comes to naught,
yet were not their error any whit strengthened thereby. For when we say that the
spirit of man is immortal, we do not affirm that it is able to stand and
abide against the hand of God, or to continue fast and sure without his power.
Now, God lyketh not, nor is not pleased that we should thus blaspheme. But we
say, that the spirit is vpholden by the hand and blessing of God. And so
defends Ireneus also the Immortality of the soul with us: Ireneus in his 3.
book against Marcian.
and yet would he have us understand: That by nature we are mortal, and that
God alone is Immortal. And he speaks it after this fort: To the end we might
not be puffed up with vain glory, as if we had life as it were of our selves,
neither yet proudly lift up our selves against God: But that we might learn by
experience, That it proceeds from his almightines, and not from our nature,
that we have a firm and everlasting perseueraunce. And thus ye see what the
controversy is, which we have against David, whom they make so mighty an
Adversary against us. Now he says, that if the Lord take his mercy away from
man, that then he comes to naught and pearisheth.

And we for our part do teach, that he is firm, and sure and vpholden by the
loving kindness and power of God: and the reason is this: That God is alone
Immortal: 1. Tim. 3.
and whatsoever has life, it comes from him.

The fourth place is this, My soul is filled with evils, Psalm. 88.3.
and my life draws near to the grave. I am counted among them that go down
to the pit, and am as a man without strength, free among the dead, like the
slain lying in the grave, whom thou remembrest no more, and they are cut of
from thy hand. What? say they: If they have been cut of by the power of God,
and fallen away from his providence, and from out of his remembrance, do they
not then cease to be? As if I could not return them this Argument into their
own lappes and bosoms. What and if they be cut of by the power of God: and
that there is more remembrance of them, how is it possible for them to be
again? and besides, what shall become of the resurrection? On the other side,
how shall we reconcile these two places? The souls of the righteous are in the
hand of God: Wised. 3.1.
or to the end we may set before them other sure Oracles of God. The righteous
shall be had in everlasting remembrance. Psalm. 112.6
By this we see that they are not fallen away from the hand of God, neither
has he forgotten them. But let us rather by this manner of speech, conceive
the grief, and sorrowful feeling of an affected and troubled man that makes
his co^playnt unto God, declaring that it went very narrowly, that he had not
been left in destruction with the wicked: of whom it is said, yt the Lord has
no knowledge, and has forgotten them: because there names are not written in
the book of life: and plucked away his hand from them, because he guides not,
nor governs not them by his spirit.

The first place is taken out of the same psalm, Psalm. 88.10.11.12.
where it is said: Will thou show a miracle to the dead: or shall the dead rise
and praise thee? shall thy loving kindenes be declared in the grave, or thy
righteousness in the land of forgetfulness? It is likewise said in another place:
Psalm. 115.17.18.
The dead praise thee not, O Lord, neither any that go down into the place of
silence. But we which live, will praise the Lord from henceforth, and for ever.
It is also said: Psalm. 30.9.
What profit is in my blood, when I go down into the pit: shall the dust
give thanks unto thee, or shall it declare thy truth? They bring in also the
song of Ezechias, which is of the same effect, Isaiah. 38.18.29.
where it is said: The grave cannot confess thee: death cannot praise thee:
they that go down into the pit, can not praise thy truth. But the living,
the living, he shall confess thee, as I do this day: and the Father to the
children shall declare thy truth. And that saying also which is written in
Ecclesiasticus: Thankefulnes pearisheth from the dead, Ecclesi. 17.28.
as though he were not: But the living, and he that is sound of heart, prayseth
the Lord. Here we make answer, that in all these places which are recited,
that the dead who are departed out of this world, according to the common law
of nature, are not in this place simply spoken of: It is not simply said, that
God is no longer praised, when we are once dead: but it is partly meant, that
none sing praises unto God, saving such as have felt his mercy and goodness. It
is also partly meant, That his name is not gloryfied after we are dead: For
then he shows not his benefits unto men, as he shows them whiles they are
upon the earth. And now let us consider of these things one after another, and
handle them in order: that we may thereby show the meaning of every one of them.

And here in the first place, we are to learn this: to wit, that though it
be so, that by death, is very often, and as it were always meant, the
separation of this life, and by this word hell, the grave, yet shall we many
times find in the scripture, that these words are taken for the wrath and
displeasure of God: so that it is said of them, from whom God estrangeth
himself, and whom he throws down by his Judgments, and bruseth by his
hand, that they go down into hell, or dwell in hell. For, to speak properly,
hell signifies not the pit or grave, Isaiah. 5.14
but destruction or confusion: as in this place. Hell has enlarged it self,
and swallowed up many.

It is also said in another place: Math. 11.25.
And thou Capernaum which art lifted up into heaven: I tell thee truly, thou
shall be brought down into hell. And although this figurative speech be found
throughout all the holy scriptures, yet is it most chiefly used in the psalms,
as in this. psalm: Psalm. 55.15
Let death seze upon them let them go down quick into hell, or into the
grave, Likewise: Psalm. 28.1.
O my God, be not deaf toward me, least if thou answer me not, I be like
unto them that go down into the pit. Psalm. 30.3.
And again, O Lord thou have brought up my soul out of hell or out of the
grave: thou have revived me from them that go down into the pit. Psalm. 9.17.
Also, the wicked shall turn into hell, and all nations that forget God.
Likewise: If the Lord had not helped me, I had almost dwelt in hell, Psalm. 94.17
or in silence. Also: our bones lie scattered at the graves mouth. Psalm. 141.7
Item, He has smitten my life down to the earth: Psalm. 143.3.
he has laid me in the darkness, as they that have been dead, long ago. It is
also written in S. Luke, Luke. 16.23.
speaking of the wicked rich man: And lifting up his eyes when he was in hell
in torments. etc. Likewise in S: Matthew: Math. 11.25.
And thou Capernaum, which art lifted up into heaven, thou shall be brought
down to hell. In all these places, by this word Hell, the place is not so
greatly understood of, as the state of those, whom God has condemned, and
adjudged to banishment.

And that is the confession which we make in our Creed, That Jesus Christ
descended into hell: that is to say: That his Father plunged him into all the
sorrows of death for our sakes, that he suffered all the torments of death,
and all the afflictions, terrors, and fears thereof, and was in very deed
afflicted: although it is said before that he was buried. Contrariwise, they
that feel the mercy and loving kindenes of the Lord, are said, Psalm. 133.3
That they live, and shall live. For there the Lord appointed the life and
blessing for ever. Psalm. 33.19
Likewise: To the end he might deliver their souls from death, and to preserve
them in famine. Psalm. 52.5
Also, God shall pluck thee out of the tabernacle, and root thee out of the
la^d of the living Likewise: Psalm. 56.13.
That I mighr wallke before god in the light of the living. Psalm. 116.
Also, I will give thanks unto the Lord, in the land of the living. But now yt
we may make an end, let us content our selves with one testimony, which so
naturally describes both the one, and the other, as that although we should
say never a word, yet lays it forth our meaning very notably. The words are
these: Psalm. 49.6 7.9.10.14
Who trust in their Goods, and boast themselves in the multitude of their
riches. Yet a man can by no means redeem his brother: he cannot give his
ransom to God: although he take never so great pains, and live never so
long. Shall not he see the pit, when as he sees the wise do die? The foolish
and ignorant shall both pearish. They are laid into the grave like sheep: and
death deuoureth them. And the righteous shall have dominion over them in the
morning: their Glory also shall consume, and the grave shall be their house.
But God shall deliver my soul from the power of the grave, when he has
received me. The sum and effect hereof is this. That they which put their
trust in riches and in the strength of them, in the end do by, and descend
into the grave: For the rich and the poor, the fool and the wise, do all
pearish. But he which trusts in the Lord, shall be delivered from the power
of hell.

Now I say and defend it, that these words death and hell which they have laid
before us in the verses of the psalms, aforesaid, and in the song of Ezechiah,
can no otherwise be taken. And I further say and affirm, that this may very
well be proved by certain and sure Arguments. For be it that Jesus Christ the
son of God, who is the head of all the faithful, and be it that the Church,
which is ye body of Jesus Christ speaks in these verses, will thou show
miracles unto the dead. etc. And likewise, what profit is in my blood. etc.

That death is to be abhorred, as a detestable and fearful thing: and she
flees it as much as is possible, and prays that it might not be laid upon
her. Which thing also Ezechiah desiereth in his song. Wherefore then fear they
to hear only the name of death, if they are thus certain, that God is
merciful and favorable unto them? Is it because they should be no more any
thing But they would eskape out of this world that is full of troubles, full of
grievous temptations, and of all disquietnes, to come unto a sovereign and
blessed reast. And because they should be no more any thing, they should feel
no more any evil, which is neither prolonged by their death, nor yet set
forward by their life. Let us now turn our selves and look upon the examples
of the rest of the Saints, and see if the like matter has fallen so out unto
them. First, when Noah dyed, he bewailed not his estate. Gene. 49.
Nei- did Abraham once make any sorrow. Jacob also rejoiced amidst his last
sithes, in that he looked for the saving health of ye Lord. Job, wept not.
Moses hearing his last hour to be at hand, was no whit troubled. And for any
thing that may be seen, they all embrased death very courageously, and
willingly. we also very often hear these aunsweres of the faithful, when the
Lord called them: Lo, here I am Lord. And therefore it cannot be chosen, but
that there was some other thing, which enforced Jesus Christ and his faithful
to make such complayntes. Neither must me stand in doubt that when Jesus Christ
offered himself, to suffer punishment for us, but that he fought against ye
power of the Devil, against all the torments of hell, and the sorrows of
death: all which things should have been overcome in our flesh, that they
might have lost yt right, which they had in us.

Seeing then it is so, that in this conflict he satisfied the rigor, and
severity of the Justice of God, and fought against hell, death, and the
Devil, he besought his Father that he would not forsake him in the midst of
so great distresses, nor deliver him into the power of death, craving none
other thing at his Fathers hand, but that our weakness, which he bare in his
body, might be delivered from the power of the Devil, and death. And this is
the faith, whereupon we must now stay our selves. that ye punishment of sin
committed in our flesh, which was to be paid in the self same flesh, for the
satiffying of the righteousness of God, has been discharged and paid in ye
flesh of Jesus Christ which was ours. And therefore Christ never fledd the
death but this horrible feeling of the severity of God, which required that he
should be chastised with death, for the saving of us. Will thou know from what
affection and mind this voice came? I know not which way better to express
it, but even by another speech coming from himself, when as he said, My God
my God, why have thou forsaken me? He calls then these dead, and buried, and
those that were carried into the land of forgetfulness, the forsaken people of
God. After this manner, the saints who were taught by ye spirit of God, used
not these speeches, to drive death away, and to thrust God back that called
them: but to the end they might ^schew the Judgment, wrath, and severity of
God, by which they felt Gods chastisement with death. And because they shall not
think that I make this of mine own head, I ask this question, to wit,
whether a ^aythfull man calls a simple and natural death, the wrath, and
terror of God? I think our sleapers are not so shameless, as to dare to affirm
this. And yet ye Prophet thus interprets this death in these places: Psalm.
88.16
Thine indignations go over me, and thy fear has troubled me. He adds
besides, many other things, which apperteyne to the wrath of God. Another
place also there is which says: For his anger lasts but a while, Psalm. 30.5
but in his favor is life. But I exhort the Readers to run unto the book: To
the end they might have a far surer belief, of these two whole psalms and
of the song of Ezechiah. For by this mean they shall not be deceived: and I
eftsoons shall get credit with those parties, who read them with a good and
sound Judgment. And therefore thus I conclude, tha^ death in these places, is
to feel the wrath, and horrible Judgment of God, and to be feare^ and troubled
with the feeling thereof. Even so Ezechiah seeing that he must leave ye Realm,
t^ be put out for a spoil to the enemies, and that he leaft no children, of
whom might descen^ the hope of the Gentiles, his soul was troubled with these
things, which were signs and tokens of Gods anger and punishment, and no
signs of the fear of death: For in deed h^ afterward dyed, without desiering
to be delivered from death. To be short, I confess tha^ death of it self is
evil, because it is the curse and punishment for sin: For on the one side,
i^ is of it self, full of fear and desolation, and on the other side, it
drives those, who feel that God sends it them, in his anger, for their
punishment, eue^ to the very last cast of desperation. And there is but one
seasoning which is able to mittigate or ease this so great sharpnes of death,
and that is to know in the midst of the anguishes thereof, that God is
favorable, and a merciful Father, and has Christ for his guide and companion.
Now, as many as are not thus seasoned, death is to them confusion, and
everlasting destruction. Wherefore it is impossible for them to praise God in
death.

And as for this verse: The dead praise thee not. etc. Is a conclusion of the
praises of the people, giving thanks unto God, because he defended them from
danger by his mighty power. This is then the meaning, If the Lord had suffered
us to be overcome, and that we had fallen under the power of over enemies: They
would then have lifted themselves up against his Majesty, and gloryed in them
selves, that they had overcome the God of Israel. But now, after the Lord had
suppressed and abated their pride, and after that he had delivered us from the
cruelty of our enemies, through a mighty hand and an outstretched arm, the
Gentiles could not say, where is now their God? who showed himself in very
deed to be the living God. Neither can his mercy come ever in question, which
he so notably has manifested. And here, they whom God has forsaken, and
whose power and loving kindenes, they have not felt, are called dead. As if he
had forsaken his people through the cruelty and unmercifulness of the wicked.
This saying is fully confirmed by the prayer that is set down in the book of
the prophet Baruck. There it is said: O Lord open thine eyes, Baruck. 2.17.18.
and behold, for the dead that are in the graves, and whose souls are out of
their bodies, give unto the Lord, neither praise, nor righteousness: But the
soul that is vexed with the greatness of sin, and he that goes crookedly,
and weak, and the eyes that fail, and the hongry soul, will give thee praise
and righteousness, O Lord. In this place without doubt, a man may very well see,
that under the name of the dead, are comprehended all these, which are
afflicted and thrown down by the hand of God, and fallen into destruction:
and that a sorrowful, rent, and torn soul is such a one, as being void of
her own power, and not staying it self upon her own confidence, runs unto
the Lord, calls upon him, and looks for help at his hands. If any man
would take all these things,, as it were by the discribing of a person, he may
soon have an easy order to come to the manifest laying of them open, because
that in persons the deed is taken: and when we hear this saying of the dead,
in this sense, is meant, death. For the Lord wins no commendatio^ for his
mercy, and goodness, when as he afflicts, punishes, and destroys, (although
the punishments be just.) But even then creates he a people unto himself, to
sing and celebrate the praise of his goodness, when he delivers those who are
afflicted, cast down, and fallen into despair, and lifts them again into
hope. But because these sleapers might not wrangle and say, that we run into
crooked figures, I answer that these things may also be taken without any
figure.

In the second place, I have said, yt there might be a naughty and false
conclusion of these places, that the saints after they are dead are no body,
and do no longer praise the Lord. But I say again, that they rather praise
him, which is, they tell fourth, and declare the benefits of God unto others,
who do praise him. And these words do not only bear this sense, but do
also requier it. For to declare and tell fourth, and that the father gives his
children knowledge, is not to conceive the glory of God in spirit and
understanding, but to worship him with the mouth, to the end that others might
hear. But if they would here disturb me of my purpose and talk, and say that
it is lawful for them to do the same, if they be in heaven with God (as we
believe) to this I answer, that to be in heaven and to live with God, is not
to talk one with another, and one to hear another, but only to take pleasure
in God, to feel his good will, and to reast in him. And therefore if they have
any other reuelatio^s else where let them look well unto them. For, as for my
self, I will never go about to seek after such crooked questions, which
serve more to stir up debate and strife, then to set fourth Religion, and the
fear of God.

Neither does that saying which is written in the book of Ecclesiasticus te^d
to this end: That the souls of the dead do pearish: But when he exhorts
that we, in good time, and as occasion serves, might give thanks unto God, he
soon after teaches, that after death, there is no more time to praise him:
That is to say, that there is no place left for repentance. Now, if there be
any amongst them that do yet murmr and are not contented, saying, this
touches us nothing at all, that destruction it self must come unto children:
I answer for the faithful, Psalm. 118.17. Psalm. 84 4.
that they shall not dye, but live, and shall set fourth the works of the
Lord. They that dwell in the house of the Lord, Psalm. 146.2.
will praise him for ever.

The sixte place which they allege out of the psalms is this: I will praise
the Lord during my life, and as long as I have any being, I will sing psalms
unto my God. And thus they reason: If a man must praise the Lord so long as he
lives, and has any being, he will not praise him after death, and when he
has no being. And because, as I think, that they speak this meryly and in
the way of jesting, even so will I also for their sakes speak some thing by
the way of mirth.

When Eneas, as it is written in Virgile, promised unto his hostess to
acknowledge that humanity, and curtesy which he had received at her hands, as
long as he thought of her, meant he hereby, that he would sometimes forget her:
when as he said, So long as my soul shall stir in my body: did he think by
this, that he would acknowledge the good turn after death, in these fabulous
fields.

God forbidd that we should suffer this wrong to be done unto this place of
scripture, least soon after we suffer our selves to be overcome of that cursed
heretic Heluidius. And this I speak in good earnest. And to the end they
should not find fault with us, that we have not done as much as them selves, I
will yeald them five times as good a reckoning hereof. Psalm. 30.12.
First where it is said: I will give thanks unto thee O Lord my God for ever
and ever. Psalm. 34.1
Likewise I will always give thanks unto the Lord, his praise shall continually
be in my mouth: Also, Psalm. 52.9.
I will always praise thee, because thou have done this. Likewise, O my God, my
king, Psalm. 145.1.
I will extol thee, and bless thy name for ever and ever. Psalm. 61.8.
Also So will I always sing praise unto thy name for ever. And even very now
they see, that David who was so much their friend, fights here sharply
against them. And therefore let us make no count of these Arguments which are
built upon the point of a nedle, or upon so weak a foundation.

The Seventh place which they allege is this: Psalm. 39.13
Stay thine anger from me, that I may recover my strength, before I go hence,
and be no more. And therewith they join that which is said in Iobe: Job. 10.
ver. 1.21.22.
Let me a little complain my sorrow and grief, before I go hence and shall
not return, even into the land of darkness and shadow of death, into a land I
say, dark, as darkness it self, and into the shadow of death; where is none
order, but the light is there as darkness.

All this gear serves them to no purpose. For these are words full of heat,
and of a troubled conscience, in truth expressing, and lively representing as
in a Table, the affection of those who being touched to the quick, with the
fearful Judgment of God, are no longer able to bear his hand.

And therefore these men pray that if they deserve that God should forsake
them, yet, that they might at the least in some small measure, and that at the
last cast, gasp for life before the Judgment of God, wherewith they are
shaken and terrified. And we ought not to marvel, although the faithful
servants of God are driven to this point. For it is said: 1. Sam. 2.6
That it is the Lord that kills, and makes alive, brings down to the
grave, and rayseth up. And this saying: not to be, signifies, to be separated
from God.

For if in this case, there is no man that has his being, but he that is, they
that are not in him have no true being, because they are for ever confounded,
and cast out from before his face. Moreover, I see not how we should be so
greatly offended with this manner of speech, if it be simply said of the dead,
that they are not, so that this saying be referred to men. For with men, they
are not, although before God, they are. And so to conclude in a word, not to
have any being, is not to be seen any more. According to that which is said in
Jeremy: Iere. 31.
A voice was heard in Rhama, a mourning and bitter weeping, Rachell weeping for
her children, refused to be comforted for her children, because they were not.

Let us now come to that which remains out of the story of Job. Job.
3.11.12.13.14.15.16.17.18.19.
For we have herebefore handled something, touching the same matter as it came
in question. The first is, Why dyed I not in the birth? or why dyed I not so
soon as I came out of my mothers womb? why did the knees prevent me: and why
did I suck the breasts? For so should I now have lain and been quiet, I
should have sleapt then and been at reast, with the kings and Counselors of
the earth, which have builded themselves desolate places: or with the Princes
that had Gold, and have filled their houses with silver, or why was I not hid
as an untimely birth, or as Infants which have not seen the light?

The wicked have there ceased from their tyranny, and there, they that labored
valiauntly, are at reast. The prisoners reast together, and hear not the voice
of the oppressor. There are small and great, and the servant is free from his
Master. But what and if I bring against them the fourtenth Chapter of Isaiah?
Isaiah. 14.10.
Where he brings in the dead coming out of the graves, and going before the
king of Babylon: where he also makes mention of their talk, saying, Behold
thou art brought low, even as we are. etc.

For I have as good a coulor by that place to reason, that the dead have wit
and understanding, as they have to gather by the words of Iobe, that the dead
have utterly lost their whole understanding.

But I leave unto them those tryfling and toyish inventions. Now it will be no
hard matter, to make plain the place which they allege, without we would
devise mazes of our own minds. For Job being pressed with marvelous
affliction, and almost fainting under that burden, had none other regard, but
unto his present miseries: and did not only think them to be the greatest
that might be, but thought also that there could not well be any more such.

He no whit feared death, but desiered it, because it brings with it a common
condition unto all: makes an end of the rule of kings, and of the oppression
of servants: and lastly, it is ye end of all things, whereunto every man
resigneth the estate which he had in this world. For, by this mean he trusts
to see ye end of his misery. And yet by the way, he looked not what manner of
life it was that they there leadd, neither yet what he should do, or yet
suffer, But only desiered most earnestly the change of the present state: as
they commonly are wonted to do, that are tormented with the vehement feeling
of sorrow. For if when we feel the great and extreme heates of Summer, we
judge winter to be temperate and mild: and contrariwise, when we are nipped,
and pinched with sharp and cold weather, we altogether wish for Summer: what
shall he do in respect, who feels the mighty hand of God against him?

And therefore let us not marvel, although this be not enough to persuade our
galla^ts. For they gather together fragments, and curtalled sentences for their
defense, and never consider of the sum and effect of the whole matter. But I
trust they who with a single eye have perused the whole story, will allow my
reason.

The second is this: Job. 7.7.8.9.
Remember that my life is but a wind, and that mine eye shall not return to
see pleasure. The eye that has seen me shall see me no more: Thine eyes are
upon me, and I shall be no longer. As the cloud vanishes and goes away,
(...) he that goes down to the grave, shall come up no more. By these words
Job bewayleth his misery before ye presence of God, and enlarges it, as one
who had no hope before his eyes to see the issue of his grief.

For his griefs were before him, which persued him even to his grave. And
therefore it came in his mind, that after his miserable life, he could look
for none other, but for as miserable a death. For whosoever feels the hand of
God against him, can not otherwise think.

So that in amplyfying his grief, it moves compassion, and makes him self
miserable before God. Now I see not what other thing is to be demanded in this
place besides this, except it be that there is no resurrection to be looked
for. Which thing at this time I mind not to discuss.

Job. 16.17
The third is this, The grave shall be my house: Also, All my things shall go
down into the bottom of the pit. All this is true. For there remains none
other thing for him whom God favors not (as Job then thought of himself)
but the grave, the deep pit, and death. And therefore, after he had long
discoursed of all his miseries, he says that the end of them is confusion.

And this is the end and issue of all those whom God scourges with his hand.
For in his wrath, is death, and in his loving kindenes and mercy, Ecclesiast.
37.24.
is life. The book of Ecclesiasticus has very well declared this, whenas it is
said: The life of man stands in the number of days: but the days of Israel
are innumerable. But because this Aucthor is of no sound authority, we will
hear leave him, and hear the prophet teaching this very notably, saying:
Psalm. 102.23.24.25.26.27.28.
He abated my strength in the way, and shortened my days: And I said, O my God,
take me not away in the midst of my days: thy years enduer from generation
to generation. Thou have a foretyme laid the foundations of the earth, and the
heavens are the work of thy hands. They shall pearishe but thou shall enduer:
even they all shall wax old like a garment: as a vesture shall thou change
them.

Hitherto has he declared, how frail and brittle our state is: although in
deed, nothing under heaven is steadfast and suer: seeing they all corrupt and
come to naught. And anon after it follows: But thou art the same, and thy
years shall not fail. The children of thy servants shall continue, and
their seed shall stand fast in thy sight. Herein we may very well see, how he
joins the salvation of the faithful with the eternity of God.

And therefore so often as they set before us Job as afflicted by the hand of
God, and almost fallen into despair, they speak nothing of hell and death:
and I tell them that when God is angry, we can look for none other issue: and
that it comes of his free mercy, when we are taken out of deaths chapps.

Job. 34.14.15.
The fourth is this: If he set his heart upon man, and gather unto him self his
spirit and his breath, all flesh shall pearish together, and man shall
return into dust. If they take these words for judgment, as if it were said,
that by the wrath of God, man is cast down, overthrown, confounded and
utterly brought to naught, I will grant them more then they demand. Or else if
they mean that the spirit, to wit, the soul, returns to God, after death:
and that the breath, to wit, the moving power, or lively motion departs from
man, I will not gaynesay it. But if their controversy be, that the soul
pearisheth, I am tooth and nail against the^. Although in the Hebrew it is
somewhat otherwise. But being contented that I have put by, their wranglings, I
will hear leave.

They cast also other darts, but they are blunt and hurt not, and therefore
are not to be greatly feared. For they allege certain places, which serve to
no purpose, and out of such books whose Authority is uncertain: As out of
the fourth book of Esdras, and out of the second book of the Macabies. And
yet for all this, we will none otherwise answer, but as we have heretofore
spoken of the resurrection. Although that in all these things they openly show
their impude^cy and shamelesnes, seeing they are so bold as to take Esdras for
them selves, who makes altogether on our side.

Neither are they ashamed to bring fourth the books of the Machabies for the
defense of their cause: Where Jeremy after his death prayed the Lord for ye
people that fought: where prayers are appointed for the dead, to the end that
by them, their sins might be forgeuen.

It may be, that they have other Arguments, but as yet I know them not: For in
very deed, I have not altogether seen all their gloses and drowsy dreams.
And, for any thing I know, I have leaft out nothing, which may cause the
vnlearneder sort, to change or waver. But I again desire all those which
shall read this, to remember that the Anabaptists (whom it is enough that I
have so named, for the declaration of all kinds of horrible wickedness) are the
Aucthors of this jolly doctrine. For we are of very right to suspect,
whatsoever comes out of such a filthy Iakes, and beastly Shopp, which has
devised, and daily deuiseth so many monstrous things.

1. Timo. 1.17. Unto the king everlasting, immortal, invisible, unto God only
wise, be honor and Glory for ever and ever.


FINIS.
The opinion and absolute conclusion of Master John Calvine, in and about the
questions ensuing: agreeing with the opinion of Phillip Melancton, Peter
Martyr, and Martin Bucer. All godly, notable, and excellent learned Ministers
in the Church of God.
BEcause (says he) I verily think, that the parties abouenamed have
sufficiently said, that that man does not the duty of a Christian, who in all
the days of his life, makes not a confession of his faith: Much less then,
he who defiles himself with dissimuling of Idolatry: therefore will I cease
to dispute thereof at large. Nevertheless, This is my opinion and answer to
the Questions following.

First, Whether a godly and devout man, may rather forsake his Country, and
leave his calling, then to be present at Masses, at the celebration of the
burialls of the dead, after the popish manner, and usurp such ceremonies of
Popery, as are against the word of God.

I answer, that not only the spiritual Worshipp of God, but also the
outward profession of him, wherein is contained the glory of his Majesty, are
to be preferred before Country and kinsefolkes, yea before life it self. And
therefore, whosoever they be which live in such places, as that they cannot
perform that duty unto God which is necessarily required of all Christians,
let them understand thus much, that this commandment stretches it self
as well unto them, as unto Abraham, where it is said in Gene. 12.1. Get the out
of thy Country, and from amongst thy kindred, except peradventure they have
this courageous mind with them, that they had rather dye whenever they shall
be driven thereto, the^ forsake their profession, for any favor or gain
whatsoever, which they may any way obtain at the hands of men,

Here is also another objection, that no lawful vocation or calling appointed
by God, is for any cause unadvisedly to be neglected: and therefore in no wise
to be voluntarily leaft.

I answer, that every Christian is bound unto his calling, even to the
uttermost of his power. Wherefore, except God would render up his own title
and interest, there is nothing that ought, or may hold us from doing our duty.
For either God is to be respected in the calling, or else we have some other end
and purpose. And therefore without we make the chiefest account of the glory of
God, this name or title of calling, is but vainly foisted in. Howbeit if this
obtain the principal place, as it is good reason it should, we are to call to
mind that we are so farfourth bound to our calling, as that it ought by no
mean to withdraw us from the true and sincere worshipp of God. To be short,
like as the first table of the law takes place before the second, Even so
likewise are all the duties of the second Table to be directed unto it, as to
a true and perfect square. For, this is the sum and effect of the first
Table, to hold and keep the pure worshipp, adoration, and invocation of our
God.

This therefore is my opinion, That there is nothing in all the world of so
great a price whatsoever, which ought to cause any Christian to profane
himself with any dregs of superstition, thereby to dyminishe or violate the
worshipp of God. For if he do, it is impossible for him to be excused.

Furthermore, when as I in this sort shall set down, that popish Masses, and
dyrges, and all solemn prayers, wherein the dead Saints are called upon, are
of this kind: he that shall hear me, will never agree to hear Mass, or yet
be present at any such filthy trashe, neither yet once flatter himself, as if
he might do it.

But what if some man, by fine, and cleanly dissembling, for the Commo^weales
sake, and the benefit of many, were able to redeem great riches and
commodities?

I answer, that none of all these thing are able once to counteruaile the
true and necessary profession of the worship of God and the testimony of
Religion. And beside^ it is not for us to make a reckoning of tha^ which shall
be most profitable: But we ar^ to follow that which the Lord prescribes unto
us.

For it belongs to God alone to govern the euentes. Lastly, it is not for us
to alte^ that which he has set down, by any cyrcumstaunces, but we are to
keep our selves unspotted and blameles toward his Majesty, both in soul
and body.

But what if a grievous and hurtefull offense should arise through the departure
of some, so that the cruelty of the ungodly might be provoked, and occasion of
backslyding be given to the weak?

I answer, that this is a thing uncertain unto us: For God may so moderate
the matter, as that all things may turn to the contrary. And surely, there is
not so much hurt to be feared thereof, as hope of much good. For, how furiously
soever the wicked are blinded, it will be a notable hoate iron to wound their
consciences, to see, that they which do depart, had rather forsake their
Country, kinsfolks, and whatsoever else that men greatlyest delight in, then
to defile themselves with Idolatry. And therefore, such great magnanimity will
^ore prevail to burst their stubborn hearts, ^hen furiously set them on fire.
And it will ^e a cause rather to confirm the weak, ^hen make them stumble and
stagger at it. Nevertheless, be it that all these dangers ^ang even over our
hedds, yet is it our du^y to go on without all controversy, and ^aynesaying,
whether soever it shall please ^he Lord our God to call us, and commend unto
his Majesty the government of the ^uentes. Only, let us make earnest and
^arty prayers, that he would turn and di^ect them to a good end and purpose.

Here also arises a complaynt of those which are very well able to help and
re^ieue the poor Brethren, that are troubled ^or the testimony of Christ. For,
if (say they) ^hey forsake the place, they also leave them without help.

I answer, that there can be no better ^ouncell given to such,, then even to
ha^ard their lives, for the confirmation of the glory of Christ: Howbeit, if
they have not that courage, no duty of the second Table ^xcuseth them from
Idolatry, and other ^regges of superstition.

Now then, to come to the very state, and ^umme of the Question, I think, that
this mine answer, differs not from the judgment of the rest. For, seeing
that Mai^ter Phillip, with whom the other two agree, although he answers
not perticulerly, and severally unto these objections yet since in a word, he
excludes all pretenses, he sufficiently testifies, that in his opinion, there
is nothing of so great weight, nor more pernicious, then to give liberty to a
Christian, to use the very least dissembled profession of Idolatry.

FINIS.
AT LONDON Printed by John Day, dwelling over Aldersgate. Anno. Domi. 1581.


