A Sermon of the famous and Godly learned man, master John Calvin, chief
Minister and Pastor of Christ's church at Geneua, containing an exhortation to
suffer persecution for followinge Jesus Christ and his Gospel, upon this
Text following.

Heb. 13.13. Go ye out of the Tents after Christ, bearing his rebuke.

Translated out of French into english,

Imprinted at London by Robert VValdegraue for Edward White. 1581.

A SERMON of the Famous and godly learned man, Master John Calvin, Chief
minister and Pastor of Christ's Church at Geneua, containing an exhortation to
suffer persecution.
Heb. 13.13. Go ye out of the Tents after Christ, bearing his rebuke.


ALl exhortations that a man may make to us, of suffering patiently for the
name of Jesus Christ, A constant man in religion is known by the certenty of
the word whereupon he stands
and for the quarrel of the Gospel, they shall have no place, if we be not
very well assured of the cause, for the which we do contend, for when the
question is of yielding the life, it is requisite, that we be resolved and
certain, wherefore it is. And such constancy cannot be in us, unless it be
grounded on the certeinty of faith. True it is, that a man shall find out some
that will submit themselves foolishly to death, Stubbornes in opinion besides
the word, is frenzy.
For to maintain certain fond opinions, and fantasies, which they shall
conceive in their head, but such an earnestness deserves rather to be
counted for frenzy, then for a Christian zeal, like as in deed, there is
neither constancy neither approved judgment in such people, who gave themself,
so to stubbornness, Sithen this is so, there is nothing but a good cause,
which makes that God accepts us for his Martyrs: for death is common to all.
A good cause makes a martyr.
And the children of God shall be condemned to such shame and torments as
though they were thieves. But God puts a difference between them, in so
much that he can not deny this verity. the children of God are put to villainy
in this world.
Therefore it is requisite yt on our part we have sure undoubted testimony of the
doctrine, which we do sustain. For as much as I have said we can not be
moved, neither touched with a good intention, for any exhortations that any
body make to us, to suffer persecution for the Gospel, if there be not a true
certeinty of faith graven in our hearts, A man can not suffer persecution for
the gospel unless faith be graven in his heart, for to hazard our life it is
not natural but temeritie.
for to hazard our life at all adventure, that is not natural. And when we
shall so do, that shall be but temerity, and no Christian virtue at all, at
length God will approve nothing at alll that we shall do unless we be well
peesuaded, that it is for his sake, and for his cause, that men do molest us,
and that the world is our enemy Now when I speak of such a certeinty, I do not
mean only that we know to desern between true religion, and the abuses or
follies of men.

But also that we be well persuaded of the life celestial, and of the crown
which is there promised us, after that we have striuen here beneath. In the
mean while note that both these two points be requisite, We must be persuaded
of the life celestial and the glory to come.
and that no man ought to separate the one from the other, it is meet
therefore for us to begin at this point, to know well what our Christanitye
is, what the faith is which we must mayntein and follow, what is the rule that
God has given us, Too points necessary in religion to be known.
and that we be defended with such instruction, that we can boldly condemn all
false lies, errors and superstitions, which the devil has brought in for to
corrupt the pure simplicity of the doctrine of God: wherefore a man must not be
amazed if he see not at this present day, Why men commonly refuse the Cross
of that.
very many persons yt be disposed for the gospel to suffer, and that the
greatest part of those which name themselves Christians, knows not what it
is. For all be in manner negligent, and make no account, neiher to hear,
neither to read, but it is enough for them that they have had a little taste
of the faith of Christ, behold then, wherefore there be so few of others, but
if they be assaulted, they will by and by run away. This ought to stir us up
to enquire more diligently of the truth of God, because we might be certain
thereof. But yet this is not al, The want of zeal and love to the truth, is
the cause why men refuse to suffer persecution therefore.

God speaks to us in the scriptures.


that we should be taught well and have intelligence, for we may see, such as
seem to be perfect in good doctrine, the which notwithstanding have neither
zeal, neither affection in them, no more then if they had never known any
thing of God, but after some fantastical will. And wherefore is that, but in as
much they never before comprehended the majesty of the holy scripture. And in
deed, if we all to gether considered well, that it is God which speaks to
us, it is most certain that we should be more attentive to hearken to the same,
and with a great reverence, when we in reading the scripture do think that we
are at the schole of Angels, The scripture is the schole of Angels.
we shall strait have another care, and desire to exercise us in that doctrine
which is set before us, now we seeing that it is the mean to prepare us to
suffer for the gospel, that is, that we have so far profited in the schole of
God, that we being assured of the true religion and doctrine which we ought to
hold, we may avoid all the crafts and subtelties of the Devil, and all man's
inventions, Note how a true martyr is known from the false
as things not only of no effect, but also accurssed, in as much as they
corrupt Christian purity: and in this point we as true Martyrs of Jesus Christ
do differ from these bedlems that suffer for their foolish opinions.
Secondarily, that we being certain of the good cause, be enkendled, as it is
conueniente to follow God whereto soever he calls us, that his word has
such authority with us, as it is worthy, and that we being wtdrawn from the
world, be in manner ravished to seek after the celestial life. But this is a
thing very strange, that the brightness of God shines at this day so
plainly, as it did never more, and yet there be very few that have a zeal
thereto which is lamentable, and if we be not ashamed hereof, it is so much
the worse for us, for we must come shortly before the great Judge, where that
evil which we go about to cover, shall be set before us with such reproach, that
there will be found sufficient cause to cast us down altogether to the pit of
hell, For if we be bound to render testimony to God, alter the mesure of the
knowledge which he has given us, to what tends it I pray you, that we are
so cold and fearful, We are bound to confess our faith.
for to enter to this combat, sithen that God is in such sort revealed to us at
this time, that a man may say that he has disclosed and opened the great
treasures, of his secrets, may it not be well said that we will not have any
thing to do with God, for if we had any regard of his majesty, we would not
be so bold as to turn the doctrine which proceeds out of his mouth into a
certain Philosophy or speculation, I can not tell what. To be short, there is no
excuse but this is to our great shame, and rather to our horrible condemnation
that we have had so much knowledge of the truth of God and have so little courage
to stand to the same. Over al, when we consider the martirs in times past,
Courage to stand is requisite with knowledge. The faith of Martyrs in pime past.
we may well abhor the vilany which is in us, for ye most part of the^ were
not much exercised in the holy scripture, for to have knowledge, to dispute of
all things, they know that there was one God alone, whom men ought to
worship and serve Also that they were redeemed by the blood of Jesus Christ
to this end, to put their trust of salvation in him, and in his grace, and
that all that which has bine found out by me^, was not to be esteemed, and
were able thereby to co^demn al idollatry and superstition, and ye sum of
their divinity was this, there is one only God, who has created all the
world, and has declared us his will by Moses by ye prophets, and last of all by
Jesus Christ and his Apostles, we have one only redeemer who has redeemed us
by his blood, and grace, whereby we trust to be saved. Al ye Idolles of the
world be accurssed and execrable having nothing but this, they went frankly
either to the fire or else to any other kind of death. And this was not done by
two or three, but in so great multitudes, that the number of those which be
dead by the hands of Tyrants is in manner infinite, we are of our part so
great Clearks, that none can be more, Now a days much knowledge and little zeal.
(at least so we think,) and in deed as concerning the understanding of the
scripture, God has dealt so largely with us as ever he has don with any age.
Yet not with standing there is scarce one drop of zeal. Now to make much of
such a feeblenes, it is to no purpose, unless we will willingly provoke the
vengeance of God, Note what is to be done to have a courage to suffer.
what shall we then do, for to take a good courage. First of al we have to
consider how this thing is precious before God, the confession of our faith,
for we know it slenderlye, how God allows the same since our life, which is
very nothing, is more esteemed of us: In the which we declare a marvelous
bestialitie, for we can not spare our life in this cause, but we must confess
that the same is more beloved of us then the honor of God, and the salvation of
our souls. A certain painime could well say, that it was a miserable thing
for a man to put away the causes wherefore he does live to save his life,
nevertheless he and such like never knew to what end men were set in the
world, and for what cause they live. It is true that they had good knoweledge
to say that a man ought to follow virtue, that a man ought to behave him self
honestly, Our life is to glorify God.

The prolo^ging of our life besides Gods will is malediction


and without reproach: but all their virtues were but colors and smokes, we
know much better, to what our life ought to be employed: that is to glorify
God, to the end he might be our glory, without this the woe is over us, and we
can not prolong our life, as much as one minute more of time on the earth, in
the which we do bring so much the more malediction upon our own heads.
Notwithstanding we are not ashamed, to purchase here in this world a certain
few days, for us to lament in, renouncing thereby the everlasting kingdom,
seperating our selves from him, by whose virtue we are maintained in life. If a
man demand of the veriest ignorant persons, or else of the most brutest of the
world, for what cause is it that they live, they dare not simply say that it
was, to eat, drink, and sleep, The end of our life is to honor God, and to
be ruled by his word.
for all men do know that they were created to a more noble and more excelent
end, and what end can we find else but to honor God, and to suffer our selves
to be ruled by him, as children of a good father, to the intent that after we
have ended the viage of this corruptible life, we may be received into his
eternal inheritance, behold this is the principal cause of our life, and
the self same altogether, when we make account thereof that we are incarnated
to a beastly life, the which is worsse then a thousand deaths, what may we
allege for our expenses, for to live, and not to know, wherefore it is against
nature plainly. And to reject the causes, for the which we live, under the
pretense of a foolish appetite, for to have a certain respite of three days,
to the end to dwell in the world being separate from god, I can not tell how a
man shall call such a frenzy and rage. But because persecutions do not
cease, to be grievous, and bitter unto us, mark how this comes to pass, and
by what means Christians might strengthen them selves to patience, even to
yield constantly their life for Gods verity the text which we have recited,
Heb. 13.
when it shall be under stood, is sufficient enough for to induce us to the
same, Let us go out of the country (says the apostle) after the Lord Jesus,
bearing his reproach, In the first part, he exhorts us, although the swords
be not ready drawn upon us, nether the fires kindled to burn us, that we can
not truly be joined to the son of God, whilst that we be engraffed in this
world, A person of God must have his affection drawn from the world.
wherefore it is requisite that a christian person being him self at rest, has
always one foot lift up to go to battle, and not only that, but that he
has his affection withdrawn from the world, albeit the body dwells here.
Although this seems to us a rude thing, at the first looking, yet we should
be well contented with this saying of S. Paul, 1. These. 3.
which is that we are called and appointed to suffer, as who would say, that
the condition of our Christianity, is in such sort, that we must pass by this
way, if we will follow Jesus Christ, In the mean while for to comfort our
infirmity, and to make sweet the tediousness and sorowfulnesse, Note our
comfort in persecution.
which persecutions might bring us, behold a good recompense, which is, that
we in suffering for the Gospel do follow as it were, step after step, the
son of God, and we have him for our guide, if it had been said simplye of
us, that for to be Christians, we must pass through the shames of the
world, and must come courageously unto death, as many times, and as often as
it shall please God, we might have (as it seems) some colors to reply, that
this is a thing very strange to make on stray away. We must be like to the
image of Christ.
But where it is commanded us to follow the Lord Jesus, his conduct is too
good and honorable for us to refuse. Now to the end that we might be the better
moved, it is not only said, that Jesus goes before us as our captain, but
also that we be made like to his image, as S. Paul speaks thereof, the eight
Chapter to the Romans, Romans 8.
That God has ordained all those whom he has chosen, for his children, for to
be made conformable to him, who is the patron and head of us al, are we so
delicate that we will not suffer nothing, it behooves us to declare the grace
of God, by ye which he has called us unto the hope of salvation For these be
two things that can not be separated, Two things necessary in a Christian, we
may not regard the shame of the world in Christ's cause.
for to be the member of Jesus Christ and to be exercised with many
afflictions. Certainly we ought a great deal more esteem such a conformity
with the son of God, then we otherwise do, It is true that after the
judgment of the world, it is shame to suffer for the Gospel, but sithen that
we know that the faythlesse be blind, should we not have better eyes then
they, Acts. 5.
It is ignominy to be afflicted by the^ which occupy the seat of
righteousness, but Saint Paul shows us by his example that we have to glory
in the wounds of Jesus Christ, as in the marks. by the which God
acknowledges, and allows us for his. And we know what S. Luke reherseth of
Peter and John, that is, how they rejoiced of that they were counted worthy to
suffer infamy and reproach for the name of the Lord Jesus, behold two contrary
things, Ignominy, and dignity: It is a dignity for a Christian man to suffer
verily for as the world is foolish, it judges against al reason and by this
means conuerteth the glory of God, to dishonor, Then of our part, let us not
refuse to be despised before the world, that we may be honored before God, and
his angels, We see what pain ambitious men do take for to obtain the order of
a King, and what triumphs, they make therein. The son of God offers us his
order, and every body refuses it. I pray you in this doing are we worthy to
have any thing commen with him? our sensuality can not bite here, but is of
such balure that the same, be the very bages of our noblenes, imprisonment,
banishment and curssings, do not bring after man's fancies, but all reproach:
Look not in thy trouble what the world judges, but what God judges.
but what lets us to behold that which God judges thereof and pronounces
but only our infidelity, wherefore is it, that the name of the son of god
has such importance with us, as it is worthy to the end, we should learn to
take to honor, that he printeth in us his marks, otherwise our unthankfulness
is not to be borne. If God should punish us after our demerits, has he not
daily just occasion to chastise us in a thousand sorts. Moreover then this, a
hundred thousand deaths were not suffitient for a little portion of our
misdoings, yet by his infinite goodness, he puts under foot al our
trespasses, and does them away, and in steed of punishing us according to that
we have deserved, he finds a wonderful means for to make the afflictions to
be turned to our honor, and into a special priuelege, By affliction we are
made companions with Christ.
in so much that by the same we are associate into the company of his son
may it not well be said when we disdain so blessed a condition, that we have
very evil profited in the doctrine of Christ, Behold why saint Peter, 2.
Peter 4.
after he had exhorted us so holily in the fear of God, that we should not
suffer as thieves, whoremongers, and murderers, he adds how and in what
manner: let us suffer as Christians that we might glorify God for the good
which he does to us. To defend the verity is an honor above the Angels.
It is not without cause that he speaks in this wise for what are we I pray
you, to be witnesses to the verity of God, and procurers to maynteine his
cause, Behold here pore worms of the earth, creatures full of vanitye
altogether, and yet God wills us, that we defend his verity, which is an
honor yt pertains not to the very aungelles of paradise? Ought not this
consideration alone so much to inflame us to offer our selves to God, for that
which pleases him to apply us to so honorable a thing: not withstanding many
can not refrain themselves to encounter against God, or at the least to make
their complaints of this, that God does not bear better with their weakness.
An answer to the objection of of weaklings 1. Peter. 1.
This is marvelous say they, since that God has chosen us for his children,
how can he abide it that we be thus defiled and tormented with the wicked, I
aunsweare, although it does not appear to us, wherefore he does it, yet it
should have this authority with us to make us walk after his pleasure. But
when we look in our pattern Jesus Christ, ought not we to judge it a great
felicity, for to be made like unto him without any further question,
Notwithstanding God shows us causes very evident, for the which he wills us
to be persecuted.

1. Peter. 1.
If there were none other reason but that S. Peter makes, we were very co^ if
we would not be content therewith, that is, since that gold and silver,
which be not but corruptible mettalles be purged and examined by the fire, It
is the will of God we should suffer persecution.
it is good reason that our faith which surmounteth all the riches of the
world be proved. God might have crouned us as at the first brunte without
making us to sustain any conflict: but he wills that Jesus Christ does rayn
in the midst of his enemies, so he wills that we being iugled in the
mids of them, should suffer their oppressions and violences, until that he
deliver us from the same. I know well that the flesh reigns when we go
about to bring it to this point, but it is requisite, It is natural for us to
flee the Cross but we must subdue that affection.
that the will of God have the upper hand. If we feel any contradiction in us,
we must not be amassed thereat, for this is a right natural thing to flee the
cross, nevertheless, we may not go any further, knowing that God does
accept our obedience, so that we do subdue and mortify our senses and desires
for to make them subject unto him: for the Apostles and prophets went not in
such wise to death, that they felt not in themselves, John. 21.
a certain will to go back, another man shall lead thee whether thou would
not (said Lord Jesus Christ to Peter, The battle of a cristian man.
) Likewise when such fear of death does prick us, it is a gain for us to
heauenward, or rather God wins us thereby, or in the mean time let us be
assured, that this is a Sacrifice praising him: that we do resist and make
force against our affections, for to be altogether at his commandment, and
this is the principal battle in the which God wills that his people do
employ themselves, which is, that they endeavor to beat down all that lifts
it self up in their senses and spirits, for to turn them out of the way,
which he shows them, and with all this, the consolations be so great that it
must needs be said, that we are more then cowards when we do faint. In old time
an infinite number of people, for the desire of a simple crown of leaves, they
refused not any travel, trouble or pain for the same, they counted it nothing
to dye, The crown of immortality is prepared for such as do suffer.
notwithstanding there was none of them, but did fight at al aduenturs not
knowing whether he should win the price or not, God has set before us the
Crown of immortality, by the which we are made partakers of his glory, he
intends not that we should fight at all adventure, 2. Tim. 2.
but promises us all ye price that have a desire thereof, what occasion have
we to come to heaven, do we think that it is spoken in vain, Math. 5.
that if we dye with Jesus Christ, we shall live also with him. The triumph is
prepared, and we flee the Combat as much as lies in us. This is a doctrine
repugnant to man's judgment, I do confess the same, and also when Jesus
pronounces that those which suffer for righteousness be blessed, he
proponeth not a sentence which is easy to be received of the world.
Contrariwise he wills us to repute that for felicity which the world and our
senses judges unhappy. Whom the vvorldlye counts miserable are most happy.
It seems us that we are miserable when God permits us to be destroyed by
the Tyranny and cruelty of our enemies, but the fault is, yt we have no regard
at all to the promises of God, the which do certefie us that all shall be
turned to our good, we are discouraged to see the wicked to be stronger, and
to hold their foot upon our throat. but such a confusion (as says Saint
Paul) ought rather to lift us up on high, Note why the evil do prosper and
the good troubled.
for in as much we are given of our selves too much to muse upon the things
present. God in permitting the good folk, to be evil entreated, and the
wicked to have there will, he teaches us by manifest tokens that one day will
come, in the which all that is now confused shall be reformed. If the time seem
long unto us, let us run to the remedy, and not flatter our selves in our
vice: for it is certain, that we have no faith at all, unless we lift up the
eyes of our souls to the coming of our savior Jesus Christ, our eye must be
fixed upon the coming of Christ.
Now God to the end he might leave no mean unattempted, which might be fyt
to drive us forward, he sets before us the promises on the one side, and his
threatenings on ye other. We must have both the promises and threatenings of god
before our eyes in our troubles. Math. 10. Luke 12.
Do we think yt the promises have not power enogh in us? let us ioin the
threatenings for to strengthen them. It is very true, that we must be so much
the more perverse and froward, not to adioyne more faith then we do to the
promises of God, when the Lord Jesus says, that he will auow and acknowledge
us before his father, so that we confess him before men. and what is there
that ought to let us, that we should not yield him that confession that he
requires. When men shall have done their uttermost, they can do no worse but
murder us. And what shall eternal life be in comparson thereof? I heap not
up here all the promises contained in the scriptures which tend to one and the
same end: yet (forasmuch as they are so often times repeted) we ought wholly to
stay upon them. But if when the plague hang over our heads, if three or four
be not enough, one whole hundred will not serve to make us to overcome all
adversity and contrary temptations. But if God can draw us unto himself
thorough gentleness, must we not be more then beetle blockkish heads, when
his severe threatenings can do no more therein? Jesus Christ cites all those
before his father, Christ does sommon all them that deny his truth. Math 10.
Math. 10.
who shall through fear of bodily death deny the truth: and says, that both
the body and soul, shall be thrown to perdition, And in another place he
says, that he will deny all those that shall deny him before men, unless that
we be to much bereued of al understanding these words ought to make our hair
stand upright upon our heads, Howsoever it be, when we shall not be moved
therewith as were meet, there remains nothing for us but an horrible
confusion: For in that, When neither the promises nor threatenings do move
confusion remains.
that all the words of Jesus Christ do so little profit us, we are convinced
of too great infidelity. We shall have alleged too godly purpose that there
is some pity in us, forasmuch as our nature is so brittie: For it said
contrariwise that Moses looking unto God through faith, was strengthened not to
bow under any tentation. Heb. 11. An answer to the objection of fraielnes of
nature.
Wherefore when we are so soft and flexible yea, that there is no zeal and
constancy in us, it is a sign that we are utterly ignorannt both of God and
his kingdom. When it is showed us yt we ought to be joined to our head, we
think that we have a goodly color to exempt ourselves from it, by saying that
we are men. But they which have gone before us, who were they? It is true that
when we shall not have the pure doctrine, all the excuses that we can bring
forth shall be vain: but having so many examples which ought to serve for the
greater approbation, so much the more are we to be condemned. But here we
have two points to be considered. The church of Christ is continually subject
to afflictions. Psalm. 129.
The first is, that all the body of the Church generally, was and shall be
always subject till the end, to be afflicted by the wicked: as it is said in
the Psalm. They have vexed me from my youth up, they have drawn the Plow upon
me from one end to an other. The holy Ghost brings in the old Church
speaking, to the end that we, after we have known the afflictions thereof, we
should not find it strange or troublesome if the like at this day be done
unto us. S. Paul also drawing this place from another Psalm where it is said,
Romans 8. Psalm. 44.
We have been as Sheep that are led to the slaughter, shows yt this was not
for one age alone: but that it is and shall be ordinarily and usual in the
Church. Seeing the Church of God to be at this day troaden under, by the pride
of worldlinges, that one barketh, The ordinance of the Church.
another byteth, that men torment it, and always mischieuously devise against
it, that without ceasing it is assailed of mad dogs and sauadge beasts: let us
remember that this was done unto it of old time. It is true that God may well
give it sometimes certain truces and releasements. And this is it that is
said in the Psalm before alleged, The end of afflictions is bliss.
be cutteth asunder the Cords of the wicked. And in another place, that he will
break their stuff, for fear that the good does not overmuch vex themselves,
being too much oppressed. But God would always that his Church should be
tossed in this world, and be as it were in a continual conflict, reserving
rest for it above in the heavens, Notwithstanding that yet the issue of these
afflictions was always blessed, and at the least God brought to pass, that
being oppressed with many euilles, it was never utterly oppressed, as it is
said that the wicked with all their forces never attained to that which they
immagined: Psalm. 7.
S. Paul also rejoices himself of the like to show, that this is a
continual grace of God: We (says he) endure tribulations, 2. Cor 4.
but we are not therewith distressed, we are pore but we are not destitute: we
are persecuted but we are not forsaken: we are cast down but we perish not,
every where bering about in our bodies the dying of our Lord Jesus, to the end
that his life may be made manifest in our mortal bodies, Such issue as we see
that God has given at al times in the persecutions of his Church, ought well
to encourage us, knowing that our fathers, who were brickle men as we are, had
always the victory over their enemies: in as much as they remained steadfast in
patience. But I do but touch this point briefly to yt end I may come to ye
second, Secondarily we must look upon the particular examples of martirs
which have been before us. Heb. 12.
yt which more agrees to our purpose: that it is to make our profit of those
particular examples of the Martyrs, which have gone before us.

Now there are not only two or three of them, but a thick and great cloud,
as the Apostle says in the epistle to the Hebr. Whereby he signifies that the
number is so great, yt it ought as it were even to stop up our eyes. And that I
be not to tedious, I will take only the example of the Jews which were
persecuted for true religion, as well under the Tyranny of Antiocbus the King,
as also a little after his death. We cannot allege that it was a small number
of people: for there were then as it were a great army of martyrs. We cannot
say that it was of Prophets, whom God had separated from the common people:
for the women and young infants were of this company. We cannot say that they
were let go for any pryse: for they were tormented as cruelly as was possible.
We hear also that which the Apostle shows us of.

Some (says he) were hanged up like belles and racked, Heb. 11.
making no account to be delivered, to the end they might receive a better
resurrection. Others were tried by mockings and scourgings: yea by bonds and
prisonment: others were stoned or hewn asunder: A comparison between the
faithful in the old law and us.
other wandered up and down hither and thither, in Wilderness by mountains and
Caves. Let us now enter to make comparison of them with us. If they suffered
for the truth of God, which was yet so dark at that time, what ought we to
do in this great light that shines now? God has spoken unto us as it were
with a full mouth, the great Gate of the kingdom of heaven is opened, Jesus
Christ has called us unto him, being come down unto us, to the end that we
should have him as it were present before our eyes. And what a shame shall it
be unto us to have less zeal to suffer for the Gospel then they had, which
only saluted and beheld the promises of God, as it were a far off? Which
had but a little Wicket open to come to the kingdom of heaven? which had
nothing but a certain remembrance and figure of Jesus Christ? These things
cannot be expressed with mouth as they are worthy: wherefore I leave them for
every one to meditate upon.

We ought to prepare our selves to the Cross although we be in no danger
thereof.
Now this doctrine as it is general, so ought it to be put in practice of all
Christians: But every one ought to apply it to his own use as necessity shall
require. I speak this to the end that they which see themselves in no apparent
danger, should not think that it is superfluous unto them. They are not at
this time in the hands of Tyrants: but what know they how God will deal
with them hereafter Wherefore we ought to be so armed before hand, that if any
persecution, which we have not thought upon, shall come upon us, we be not taken
at unawares and unprovided. How he ought to be have him self that is under
persecution.
But I fear me that there are a great sort of deaf ears to hear this word.
So far off is it, that they which are nice and live at their ease, prepare
them selves to suffer death when need shall be, that they have no care to serve
God whiles they live. And yet nevertheless this ought to be our ordinary and
continual study, and specially in this time wherein we live. In the mean time
they whom God has called to suffer for the testimonye of his name, ought to
show in very deed that they were prepared long before, too stand thereto
constantly. And then they ought to call into their remembrance all the
exhortations that they have hard in times past: as if a soldier should take
arms when the Trumpet does sound. But what there is no question of seeking
starting holes to escape: Persecution is the touchstone whereby god does
discover his people.
I speak in respect of the greatest part: For persecution is a true
touchstone whereby God discovers and tries who are his. So far of is it,
that he should many times find who is faithful unto him, until that they
franckly offer themselves to death. But this is as it were an incredible thing,
that people which boast of some little knowledge of the Gospel, Cauilations
of the weaklings. Mar. 8. We must confess Christ is truth before the wicked.
We must commit our life to the hands of God.
dare open their mouth to use such cauilations. For one sort say, what shall
we game to confess our faith to obstinate people, and to such who have
determined to fight against God? Is not this to cast precious stones before
swine, As though Jesus Christ had not expressly declared that he will yt men
confess him amongst the most perverse and wickedst men. If they be not thereby
edefied, yet at ye least they remain confounded: of such a sweet smelling
savor is ye confession before god, how deadly soever it be to ye reprobate.
Others also may be found who say, what shall our death profit? It rather
falls out to an offense, as if God had left to their choice to die when they
think good, and when they shall see a fit time. But contrariwise we approve
our obedience, leaving the profit into his hand that shall come of our death.
Wherefore in the first place, it behooves that a christian man, in what country
soever he be, notwithstanding dangers and threatninges, that he fully
determine to walk in simplicity, as God has commanded, Let him keep him
self as much as he can from the rage of the Wolves: so that the same be not
done thorough the craft of the flesh. Above all let him resign his life into
Gods hands. Has he done this? If it fall out that he fall into the hands of
enemies, let him think that God has brought him into that place, He that is
once caught for religion has no means to go back.

It is necessary that we answer to all that the wicked demand of us.


and will have him to be one of the witnesses of his son, and therefore that
there is no way to draw back, unless it be in denying our faith to him, to
whom we have promised all duty: both to live and to dye, and to whom we are
and belong, although we had promised nothing unto him. Hereby I do not bind
all men of necessitye to make a full and entire confession of all that they
believe, admit yt they were thereto required, S. Paul in this point has used a
good moderation, who was as ready as any other freely to maintain the cause of
the gospel, as he ought. And also it was not without cause that our Lord Jesus
promised that in such a case he will give us a mouth and Wisdom: as if he
should say, that the office of the holy ghost is not only to strengthen us to
be bold and valiant: but also to give unto us Wisdom and discretion, to know
how it becomes us to rule and govern our selves in so great and hard a
matter. why Christ sometime held his peace.

It is the rule of christians to confess his faith being required. Christ
never dissembled to save his life.

Rosse his examination which he wrote is here answered.

The testimony of the verity ought more to be regarded of us then our life.

We may not regard what other men do, but what they ought to do. John 21.


The sum is, that they which are in such distress, should ask and receive
such Wisdom from above, not following their carnal counsel to seek a way
to escape, (as they say) by any cross or bypathes. There are also which reply
that our Savior Jesus Christ himself, answered not to them that asked of
him. But I say first of all, that this serves not to abolishe the rule which
he has given us, to make confession of our faith, when we are thereto
required Secondly I say, that he never disse^bled to save his life. Thirdly
that he never gave answer so doubtful, yt it did not import sufficient witness
of that which he had spoken: or rather, that he had not satisfied them already
which came to ask him further, as it were laying nets to catch him.
Wherefore let this point remain resolute amongst all Christians: that is, that
they ought not to account their lives more dear then the testimony of the
truth, inasmuche as God will be glorified in it. Is it in vain that he
calls all those witnesses (for the word Martyrs signifith the same) that have
answered to the enemies of the faith? Is it not because he would have them
serve to such purpose? And here every one must not look to his fellow and
companion: for God does not show this honor to al to call them thereto. And
forasmuch as we are given to mark others, We must arm our selves with the
promises of God in our afflictions.
the more we ought to take heed thereof. Peter having hard at the mouth of our
Lord Jesus Christ, that he should be led in his old age whither he would not,
asks what should become of John his companion. There is none of us but he
would willingly make such a reply. For this we imagine by and by: Why do I
rather suffer then others? But contrariwise Jesus Christ exhorts all in
general, and every one in particular, always to be ready, to the end that as
he shall call hither one or other, every man may march forth in his rank and
order. I have showed before that we shall be ill appointed to suffer
Martyrdom, unless that we be armed with Gods promises. It remains now that
we lay out a little more fully whereto they tend, not to specify al by
piecemeale and exactly, but to show the principal things, that God would have
us to hope for, to the end to comfort us in our afflictions. Now these are
briefly three things. three things specially to be considered of a person
under the cross.
The first is, that forasmuch as our life and death are in his hand, that he
will in such fort preserve us by his power that not one hair of our heads
shall fall but by his license.

Wherefore the faithful ought to hold themselves assured into whose hands
soever they shall come, that God has not cast of the safegarde which he has
of their persons, If such a persuasion were well imprinted in our hearts, we
should be delivered from the most part of doubts and perplexities that torment
and hinder us from doing our duty. We see that Tyrants are let lose: and
hereupon it seems to us that God has no further mean to save us: For this
cause we are tempted to provide for our selves, as though there were no more
waiting upon him. But contrariwise his providence which he has declared unto
us is such, as ought to be unto us an inuinsible fortress. Our bodies be in
the hands of him who has created them.
Let us therefore labor to learn this short sentence, that our bodies are in
his hands who has created them. For this cause he has sometimes delivered
his own after a miraculous manner, and beyond all hope of men, as
Sidrach-Misach and Abednago, from the fiery furnace, Daniel from the Lions
den, Peter from Herod's prison, where he was enchained, fettered and kept so
straightly. By these examples he would testify unto us, God gives our enemies
power over us.
that he holds our enemies bridled, though it seem not so, and has power to
draw us out, even from the mouth and midst of death when he will. Not
because he always does it: but by keeping unto himself the aucthority of
disposing of us both in life and death, he would have us fully resolved that he
has us in his keeping: in such sort that whither soever Tyrants look, or
with what fury soever they rush upon us, that it is from him only who is the
orderer of our life. If he suffer Tyrants to kill us, Our life i^ dear in the
sight of God
it is not because our lives are not dear unto him, and in greater
recommendation an hundred fold then it is worthy, seeing it is so, that he
has pronounced by the mouth of David, Psalm. 116. Esai. 16. our enemy shall
render account of our blood.
That the death of his saints is precious before him, and says he also by the
mouth of Esaias: That the earth shall disclose the blood which seemed to be
bidden. Let the enemies therefore of the Gospel, be as prodigal in shedding the
blood of his martyrs, as they will, yet shall they render a terrible account
even to the last and uttermost drop. They do scornfully mock at this day when
they burn the faithful, The power of Gods spirit is stronger then man.
and after they have bathed them selves in their blood, they are so drunken
therewith, that they care nothing at al what murders they commit. But if we
have patience to wait, God will show in the end that it is not in vain that
he has set such an high price upon our life, The constancy of martirs is the
work of God.
In the mean time, if he does us no evil, yt it serves to ratify his gospel,
which in worthiness surmounteth heaven and earth. And the better to assure us
that God leaves us not in the hands of Tyrants, as having forsaken us, let us
call to mind the sentence of Jesus Christ, where he says, that it is he
whom they persecute in his members.

God had well said before by Zachary, He that touches you, touches the
ayple of mine eye. A notable example.
But this is yet more plain, that if we suffer for the Gospel, it is as if
the Son of God were there in his own person. Wherefore let us know that
Jesus Christ must forget himself, if he should not think of us when we are
in prison, or in danger of death for his cause: And let us know that God
takes to his own heart all the outrages that Tyrants do unto us, as if they
were fastened to his own son.

Let us come to the second point that God in his promises has set forth unto
us for our consolation: that is, that he will so sustain us by the power of
his holy spirit that our enemies whatsoever they do, or Satan their head, yet
shall they not get the upper hand over us. And in deed we see how he
displaieth his graces in such a need. For such invincible constancy as is in
ye true martyrs, is a sufficient show that God works mightily in them. There
are two grievous things to the flesh in persecutions: too wit, the one the
rebukes and shame of men, and the other the torments that the body endures.
But God promises us, such assistannce that through patience we shall
overcome both the one and the other. And he perfourmeth in deed that which
he has promised unto us. Let us therefore take this buckler too repulse and
put back all fears, wherewith we are assailed, and let us not restrain the
power of Gods spirit to so narrow a scantling, that we think not, but that
he will easily overcome all men's cruelties. And hereof amongst others we had
an notable example in our time not to be forgotten.

A certain young man who dwelt here with us being taken in the city of
Tournay was condemned to be but beheaded if he recanted: and to be burned
alive, if he continued in his opinion. When he was asked what he would do, he
answered simply: He that shall give me grace to dye patiently for his name, he
will give me grace to endure the fire. We ought to esteem this sentence not
as the sentence of a mortal man: but as a sentence of the holy ghost, to the
end to assure our selves that God is as able to strengthen us, and to make us
to overcome all torments, as to move us to take any other kind of meeker
death in good part. Which is more, we see often times, what constancy he
gives to poor malefactors who suffer for their offenses. I speak not of the
obstinate: but of those which comfort themselves in ye grace of Jesus Christ,
and by this mean receive with peaceable heart the most grievous punishment
that can be done unto them: As we may see a notable example thereof in the
thief who was converted at the death of Christ. God who so mightily assisteth
poor offenders, being worthily punished for their misdeedes, will he fail
his who fight for his cause, that he will not give them an invincible power?
The third point concerning the promises that God has made to his martirs, is
of the fruit that they ought to hope for of their sufferings: and in the end
if need be of death it self. Now this fruit is after that he has glorified
his name, and edified his Church through their constancy, The fruit of our
death
when they shall be gathered with the Lord Jesus Christ into his immortal
glory. But because we have spoken more fully of it before, it is enough now
to bring it in our remembrance.

Wherefore let the faithful learn too lift up their heads on high to this
Crown of Immortalitye and Glory, whereunto GOD does call them: to the end
that he do them no hurt in making them to forsake their present life for such
a reward: and to be assured of this inestimable benefit, let them always have
before their eyes the co^formity which they have with our Lord Jesus, to
behold life in the midst of death, as he by the opprobrye and shame of the
Cross, came to that glorious resurrection in which consists all our
felicity, joy, and Triumph.



An answer to the slanders of the papists against Christ's syllie flock,
appointed to the slaughter through fire.
HOW desperately, how desperately
can thus the papists groan,
To see Gods word so faithfully,
through fire to be borne.
2
Therefore their teeth and tongue they where
like a raser so fine,
Against Christ's martyrs for to spet,
their poison and repine.
3
And whereof truth they cannot lay,
to them that love the word,
With curse and lies they do assay,
to show their learned sword.
4
And when they have with force falsely,
condemned that is right.
Then studdy they full craftily,
to wash their hands of spite.
5
It is not we then can they uphold,
that any man do kill,
Least our cold charity be outtolde,
our ranckor and our ill.
6
Therefore we must devise straighte laws
Our judgments to be kept.
And make the nobility like Dawes,
so be caught in our net.
7
Thus we in fair places reign,
and make good cheer and game,
To see noble men put to pain,
to execute their shame.
8
To them it is a matter staunge,
to see gold fire bide,
And says to be without exchange,
when pains of death betyde.
9
If turn as wether cocks men would,
that gospel do profess,
Then for Catholic men they should
be counted as they guess
10
But faith is a Substance plain,
of things that be not seen,
And will in steadfastness remain,
though chaungelings turn and ween.
11
What though lively hope they call,
falsely desperation,
Who knows not the truth at all,
blinded by sedition.
12
Was not Christ Beelzebub named,
because that truth he said,
And yet was not to be blamed,
as evil tongues betrayde.
13
Now Ione of Kent and heretic,
for help they in do call,
Who in her heresy did stick,
and died therewithal,
14
Who knows not the prince of Hell
to have his servants stout,
As well as the sincere gospel,
professors round about.
15
But in this we differ plain,
for us we have the word,
And they for them have naught certain,
but only self accord.
16
Also vaynglory they object,
to such as for truth dye,
By all means they would them reject,
whose glory is on hie.
17
That glory is not counted vain,
which gloryeth in the Lord.
And for the same to abide great pain.
it is after the word.
18
Judge therefore with equity,
and call not truth amiss,
Least for your great impiety,
ye leese the endless bliss.
19
O noble men of famous England,
look well to your doings,
Let not partakers be your hands,
of guiltless bloodsheddings,
20
No drop of Faithful bloodshed is,
through rage of cruelnesse,
Which God will not require as his,
repent therefore and cease.
FINIS quod I. P.

