To the right (...)ble, and ^is (...) staye^ Lord, Fraun(...), Lord governor
of Barwicke, and one of the Queens Majesty's most Honorable privy Counsel,
etc. Arthur Goldyng wishes increase of Honor, and haboundaunce of the
knowledge and grace of Christ, ^ith perfect continuau^ce therein, (...) end.
IT is agreed on and confessed by all men (right Honorable) that reason and
understanding, makes differre^ce betwen^ mankind and other living
Creatures, but how a true Christian may be known and discerned from an
infidel and counterfeit, none perceives, save only such as give diligent
heed to the written woo(...), wherein we may find that (...) (...)uerlastyng
to know one God and (...) he has sent, that they are blessed which hear the
word of God and keep it, that not every one that says Lord Lord shall
enter into the kingdom of Heaven, but he that does the will of the heavenly
Father. Whereby it is evident, that wicked Infidelles are either altogether
void of the (...)ledge of God, or else far from (...) walk accordingly, if
they have (...) to any understanding thereo(...) (...) the true Christian, not
only laboreth (...) behold the grace of God, which brings salvation to all
men, but also learneth to renounce impiety and worldly lusts* and to live
soberly, justly, and godly, in this present world, and lookinge for that
blessed hope, and appearinge of the glory of the great God and our Savior
Jesus Christ, walks all the days of his life, in holiness and righteousness,
not after men's devise and fantasy, but according to the rules and
ordinances, which God has prescribed. And yet beside ye sleights of Satan,
the fraylenes of the flesh, and the wickedness of the world, we may easily
see how the malice of men stays and hinders the children of God from
proceedinge in that they have professed, while some are driven to stagger at
the prosperity of wicked: when they see them neither troubled nor plagued as
other men are: either to fear their power when they see the Kings of the
Earth band themselves, and the Princes confederate ^^^ther against the Lord,
and his anointed, and every good man with grief of heart, enforced to
complain with David: how long will ye imagine mischief, ye shall be all slain,
ye shall be as a bowed wall, or as a wall shaken. They consuite to cast him down
from his dignity, their delighte is in lies, they bless with their mouths,
and curse with their hearts. It is not unknown what has been concluded in the
Council of Trent, what confederacy and conspiracy, the Romayne Antichrist
has made, with other great Princes, against the doctrine of God, and such as
profess it. What force and tirannie has been used to suppress the children
of God: what policies, and practices both at home, and abroad, have been,
and are daily put in execution, to hinder the course of the Gospel: what lies
and slanders are daily raised, what quarrels are inverted, what falsehoode and
dissimulation is in every place practiced, to keep the most part of men from
the knowledge of truth, whereby as we see the words of David verified in the
wicked dealyng of this miserable age, so have we just cause to complain with
him, and not only to proclayme with confidence the like end to mischievous
men, but also to arm our selves against al assaults that are made, to drive
or draw us from the truth professed. Yea it behooves us herein to care for
other, not for our selves only, least by us any be discouraged, where they
ought to be comforted, or hindered, where they ought to be furdered. For the
vengeance is fearful which our Savior pronounces, where he says: woo to
him by whom Offense comes, and the charge is not small which he gives to
his, where he wills: that their light so shine before me^, that their good
works may be seen to the glory of their Father which is in Heaven, whereof
it follows that God would not have us by any means to discourage, but rather
to encourage, neither to dissuade, but rather by all means to persuade, and
allure all sorts of men as much as in us lies, to the love and likyng of Gods
eternal truth. This point of duty God requires by his Prophet Esaias, as well
of Princes as of Pastors, when in the kingdom of Christ he bids them go
through, go through the gates prepare you the way for the people, cast, up
cast up, the way and gather out the stones, set up a standarte for the people.
So God would have all impedimentes removed, so he would that men should be
provoked to the kingedome of Christ. Whereunto this treatise written by that
excellent instrument of God, master John Calvin, very much avails, for in
it he purposely entreats, of such Offenses and stumblinge blocks, as at this
day make many men either to fear, or to abhor the doctrine of the Gospel,
it serves well for this our country in this light of truth offered, to
convince the obstinate, to confirm the week, to stay the waueryng, to
instruct the ignorant, and to occasion all men with reverence to receive the
glad tidinges of the Gospel, and that without delay, least for our
unthankfulness the public profession thereof being taken away, it be to
late for us to seek oil, when we should be ready to enter with the
Bridegroom. Wherefore I could not devise how my endeavor might better be
employed, then in the translation of such a treatice, as remouyng al lettes,
makes straight unto us the way of Salvation. And because your Lordshippes
good government, and conversation in these North parts of England, has
furdered not a few, to the light of true Religion, I thought it most
convenient to be dedicated and presented unto your Honor, as unto one whom to
this day, neither prosperity, nor adversity, could make ashamed of Christ
crufisied: not for that I think the matter contained in this Book needs the
defense of any man, for it rather defends then craves defense: but because I
trust that other shall be more willinge to receive it, and use it to their
comfort and commodity, when they see it after a sort conveyed and commended
unto them, as it were from your Lordeships hands. And although my travail
herein may seem very small, yet my hope is that your Honor of your accustomed
goodness will accept it, as the testimony of a duetifull mind, as God has
given you a singular desire to advance his glory, and benefit his Church,
so I trust ye shall have no small occasion hereby, to continewe and proceed
therein. Notwithstanding the manifold impedimentes of these perilous times,
when Satan by all means seeks in stayinge the sincere preachinge of Gods
most holy word, to scatter the people into sects and Scismes* and by
raysinge of dissension in opinions to slander and defame the doctrine of
truth, against whose subtlety it behooves all such as God has advanced to
authority, to labor especially yt the public preaching of Gods eternal
truth, be furdered and mainteyned among the people: for the holy Ghost
teaches, that where preachinge fails the people go to havoc, and
experience shows that one of these two mischieues ensues when preaching is
stayed (to wete) either no Religion at all, whereof proceeds Atheism and
Epicuresme, or else every man to have a Religion by him self, which is the very
Original cause of all Heresy and Scisme in the Church of Christ. It is the
Deuilles policy to have preachinge set apart, to the end, that he may have a
time to scatter his darnell and cockle in ye Lords field, wherein if he be
not speedely prevented, it is to be feared, that the Devil which has been
cast out, will return again to his old possession, and findinge it vacant
and ready trimmed for him, settle him self, and seven other Deuilles with him
worse then he is, and so it fall out with us, as with the froward generation,
whose end was worse then the beginnynge. Which extreme misery the Lord
vouchsafe to prevent with his mercy, that we and our posterity may co^tinewe
in ye light of his truth, and that the same may continewe with us to the end.
At Barwicke the first of October. Anno 1566.

Your good Lordshippes, most humble to command, Arthur Goldinge.

To Laurence Normandy a man endewed with excellent gifts, John Calvin sends
greetinge.
WHereas for many considerations, I had vowed some part of my travels unto you
in my heart, I have deemed this little work worthy to be chosen before
others, because your example may avail, and that not smally, to bring in
credit the doctrine which it contains. For since the time, that forsakynge
your country willingly, you have come hither as a ba^nished man, we two can
best bear witness with how many and how violent practices of Satan you have
been assaulted: and yet there are other also that know of it. The fourth
month after your departinge, came tidinges of your Fathers death. It could not
be but that you must needs think that, which malicious persons let not
to speak, how the cause of his death might be ascribed to thought, to the
intent that all the blame might be laid upon your neck. Anon after followed
a most sharp wound, that your wife being such a woman as every good man
would wish him self the like, was taken away in the chief flower of her age.
Here also it could not otherwise be, but that diverse te^ptatio^s perced your
mind, being not a man of a blockishe nature. Now sounded in your ears the
slau^ders of evil men, that she was drawn out of her native soil in an
unlucky hour, to leave her wretched life, almost in an other world. But
this touched you nerer at the heart: that they should have any color, because
they reported that your purpose was cursed of the Lord with a sorrowful issue.
I omit the other innumerable prickinges which you could not but feel inwardly.
For seeing widowhoode is a grievous evil, it was to exceedinge a grief to
you, to be deprived of such a companion of your life. And to encreace the
heap of your sorrows, last of all came also the burial of your little
daughter. In the mean while the Devil powered out of other places, all the
mischief he could devise, to the intent that ouerwhelminge your wounded heart,
he might dispatch you out of hand. Finally you were driven to swallow up more
trouble within one half year, than many that are commended for the haultnesse
of their courages have suffered all their lives long. That was a heap of
stumblingblockes cast against you by the sutteltie of Satan even at your
first settinge forth in your race, to have compelled you to pull back your
foot again. But you puttyng your affiance in the invincible power of Gods
spirit, gave ensample to all others, that there is no let so deep and
difficulte, which by the same aid may not be waded out of. And therewithal you
have tried, with what armor the Lord is wont to furnishe his servants, as
often as he calls them to the encounter. I remember when I first told you
your Father was dead, and that I alleged the example of Abraham, whom the men
of his age might call the murderer of his Father, in that Their followinge
him when he went from home, miscarried by the way: you made me answer by and
by, that for as much as God did both bear witness to your doing, and also
allowed it, you passed nothing for the slanders of the wicked: and that
nothing grieved you, but that your Father bearing you company in your
journey had not made you like unto Abraham. For you were neither so nice nor so
proud, that you would either refuse to be Abraham's companion, or that you
would shun that slander, which God sets out with great commendation.
Howbeit your wife did of her self wonderfully assuage and mitigate the sorrow
of her death, before she departed from us. For there could no apter medicine
have been wisshed, than those heroical words of hers, which she uttered
upon her death bed: when taking me by the hand she thanked God, who had
brought her on his hand in to such a place, where she might die with a quiet
conscience: when, bewailyng in her heart the state of her former life, she
cried out that she was double happy, in that being lately drawn out of the
cursed iayle of Babylon, she should now also depart out of the miserable prison
of the body: when out of the lively sense of her conscience, disputinge of her
own sins, of the gilte of eternal death, and of the dreadful judgment of
God, not womanlike, she extolled highly the grace of Christ, and with like
humbleness and affiance embraced it as a holly Anchor. I do so well remember
her, how she uttered these words, not only plainly and distinctly, but
also with an unaccustomed earnestness even at her last drawinge on, that me
thinks I see her yet still. Therefore when I saw you on the contrary part,
nobly striuyng to subdue the heaviness of your heart, I marueled the less
that a man should be stout in sorrow, being helped with so many and so
goodly remedies. I will not tarry in rehearcinge of others. This I say only,
when the Devil had framed a buisie Labyrinth, of an unmeasurable heap of
stumblingblockes for you, you overcame them all in such sort, that you may
not only be a meet admonissher and counselor unto others, but also that such
as are somewhat weakeharted, being encouraged by your example, may woorthely
take a new stoutness unto them. Ye may see that the moderatenesse of an
upright mind is a very defe^sible tower, whereof you have given a singular
proof, partly in other things, but specially herein, in as much as having
left in your country, things which lead some men to ambition, and hold
other some fast with their enticementes, you are touched with no desire at all
of them: so that it may appear you bear the want of them with as quiet and
upright a mind, as you did easily once renounce them. Of this your godliness
like as I reap no small fruit and pleasure, so it is no wonder if I desire
that part thereof should redou^de unto others. For I who a while ago, (when
you were the Kings Lieuetenant of the same City where I was borne, and the
Mayor of our Citizens,) lamented your case, as for one far removed from
Christ: do now (since you are wholly addicted to Christ,) take you as my
very own, and embrace you as it were in the bosom of the Uniuersall Church.
Nevertheless I would that this book should be a demonstration after a sort
of my love toward you, even unto the^ that know you not. For you your self
demand no pledge. Surely there are between us many bands of true
friendship: but there is no neerenesse of blood, nor any other aliance,
which may surmount our love. And so little it grieueth your dear brother that
you should be made equal unto him, yt he accepts it as a full recompense, in
as much as he perceives him self to be beloved as entierly at your hand
again. Moreover, in that this book comes forth somewhat later than many
wisshed, I would I might be lawfully excused by the ancient Proverb, which I
have cited in the beginnynge: how that thing is done soon enough, which is
done well enough. But I am afraid least many, which partly by reason of the
largeness of the matter, and partly by reason of the long delay, have
promised to themselves some great thing (I wot not what,) will be offended
when they are deceived of their hope, when they shall see such things, as are
most worthy to have been set out with plentuousnesse, gloriousness, high
style, or behemencie of enditinge, and finally with all the thunderinges, or
artificiousnesse cunning, and force of eloquence to be touched briefly,
basely, homelily, poorly, nakedly, and sparely. Unto whom I have not ought to
answer, but that I have followed that fasshion which I deemed best. Wherein
I require not that they should subscribe unto me, so they refuse not to give me
leave to dissent from them. Farewell worthy man, and my right dear brother
in the Lord. At Geneua the.viij. of July, being the day of my birth. Anno
1550.

Thanks be to God.
Sentences taken out of the holy Scriptures, concerning Offenses.
Out of the.69. Psalm.
LEt their table be made a snare to take them withal, and let the things that
should have been for their wealth, be unto them an occasion of fallinge.

Let their eyes be blinded that they see not, and ever bow thou down their
backs.

Power out thine indignation upon them, and let thy wrathful displeasure take
hold of them.

Let their habitation be void: and no man to dwell in their tents.

For they persecute him whom thou haste smitten, and they talk how they may
vex them whom thou haste wounded.

Let them fall from one wickedness to another: and not come unto thy
righteousness.

Let them be wiped out of the book of the living, and not be written among
the rightuous.

Esaias the.8. and Luke the.2.
BEhold he is appointed to the falling and to the risinge up of many in
Israel, and for a sign that is spoken against.

Esaias. 57.
MAke strong, make strong the way, make plain the path, take away Offense
out of the way of my people. Because thus says the most highest, dwellinge
in eternity, and whose name is holy. I do inhabit the high and holy place at
once, and with the co^trite and humble spirit, that I may quicken the spirit
of those that are lowly, and quicken the heart of such as are contrite.

Matthew. 11.
Blessed is he that is not offended in me.

Matthew. 18.
WOe be to the world for Offenses sake, for it must needs be that Offenses
come: nevertheless woe be to that man by whom Offense does come. If thy
hand or thy foot offend thee, cut him of and throw him from thee. Better it
is for thee to enter into life lame or maimed, than having two hands or two
feet to be cast into everlasting fire, and if thine eye offend thee, pull him
out and throw him from thee. It is better for thee to enter into life with one
eye, than having two eyes to be cast into hell fire.

Matthew. 24.
SEe that no man misleade you. For many shall come in my name, saying: I am
Christ, and shall deceive many. Ye shall hear of wars, and rumors of
wars: see that ye be not troubled. For all these things must come to pass,
but the end is not yet. For nation shall rise against nation, and Kingdom
against Kingdom, and there shall be pestilences, and famine, and earth quakes in
certain places. All these things are the beginninges of sorrows. Then shall
they deliver you to be punished, and shall kill you, and ye shall be hated of all
nations for my names sake: and then many shall be offended, and one shall betraye
another, and one shall hate another, and many false Prophets shall arise, and
deceive many. And because iniquity shall be multiplied, the charity of many
shall wax cold: but he that perseuereth to the end shall be saved. And this
Gospel of the kingdom shall be preached through the whole world for a witness
unto all nations, and then shall that end come.

Luke. 17.
IT cannot otherwise be, but that Offenses must come: notwithstanding woo be
unto him by whom they come.

John. 6.
FRom that time many of the Disciples fell from him, and left him, and walked
not any more with him. And Jesus said to those twelve, will you also go your
ways?

Romans. 16.
I Beseech you brethren, that ye consider them which raise debate and
Offenses against the doctrine which you have learned, and decline from them.

1. Corinthians. 1.
WE preach Christ crucified, to the Jews a stumblingblocke, and to the
Greeks foolishness: but unto them that are called as well Jews as Greeks
Christ the power of God, and the wisdom of God.

1. Petr. 4.
ANd this seems an absurd thing unto them, that ye run not together with
them into the same excess of riot, as they do that speak evil of you, who
shall render an account unto him, which is ready to Judge the quick and the
dead.

Finis. Iusii. 23. 1565.
Praise be to God.
The work of John Calvin concerning Offenses, whereby in these days diverse
are feared, and many also quight withdravven from the pure Doctrine of the
Gospel.
AFter that the Lord had by many arguments proved him self to be the very
same that should come to save the Godly, he did not without cause knit up his
saying with this sentence: Blessed is he that is not offended in me. Certainly,
he not only knew, that many things were contained in the profession of his
Gospel, from which man's nature does utterly abhor, but also he foresawe,
that forthwith by the subtle woorking of Satan, should spring up all kind
of lettes and hindrances, that might bring it either in hatred or suspicion
of the world. And surely it must needs be fulfilled which the holy Ghost
has spoken of him, that he should be the rock of offense and the stone to
stumble at: Not because there is in him any just cause to be offended at, as
we shall anon see. But what skilles it? For this is (as it were) his fatal
condition, that as often as he offers him self to men, many of them do
stumble at him. The which thing if ever it happened heretofore, we find at
this day to be true, by examples almost innumerable. Wherefore we ought so
much the rather to call continually to our remembrance, his former warninge, to
the intent it may stick fast in our minds: least through the stoppes which the
Devil will cast in our way, we being turned from him, might also be deprived
of that blessedness which he promises to those that are his. But how few are
there that think hervppon? And on the contrary part, how many are to be
found, which under the color of offenses, do either shonne the Gospel
altogether as it were some rock: or after they have embraced it, yea and
somewhat profited in it, do afterward turn back again? Forasmuch then, as
there was no one matter (in my judgment,) wheraboutes I might bestow my labor
more profitably, I was not unwilling to take upon me the handlyng hereof:
specially saying I had bound my self by promise unto certain good men so to
do: who cease not to exact my promise as a dew debt. Peradventure it ought
to have been performed sooner: but in as much as hitherto, partly other
wrytinges no less necessary, and partly diverse weighty affairs have held
me occupied, this is soon enough, if it be well enough.

Moreover, before we enter into the matter it self, we must see how this
title will agree to Christ, who assuredly is the door of eternal life, that
he should be the stone of Offense, and the rock to stumble at: and likewise
how it may come to pass, that the doctrine of the Gospel, being the only way
to salvation, should continually be matched with so many offenses. This shall be
made the more evident, if we take our beginning at the definition of an
Offense. And now whereas the manner of living appointed to us by God, is likened
to a way, or a race, which it behooves us to follow, hereuppon rises another
Metaphor, that Offenses should be called what lettes so ever do either lead
us awrie from our right course, or stop us by lyinge in the way, or give
occasion of fallinge. Surely of all these, nothing can be imputed unto Christ,
nor to his Gospel. It is the office of Christ to lead us by the hand, the
right way to his Father. Also he is the light of the world, by which we are
guided thither: the pathe whereby we come thither: and the door by which we
enter. It is the nature of the Gospel, by taking away al manner of lettes, to
set us open an easy access into the kingdom of God. Nothing therefore is
more disagreable to Christ or his Gospel, than the name of Offense. This is an
infallible rule, that if Christ be esteemed as he is in deed, nothing is more
contrary to his nature, than Offense. In likewise is to be thought of the
Gospel. But this happens through the lewdness of me^, that as soon as
Christ appears a far of, by and by they are wrapped in with Offenses, or
rather of them selves run hedlonge into them. Thus is he the stone to stumble
at, not because he gives cause of stu^bling, but because occasion is wilfully
taken. Like as the Gospel being the doctrine of peace and unity, is not
withstandinge, the occasion of great troubles and turmoyles, because the wicked
greedely take occasion thereof to set all things in a broyle. Now it were to
much wrong to burden Christ with other men's faults, as if they were his own,
and to lay all the blame thereof on his neck, as if he were the offe^der. And
that is it that Peter says: Be ye builded into a spiritual house, which is
a lively stone, rejected of men but chosen of God, and precious also to you
that believe: But unto them that believe not, he is the stone which the
builders refused, the stone for them to stumble at, and the rock for them to
fall against. Behold how Christ offreth him self to al men, for a foundation
to build them selves upon, that they may be the temple of God. Surely here is
none Offense. Wherefore then should they be offended? forsooth because like a
sort of blind Bayardes, they rushe wilfully against that thing, whereon they
ought gently to stay them selves.

Yet we see the malice, or at leastwise the corruption of men is such, that
that thing which happens extraordinarily unto Christ, follows as
customably, as if it were most of all pertinent to his Office. Now come I unto
them, who otherwise refusinge not to embrace the Gospel of Christ, would
nevertheless have it without Offenses. I have to do with such as are
Christians: Would they have Christ free from all Offense? then must they go
forge thee a new one: For the son of God cannot be any other, than of such
sort as he is preached in the Scriptures. Or else they must alter all men's
natures and dispositions, and go make all the world new again. We hear
what the Scripture says: This is incident, not only to ye person of Christ,
but also to all the whole doctrine: neither is it lasting for a time only,
but it shall co^tinew through the whole course of the doctrine. How
preposterous then are they, who in these days reject the doctrine of the
Gospel now springing up again, only in this respect, because they find
therein the self same thing, that was told of before by the Prophets and
the Apostles. And yet for all that, they will be counted Christians: what if they
had chanced to have been in those days, when ye Gospel was first of al newly
preached, at which time there was almost no kind of Offense but it swarmed out
of the Gospel? How soon would they have separated them selves from Christ?
how would they have quaked for fear, least of never so slight a touch they
might have been blasted with some infection? If they say they would not have
done so then: why are they so spicec^scienced in these days? why do they not
now also acknowledge the same marks in Christ? But an Offense is an odious
thing, and to modest natures horrible. Who denies that? Neither do I say that
Offenses are willingly to be sought after. Let us shun them as much as may
be. But a Christen man's heart ought to be fortified in such wise, that what
Offenses so ever break out upon him, he never forsake his place, nor swerve
from Christ one hear breadth. Who so ever is not furnished with this
constancy that he may wade through all Offenses unvanquished, understands
not yet what his Christendom avails him. But it is a hard matter to resist
Offenses, specially consideringe our feblenesse and imbecillitie. I grant it
surely: how be it to desire to be privileged from that inco^moditie, whereunto
we see the most holy name of Christ and his Gospel subject, that is utterly
against all reason. Therefore they that at this day allege, that Offenses are
the cause why they dare not give their consent to the pure doctrine of the
Gospel which we profess, but are rather horribly afraid to come at it, I
would warn all such to take heed, that in steed of Christ they set not
the^ selves up an Idol. For this must be taken for a sure ground, that if we
will shun all Offenses, we must therewithal also utterly renounce Christ,
who if he were not the stone of Offense, were not the true Christ.

Howbeit I know there be four sorts of men whom Offenses withholde from
Christ, or at least which under this color are enemies to ye Gospel. The
fear of Offenses holds many back conceived of a certain natural modesty,
in so much that they dare not ones take a taste of the Gospel. Other some
being more slouthful and unapt to be taught, do hinder them selves rather by
dullness than by wilfulnes. And there are very many, who being sotted with
pride and the vain opinion of that wisdom which they are far from, are to
themselves an occasion of Offense through their own arrogancy. There are also
which maliciously and of set purpose do gather together all Offenses, and
invent many new of their own brains, and that not so much for ill will they
bear toward Offenses, as for hate of the Gospel, to the intent they may by
some means or other raise a slander of it. Yea rather whereas they themselves
are the Authors of Offenses, of very spite most impude^tly they turn the
blame thereof al together upon the Gospel. With such slanders the books of
Sadolet, Eckius, Pyghius, Cochlaeus, and such like, ar to be seen thoroughly
fraughted. The first and second sort are to be dealt withal somewhat more
gently: but the third and fourth sort are to be entreated more sharply. For
what point is it, I say not of humanity, (for what humanity can ye look for
at this cruel beasts hands?) but of honesty, to object reprochefully
against the son of God, the things for which they them selves are
altogether to blame? But we will look better upon these things afterward, my
mind was only at the beginning, to admonish my readers what kind of men I
purposed to deal with: to thinte^t they might thereby judge, what they had to
look for in this little book. The weak and unskillful shall find here,
wherewith to arm them selves for the ouercomyng of all Offenses. The wicked
shall find as much as shall suffice to disprove their abominable slanders. It
is a great matter that I promise, but I trust I shall satisfy indifferent
Judges. For it is not to be hoped that I should heal the diseases of all men.
And I have already condemned him of great folly, if any man will endeuer to
bring to pass, that Christ should not be a stumblyng block to the wicked.
The Scripture must needs be fulfilled, which has told before that it should
come so to pass. And I do not look that this my travel should work any
other effect, than that their rage should be more and more inflamed. But I
have respect to the weakelings, whose faith, as the wicked sort go about to
shake down. so it behooves us (as it were by puttinge under our hands) to stay
it up. As co^cerninge them that be desperate, it suffices me if I may repress
their malapertnesse, or at leastwise if I may bring to pass, that the
infection of their poison may spread it self no further.

And for as much as what matter so ever a man entreats of, distinctions are
wont to give great light unto it, I will here make a brief distinction
between the chief kinds of Offenses, which have both troubled the course of
the Gospel from the beginning, and also do hinder it at this day. Therefore
of Offenses, (if it seem good) let us call some inward, which (at leastwise as
men suppose) spring of the Gospel it self: or although they grow otherwise,
yet are they almost ever annexed unto it. And let us call other some outward,
as springing out of heads altogether strange and removed from the Gospel. Of
the first kind are those, that have their beginning as it were enclosed in the
very doctrine of the Gospel. Paul says, that the Gospel is foolishness to
the worldely wisemen. The which is true: not only because the homely and
unpainted simplicity thereof is had in derision by them, but also because many
things are therein contained, which to man's judgment are not only very
absurd, but also very toys to laughe at. For whereas it is preached that the
son of God, who is eternal life, did take our flesh upon him, and became a
mortal man: and that by his death was purchaced unto us life, by his
condemnation our rightuousenesse, by his curse our salvation: it abhors so
much from the common sense of men, that the sharper witted any man is, the
sooner he casts it of. And now saying the Gospel spoyleth us of all praise
of wisdom, virtue, and righteousness, leauinge nothing to us of our own but
utter shame, it cannot otherwise be, but it must greatly offend us. For such
is the pride of our flesh, that no man will willingly suffer those things to
be wrested from him, with the vain imagination whereof we are all puffed up.
Hereupon rises a most sharp conflicte. These things also touching the
deniyng of our selves, the crucifiyng of the old man, the despisinge of the
world, the embracing of the Cross, how sore do they with their sharpness
Offe^de us? But the experience hereof is yet far harder, when the faith is
tried by persecutions and other calamities. Besides these, there are other
things also, which partly seem unto man's reason Paradoxes and things full
of absurdity, as the things we spoke of first: and specially do minister
occasion of crabbed questions, which anon after do also hatche as many
Offenses, that is to say, innumerable. Such is the doctrine of Predestination
and other like.

Of the second sort are these: that as soon as the Gospel springs up, by
and by follow turmoyles and seditions: the wickedness of many which before
was hidden, is discovered: many sects and monstrous heresies unheard of
before, do swarm up: many do proudly take occasion of more licentious
liberty: many of the professors, by the filthy example of their life, do
shame the doctrine it self: some which for a time seemed very fervent, do
not only wax lazy, but like most horrible rebels do utterly fall from
Christ. Moreover the Devil by wonderful crafts, sets together by the
ears, good and otherwise sincere, teachers of the truth, to the intent through
their infirmity to cast some slander upon the doctrine. Furthermore because
that of the very newness thereof, others take liberty to be bolder than they
should be, it is ordinary also in new matters being, yet scarsly settled in
dew order, to mark whatsoever is done amiss. In this form let these and
such like be.

The third sort does partly consiste of surmised slanders, and partly
springs of the vntha^kfulnesse of men: while they fetch from a far sundry
accusations, which they maliciously and falsely charge the Gospel with, to the
intent thereby to make it hated. Many also of the^ that are counted faithful,
being entangled with men of an other, and almost clean contrary profession,
while they seek means to nourishe freendshippe, are carried away with
ambition, as with a tempest, that they had rather cast of the Gospel, than
dissent from the common trade of living. Saying therefore, that I must
encounter with so many and so sundry monsters, it was needeful to make this
said distinction, before and it had been for none other cause but this: that if
the infiniteness of the matter would not suffer all things to be rehearsed
particularly, the Readers might yet have recourse to the general. Therefore to
the intent I may begin to entreat of the first sort, it falls ill out
for the highstomacked men and such as are given to stateliness, that the holy
Ghost uses a homely and base kind of speaking in the Scriptures. And such as
are accustomed to elega^cie and finenesse, do either refuse or loathe this rude
style cladde with no colors of Rhetoric. In this behalf I like not to make
ye defense which other have entreated of: namely that such disdeine rises of
unskillfulness, for as much as Moses and diverse of the Prophets were as fine in
their own language, as the Philosophers and Orators which are with high
commendation and best likinge red among the Greeks and Latins. For although
it be known to be so in deed, to such as are skillful in the Hebrew tongue,
yet notwithstanding in as much as Amos is no less a Prophet than Esaias, and that
Jeremy obtained the same degree that David had, of whom not withstandinge,
the enditinge is not a like eligant, but rather the style of Jeremy sauoreth
of a Townesman, and the style of Amos has a smatch of a Herdma^: I willingly
confess, that the holy Scriptures wherein the heavenly Philosophy is wholly
contained, are void, not only of the florishinges of Rhetoricians, but also
of such mean garnishynge, as even the meaner learned sort do look for. But
they are over squeymishe, that find the less savor in them for that. And
such as under this pretext do abase ye authority of them, are to unequal and
malicious. Paul does not only grant that he wa^teth eloquence, but also
preaches it openly and glories in it, ought his doctrine doctrine therefore to
be ye less set by? Nay, rather, whereas is no floorishing of words to bleare
the eyes withal, there he warranteth the strength of the heavenly wisdom to
shine the better. Neither does he teach any other thing unto the.iiij.
chapter of the first Epistle to the Corinthians, than that the faith is then
verily, dewly founded in the wisdom and pour of the holy Ghost, when the
minds are not seduced with finenesse of enditinge and witty handlinge of the
matter. And this does every one of us know for a certentie, by the assured
experience of our faith. Surely if the doctrine of John or Paul were painted
with the colors of Demosthenes or Cicero, it might peradventure have more
grace to allure the Readers, but of weight to move the consciences, and of
worthiness to purchase it self authority, it should not have the hundredth
part that it has. For the Majesty of God utters it self there lively: in
so much that they are compelled, who so ever reads it, (unless it be such
whose minds the Devil has astonished,) to think that it is even God that
speaks unto them. And therefore they are to dullwitted, which take no taste
nor savor in ye Scriptures, because they find there no enticementes of
speech. But what if God will perce the heart through and through, rather than
with pleasant tinclinge, delight the ears? For whereas Paul, says that the
treasure of the Gospel is bestowed in earthe^ vessels, to the intent the power
of God may more clearly appear in the weakness of men, it agrees very well
to our present purpose. Thus much I may lawfully take upon me to say: that
there are no disputatio^s of the Philosophers so subtle, which are able more
strongly to persuade: no thunderinges of the Orators, that are able more
vehemently to move affections: than is the simple and rude style of the
scripture. For who sees not, how by the wonderful providence of God it is so
provided, ye in a base kind of speaking, the effectual woorkyng of the spirit
should nakedly much better show it self. They will needs have their ears
delighted with the sweetness of Eloquence: But God who formed man's tunge,
will stammer with us. Howbeit in his sta^mering he thundereth: and bears him
self with as hault and stately a gravity, to subdewe men's minds, as if the
cunningest of all Orators, should out of the treasorie of his art, put forth
of his best stuff, what so ever he had there in store. This way Paul teaches
spiritual things to be applied to spiritual things: and we our selves do
clearly see, how mighty, Gods plain and simple truth is of it self. Men
are then to stately, if for so small a matter as this is, they disdain to
Read the Scriptures, or think the authority of the heavenly doctrine, to be
therefore of less importance. But let us suffer the^ to have still their own
delight. And as for our own selves, if with the ears of our heart we harken
to God when he speaks, the rude and unpainted speech shall so little offend
us, that it shall rather lift us up to consider the majesty of the spirit,
appearinge in the same. For so ar the treasures of wisdom to be dug up,
which Paul admonishes us to be hidden in Christ. And hereof (if any man
will) he may find somewhat in the first Chaptre of mine Institutions, where
I dispute of the authority of the Scripture.

Now, to the intent we may proceed to the curing of Offenses of this sort, is
it meet I should frame a new prouinge from point to point, of the opinions
which are not delightful to man's reason? In good faith that were an endless
matter, saying those things may be fetched both out of mine and out of
otherme^s travels. And besides that, it were an unprofitable labor, to allege
the testimonies of the Scriptures for this purpose. For what shall it avail me
to declare the divinity of Christ plainly out of the Scripture, to such
kind of men. Uerely they will boldly reject what so ever I shall bring. Yea
rather this is a cause why they reject all the whole Scripture, by reason that
in their opinion, it seems to be an absurdity, as often as they meet with
any thing that likes them not. And therefore they seem then most wise in
their own conceits, when they laughe our simplicity to skorne, in that by
assured faith we embrace those things, which not only want proof to the
outward senses, but are also to man's judgment incredible. What idiot (say
they) would suffer himself to be persuaded, where he sees no reason to lead
him. To foolish were I, if I would stand in contention with them, by such
reasons as the sharpness of man's wit atteyneth too. For whereas we believe
that Christ was manifested to be God in the flesh: Paul confesses the same
to be a mystery, far removed from all perceiuerance of man. What then if
they would object unto us that it were an absurdity, and that we out of hand
did readely wash our hands of it, in such sort that they should be compelled to
stand dombe, unless they would impudently bark against us: yet could I not
bring to pass, but that they would count us more dulheaded than any Idiotes,
that would hang only upon the bare Scriptures, in the debatinge of so
weighty matters. Wherefore I will turn me to those that are tempted with such
kind of stumblinge blocks, but are nevertheless as yet curable.

Unto such I will minister none other Medicine, than that which Paul has
prescribed, namely that they learn to be foolish to the worldwarde, to the
intent they may be able to conceive the heavenly wisdom. We mean not by this
foolishness, that men should have their wits altogether dulled or amazed,
neither do we bid, that such as are learned in liberal sciences, should cast
away the knowledge of the^: or that such as are endewed with handsomnesse of
wit, should become brutish, as though he could not be a Christian unless he
were liker a beast than a man. The Christian profession requires us to be
children, not in understanding, but in malice. Howbeit least any man should
bring into the school of Christ, an affiaunce either in his own wit, or
in his own learning: least any man either swellyng in pride, or overcome with
lothsomnesse, should by and by put from him that which is laid before him,
before he have thoroughly tasted of it, if we do but offer our selves willinge
to be taught, we shall find here no let at all. But they that are wise (I say
in their own conceits only) to them their own pride is cause of fallinge.
And why so? Because the son of God has so much abased him self, as to
become thy brother, and join his eternal Godhead to thy mortal fleash, shall
that be a let to thee, that thou should not come unto him? will thou
withdraw thy self the further from God, because from his unmeasurable heighte
he has humbled him self to come down to thee? what if he should call thee
up into the height of heaven, whereto there is no access for thee of thy
self? how could thou make way to him so far of, that art offended at
him being so near hand? But thou say, it is a mo^struous thing to thee,
when thou hear that God is become mortal. And what other thing is that
else, than that God being immortal dwelled in our mortal fleashe? For the
matter itself cries out, that this thing was not in vain preached of John,
how there was seen in him such glory, both as was meet for the Son of
God, and also as showed no dark token of his own Godhead: unless it were thy
pleasure to devise monsters, you could surely find no monsters here. Our
faith has, that God took upon him a body subject to death. Here thou hear
a Mystery which thou ought to honor, and not a tale to scoff at: nor a
Monster to starcle at. Rather impute it to thine own unthankfulness, that
thy wonderinge at so inestimable a grace, swalloweth not up all thoughts
repugnant unto it. I know these things are spoken in vain unto many. Neither
is it hidden from me, what a laughing they make at us, because we seek for
life in the death of Christ, grace in his curse, and righteousness in his
condemnation. Uerely (say they) so flows cold water out of a burninge
furnace, and light springs so out of darkness. And hereuppon they conclude:
that nothing is more foolish than we, which hope for life at a dead man's
hand, which ask forgiveness of a condemned person, which fetch the grace
of God out of one that was cursed, and fly for refuge to the Cross, as to the
only author of everlasting salvation. And therewithal laughyng at our
simplicity, they think them selves very sharpewitted. But I say, they want
the thing which is chiefest in true wisdom: that is to wit, the feelinge
of the conscience. For what manner of wisdom, what manner of Reason, what manner
of Judgment is it, where the conscience is dulled? But whereof comes all
this, that they should so abhor the principels of Christian Religion? but
that the Devil has altogether so sotted them, that they are touched with no
fear of Gods judgment, nor conscience of sin? I said a little before,
that there was none other way for us to come to the wisdom of God, than by
becomminge fools to the world. But of this humbleness, like as of all the
rest of our Religion, the foundation is conscience and the fear of the Lord:
the which being taken away, in vain thou endeuorest to make up the
buildinge. Therefore, who so ever will easily vanquishe all the kinds of
Offenses by me mentioned, let him no more but enter deeply into him self. For
as soon as he shall acknowledge his own wretchedness, the way as well for him
unto Christ, as for Christ unto him, shall by and by be paued and made level.
The voice of the Prophet cries, prepare ye the ways of the Lord. And what
other thing is meant by preparyng of this way? but that men knowinge in how
great distress they were, should begin to long after Christ, whom
heretofore they lothed standing in their own conceit. By the same means
also we prepare us a way unto Christ: yea rather, that same godly longing of
ours, shall be to us in steed of horses and ships, to carry us saufely over al
letts. For like as to the atteininge of the higher sciences, is requisite a
fine and well furnished wit, so to this heavenly Philosophy, is requisite a
subdewed mind. For what taste can there be, where as is lothinge? what access
can there be, where the heart is enclosed and locked up with yronly hardness?
In vain therefore shalt thou talk of Christ, saving unto such as being
unfeignedly humbled, do feel how great need they have of a redeemer, by whose
benefit they may escape the destruction of eternal death. As many therefore as
will not wilfully be deceived and so perish, let them learn to begin with
this lesson, to know that they have to do with God, to whom they must ones
give an account: Let the^ also set before their eyes that judgment seat
which makes even the Angels to tremble. Let them think that the Devil is
hard at hand to accuse them. Let them harken to their own conscience bearyng
witness against the^. Let them not harden their hearts against the pricks of
sin, and then there shall be no danger for them at all, of finding any thing
to be ashamed at in the death of Christ, or to scare them from him with the
slander of his cross, or finally to withdraw them selves from him for any
let. Of this thing ye may behold a very goodly image in the woman of Samaria.
Who as long as Christ disputed with her of the mystical drawinge of the water
of life, was pleasantly disposed to prattle with him and to overthwart him, and
was pretely bold to dally and jest with him: but as soon as he had ones touched
her conscience, by casting her in the teeth with her whoredom, by and by
forgetting her merry conceits, she reverently acknowledged him for a Prophet,
whom newly before, she sticked not to disquiet with her tau^ts. Therefore
whosoever is offended by Christ, for ioyninge his Godhead in one person with
the Manhood, or whosoever thinks it an absurd thing, to seek life at him
that was dead, and to call the cursed Cross the wellspringe of all grace and
salvation, let us assure our selves, that they are therefore offended,
because that being utterly void of the fear of God, they have no taste at
all of the spiritual doctrine. Wherefore let not their astonishment be a
stumblinge block to us, but rather let us be carried from the human nature
of Christ, to the glory of his Godhead, which may turn all curious
questions into admiration: let us de directed from the death of Christ, to his
glorious Resurrection, which may wipe away all the slander of his Cross:
let us pass from the weakness of the flesh to the pour of the Spirit,
which may swallow up all foolish thoughts. Sure it is that Paul was endewed
with such an understanding, when he said thus: I am not ashamed of the
Gospel of Christ, for it is the pour of God to the salvation of them that
believe. For by these words he means that none are ashamed of the Gospel,
but such as take not hold of ye healthful power thereof: moreover he
declares by and by after, that it cannot otherwise be taken hold of, than
when the wrath of God is made manifest to our destruction. Who can now marvel,
that meat has no favor with them, that have no taste? For who so ever is so
astonished, ye he sleeps soundly being touched with no revelation of the wrath
of God, he differs nothing in the acknowledginge of Christ, from such as in
discerning of savors, have their taste taken from them. As for such men, we
are not wont to pass so much of them, that any of us would therefore loathe
our meat, because they refuse it. But this kind of Offense, which rises
likewise out of the doctrine, is more violent and more common: because that
whereas of Nature we like well of our selves, and would have all our own
things to be had in high estimacion: we find nothing left unto us there,
saving utter poverty of all good things. For there all the wisdom of men is
condemned of folly, and their righteousness and virtue is brought to a thing
of naught. Now this thing seems so intolerable to our proud flesh, that
for very spite they gnashe their teeth, as many as have not learned to deny
the^ selves. For men are ever desirous to keep somewhat of their own: and
albeit that in some behalf, they give place to God against their wills, yet
they can by no means abide, that al should be taken from the^ at ones. At the
beginning they seem very wise: they are puffed up with trust in their own
power: and they like well of their own righteousness. Afterward being
admonished by God: and partly also convicted by experience, they find that
their wisdom stackereth, and that their power and righteousness halteth. And
yet they cannot by any means be persuaded to believe, that they are utterly
destitute of al wisdom and righteousness. And what other thing is this, than
as it were by composition to part stake with God? Now the Gospel pronounces
that light which we imagine our selves to have, to be utter darkness: and it
in such sort leaves unto us no drop at all of righteousness, that is
pronou^ceth it to be stinkinge filthiness before God, what so ever we bring
of our selves. Hereat the worldly wisemen begin to chause, and the hipocrites
become mad. And this was the chief cause, why at the beginning of Christ's
kingdom, all the sects of the Philosophers, together with all the politic
governors, did set themselves so earnestly against the Gospel. For they might
not endure to have their own wisdom defaced, which they themselves honored
as an Idol, and for the which they knew themselves to be had in great
reputacion. Would God the ancient Doctors had made less courtesy to offend
such kind of men. For while they studied to make medicines to assuage their
malady, they left unto us a watrish and unkindly piece of divinity. Origin,
Tertullian, Cyprian, Basil, Chrysostom, and the rest of that order, would
never have spoken so of their own free motion: but whiles they sought a
mitigation to appease ye worldly wiseme^, or to avoid their displeasure, they
confounded heaven and earth together. To bring man altogether under foot, was
a hateful thing, and repugnant to common reason: and therefore they seek a
mitigation approchyng nearer to the fleshly vnderstadinge: but in the mean
time, the pureness of the doctrine is profaned. Nothing then had been better,
than to have crushed the byle hard, to the intent judgment might be given by
the filthiness of the matter. But nothing is more evident, than that men have
always been stirred up with outrageous pride, to make adoo against the
Gospel. The same cause also moved the Jews to that beastly rage, wherewith
the Evangelists, and specially Luke and Paul, do witness them to have been
carried. For they strove in defense of their rightuousenesse, which was
nothing else than smoke, and yet it seemed to them more precious than Christ.
Both of the^ ran with might and main to assault the Gospel: but the Jews
ran more furiously: whereby it might manifestly appear, that nothing is more
spightfull than the Hypocrites. Of this Offense Christ him self speaks
generally: when he says, that the children of this world do hate the light
of the Gospel, least their evil works should appear. For were the Gospel
put away, then as though the light were clearly quenched, the deceitful and
transitory wisdom of the fleash shines in darkness, and reigns like a
Prince: and counterfeite holiness spreads her wings proudely every way
about her. But as soon as Christ the only Son of righteousness, with the
brightness of his Gospel shows him self, those things which heretofore
occupied the chief room of honor, do not only vanishe away, but are as
little set by as dunge. This verily is the ground of all their grief: This
is that stumblinge block, whereof Paul speaks in another place, that going
about to stablish their own righteousness, they have not been subject to the
righteousness of God. Which thing also we see this day by experience. For ye
shall see few that are puffed up with the persuasion of their own
righteousness, but they be obstinate enemies of the truth. As for the
Hypocrites, they rage against it like mad dogs, even to the death. And what
other cause had Bunell to turn from the Gospel, but that being a man borne to
ostentation, and standinge to much in his own conceit, he could ill abide to
be made fellowlike with his inferiors? This one man I have named for examples
sake, would God he had not many like unto him. But what is there for us to
do? Let us suffer them to fall against the stumblynge stone, that the like may
happen to them, that happened in times paste to the Jews: while they endeavor
to stablishe their own righteousness (says S. Paul) they are exempted from
the righteousness of God, and so it comes to pass, that they perish in
their own blindness. Let us, I say, offer our selves empty and naked
unto Christ willingely, to the intent he may fill us with his goodness, and
clothe us with his glory, and then shall this kind of stumblynge block be
abolished.

But I should take in hand as it were to lade out the Sea, if I would search
out and rehearse in order, all causes of Offenses, which wretched men make to
them selves out of the doctrine of the Scripture, to their own destruction.
For they stumble, not only through rashness when they meet with any
difficulte thing, but they make their vagaries wilfully and of set purpose
through all the rough places, as though they had none other pleasure, but to
weary their wit about crabbed questions. What so ever has any likelihode of
absurdity be it never so little, that gather they busily and sifte it
narrowly, least they should seem over light of credit. Also if there be any
likelihoode of disagreement and contrariety, as there seems to be in many
places of Scripture, that catch they hold on greedely, and heapinge together
all such manner of testimonies, they make a boastinge of their own sharp
wit. This kind of me^ are troubled with a disease almost incurable. For
whereas they are ashamed to be ignorant in any thing, yet may they find in their
hearts to learn nothing. But forasmuch as with their braggyng they many times
wound the consciences of the simple, and such as otherwise would be apt
enough to be taught, it is needful to touch this part of offendinge lightly
in few words: not because they can be removed with few words, against
whom a long volume would not fuffise. But first and formest we are all to be
warned, that in reading of Scriptures we keep that way, which the spirit
of God shows: which assuredly shall be plain and level unto such as aspire
to Christewarde. Secondly that we covet not to be, or to seem to be witty, in
writing knottes of questions. Lastly, that we do not by and by cast it up,
if we find any thing unknown or dark to us. This is a vice worthy no
small rebuke, that the ignorance of many, makes them by and by to burste out
into lothinge. But surely he gives small reverence unto God, which denies yt
to be his word, whatsoever his wit does not reach unto. For what else is
this? than to measure Gods infinite wisdom by our small capacity of
understanding, which were as much as to measure the whole world with one
fingar. But if we grant the Scripture to have proceeded from God, let us not
marvel that many things are contained therein, which are far above our
capacity. Finally in Godliness, this is the mean and order of being wise: to
strive to get right understanding through the obedience of faith.

Of the Offense that springs of the sharpness and painfulness of the
Cross, and the severity of the doctrine, our Lord speaks in the Parable,
where he likeneth the Gospel unto sowynge of corn. For, such as fail when
persecution approaches, he likeneth to the corn that sprange up, but had no
root. And those in whom the doctrine is choked with cares of this world, he
likened to corn growe^ up among thorns, which hinder his fruitefulnesse and
ripinge. These kinds of Offenses do somewhat differ: howbeit for avoiding
tediousnes, I comprehend them both under one kind. We hear Christ tell all
his Disciples, that every of the^ must take up his cross. We hear him
exhortinge them to abide all kind of hatred, dangers, and reproaches for his
names sake: We hear him give warninge, that it cannot otherwise come to pass,
but that we shall be hated of the ungodly, and that afflictions must follow us
continually in this world. We hear him declaryng, that all they are blissed,
which suffer persecution for the truths sake. This is the greatest stumblinge
block that may be to fleashe and blood. For of nature, we fear the Cross
all of us. And therefore many for this cause do starte back, who else would
willingly embrace the Son of God, if they could sever him from the Cross.
But whereof comes this Offense, but of our own tenderness? Christ
commands us to die with him, that we might be partakers of his life: by
accompaniynge him in his Passions, he is minded to bring us to his glory. It
is no unequal condition, if there were any equity in us. But many would
feign have Christ, to be a gloriouse Christ, buriynge the mention of his
Cross, which cannot be. And yet not contented therewith, they lay the fault
which is in them selves, upon the pure Doctrine. So in times paste, the
Capernaites cried out that the saying of Christ was hard, when the
hardenesse was in themselves and not in the saying: Do we marvel if the
Son of God would have his Disciples hearty, and not meycockes and womanlike?
Do we marvel if he would have his Antesignes carried by them, and command
them to fight under his banner? Next cousin unto this disease, is that other
whereof I have spoken. For deniynge of the fleashe is so troublesome a thing,
that it fears many from enteringe into Christ's school, and thrusts
othersome quite out of doors, that were already entered. They will metely
well endure to hear original sin, and the common vices of nature disputed
upon: Thet can well find in their hearts, that the grace of God and the
benefits of Christ should be set forth with dew praise: but when it comes
to healing of every several ma^s diseases, because the medicine is sharp,
they stubbornly refuse it: so ye may see many, to whom the Gospel was pleasant
at the first taste, which think it tootoo bitter as soon as it has pricked
their consciences. Uerely, seeing the word of God is a sharp two edged
swoorde, and seeing the properties thereof is, not only to reprove and
reprehende by outward means, but also to search to the bottom of the heart,
to perce through all the marye, to discern between affections and thoughts,
and finally to sacrifice the whole man unto God: these folk cannot abide to
have their wou^des touched: Some desire to have liberty left them to steal:
some to get by extortion: some to follow whoredom: and some to haunt riottynge
and excess. All covet to run the race of their vanity without check. What
wonder then is it, if they turn themselves from Christ? But some man will say,
this is to show the cause of Offense, but not to take it away. I answer,
that the disease was first to be declared, to the intent that remedy might
afterward be sought. The niceness of men's minds was to be corrected,
rather than clokinges thereof to be sought, which could nothing further us,
and yet nourishe vice. But it is a high matter. Who denies that?
notwithstanding we must strive, and that not by our own strength, but by the
strength of Christ: who as he sends us out to the battle, so also he
furnishes us with armor and weapon to win victory. O, if we understood
what avails this saying: Blessed are they that suffer persecution for
righteousness sake: how easy were it for us to wind our selves, not only
out of this Offense, but also of all other, whatsoever the world and the
flesh seek to enforce upon us. Persecution is so troublesome to thee, that
thou startest from Christ. And why? Forsooth because thou know not what
Christ may avail thee. The care of this present world carries thee away:
and that is because thou have no taste of the world to come. Covetousness
burns thee: verily because thou know not yet, which are the true riches.
Thou art drowned with ambition: because undoubtedly thou know not to glory
in the Lord. Gluttony, fleashly lust, pomp, or other vain delights entice
thee to forget thy God: and that comes to pass, because as yet thou art
ignorant of that sweetness, which the Prophet testifies to be laid up for
them that fear God. Finally, it is no marvel though there be few true
Christians to be found, because there are few that have learned that Christ
is so much woorthe, that all things else are to be counted as dunge. But
another place will serve better for exhortations. Here I must so entreat of
Offenses, that it may appear to whom they ought of right to be imputed. But
why do I make such a disputinge of every man's private miseries, seeing the
state of the universal Church does contain in it far greater occasion of
Offense? First, it never shines with such outward beauty, that the senses
of men may discern therein the kingdom of God. Secondely, if it happen at any
time to grow to some mean state, by and by it is either oppressed with the
violence of Tyrants, or it decays of the own accord: so that it continues
but a very small time. Herupon it comes to pass, that in all ages proud men
did either despise, or slanderously misreporte the true Religion. We see how
arrogantly Cicero taunteth the law of God, because the Jews had so ill
success. By this one man ye may give judgment at all. And to the intent I
digress not to far, what is the cause that many at this day abhor the
sincere profession of the Gospel? but that they see us to be few in number,
and of small authority, and of no power at all: whereas they wonder to see all
things contrary on the behalf of our adversaries. And surely as the world
goes now a days, it is no marvel though the state of the Church being so
misordred as it is, do fear them away: and that the gloriousness that
shyneth in our adversaries do dazzle their eyes. But none other do stumble at
this Stone, neither doothe this stumblynge block keep any back, saving such
as acknowledge not the kingedome of Christ to be Spiritual. For such unto
whom neither the stable wherein Christ was borne, nor the Cross whereon he
hunge, is a let to woorshippe him as their King: they shall never despise
the lowly state of his Church. All men confess in word, and of necessity
must confess, that it is most agreeable to reason, that in the form of the
Church, as it were in a Glass, should appear the lively Image of Christ.
And when Paul reasons of the similitude of the head and the members in the
sufferance of the Cross, all men agree thereto. When he says we must all die
with Christ, that we may be partakers of his life, no man speaks against
him. When all the whole Scripture compares this present life to a warrefare,
and teaches that it is full of diverse sorts of conflictes, they consent that
all this is true and right: and therefore the name of the Militant Church is
so commonly known, that ye shall hear it even in childrens mouths. But
as soon as it comes to the pith of the matter, as though they had forgotten
all things, they shu^ne the image of Christ, as it were some monster that
they never heard of. Howbeit, if their longyng should be granted them, that
the Church should by all means enjoy prosperity, that it should flourish in
wealth and power, that it should have continual peace, and finally that it
should want nothing that might make the state thereof most fortunate and
happy, should it not appear to be an earthly kingedome? And then the
Spiritual kingedome of Christ were to be sought for else where. Or rather the
Church should be utterly separated from the head. But let us remember, that
the outward show of the Church is fo contemptible, to the intent her beauty
should shine inwardely: and that it wauereth so on earth, to the intent it
should have a steadfast seat in Heaven: and that it lies so torn and
ruinouse before the world, to the intent it should stand sound and florishe
before God and his Angels: and that it is so miserable in the flesh, to the
intent it should the rather have her felicity laid up in the spirit. In this
wise when Christ lay despised in the Oxestall, the Angels song his
excellency in the clouds: the Star in Heaven bare witness of his glory:
the wisemen perceived his power in a country far of. When he hungered in the
desert, when he strove against the illusions of the Devil, when he sweat
drops of blood, the Angels again did minister unto him: when he was now
ready to be bound, he compelled his enemies to fall backewarde with the only
word of his mouth. When he hunge upon the Cross, the Sun by loosinge his
light, showed openly that he was King of the world. The sepulchers openinge,
confessed him to be Lord of life and death. Now if we see Christ through
the despightes of the wicked, proudely dealte with all in his body, oppressed
with cruel Tyranny, made a laughing stock, drawn violently hither and
thither, none of these things as unaccustomed ought to abashe us: but rather
we ought to call to mind, that the Church was ordained for this purpose, that
it should continually go a warfare under the Cross, as long as it wandereth
in this world.

But if we were handsome and indifferente interpreters of the works of God,
the thing whereat we take occasion to be offended, should be the best
comfort for us that could be. For whereas the state of the Church is for the
most part miserable, and always unstable, or rather for as much as it is
continually tossed with diverse storms as it were in a roughe sea: first the
Lord gives an evident token of his wonderful providence: and secondely it is
a profitable and as much necessary exercise, for the trial of our faith and
patience. If the Church were so founded, and altogether fortified, that it
might stay upon the own power, it should differ nothing from an earthly
kingedome: neither would any man doubt that it were governed by man's policy,
if it had stood all at one ordinary stay unto this day. But when we see that
through (as it were) innumerable deaths, it has nevertheless continued alive
so many hundred years, it can none otherwise be, but we must needs gather,
that it was preserved by the power of God. This great power of God, other
circumstances do make more manifest: in that when it was assaulted on all
sides with deadly dangers, wherewith oftentimes it might have been overwhelmed,
maugre welneere the whole world which wrought the worste it could against
it, it always escaped as it had been from shipwrecke. I say nothing herein
which any manne may not easily acknowledge in him self, who so ever will
set before his eyes the Histories of all times. This is an old co^plainte of
the Church, that it has been assaulted oftentimes from her youth up, and has
had the ungodly her utter enemies: that they have ploughed upon her back, and
drawn long furrows upon her. By this voice, the spirit of God would raise up
the godly sort, that lie gronynge under most grievous miseries, to the intent
that ru^ninge through all degrees of ages from the beginning of the world,
they should know that the Church has always overcome by sufferance. Heruppon
ought we to set our minds continually: to the intent that if at any time the
present state of our time do trouble us, the remembrance of those things
which our fathers have suffered in time past, may refreshe us. And therefore
it shall be expedient, to have a description of all times gathered together, to
the intent that every one of us may from thence set before our eyes, examples
meet to assuage our miseries, as often as the race and need shall require.

Howbeit ere I proceed any further, it is needful to note whereupon so many
and so sundry chaunges whereby the Church of God is oftentimes turned and as
it were wheeled about, do arise. The knowledge of this thing is not to be
fetched from far and obscure conjectures, saying the continual starting of
men from God, has broken the course of his grace, which otherwise had been
continual: which thing ye may understand almost from the beginning of the
world. When Moses speaks of Seth and his son Enos, it is there recited
that at the same time, the name of God was begone to be called upon. Whereby
we understand, that the true worshipping of God, (which in the cursed
ofspringe of Cain was in manner utterly decayed) was restored anew again, that
it might thrive and flourish in the world. Scarce eight generations passed, when
all the posterity of them whom God had segregated to himself for his own
children, had thrown themselves in such wise into all kind of wickedness,
that with themselves they destroyed by flood of water, all the whole world
defiled with their abominations. At such time as the Church was brought to
eight persons, it seemed then at leastwise so purged, that ye little seed
which remained, should of it self bring forth nothing but pure holiness.
And yet anon after, it diminished almost by the fourth part. The posterity
of Iaphet also, within a while after fleeted away. There remained no more but
the householde of Sem, the which it self ere it was any long time, grew out
of kind also: so that God did worthily exclude from him a great part of it.
When the Ofspringe of Abraham, being by wonderful power brought out of Egypt,
had passed the red Sea, and was going toward the land of Promise, who
would not of luckie beginninges have judged that there should have ensewed a
continuance of a happy state? Notwithstanding, even the very same, in whose
deliverance God had showed so manifest a proof of his power, made no end of
sinninge, until such time as by horrible means, they were all destroyed in
the wilderness. At length the children of them took possession of the said
land: but yet such a possession, as well near in six hundred years after,
had no stabilitie, because they themselves through their own falsenesse and
vnco^stancie, did eftsoons trouble it. Nevertheless the Lord did diverse times
restore them to a tolerable order. All the which notwithstanding, neither the
remembrance of their first deliverance, nor the rod that was laid upon them,
so oftentimes to chasten them, nor the present feelinge of punishments, nor the
often pardoning of them, could keep them in awe, but that by shakinge of the
yoke of God, they procured new mischiefs to themselves. Moses had told them
before how it would come to pass, that when they were fat and well fed,
they would kick again: but the thing in deed was far worse, what does the
story of the Judges rehearse, but continual backeslidinges? Wherefore if any
be offended at the sundry shakinges, whereunto they see the Church subject in
this world, let them cast their eyes upon that Glass, and they shall leave
wo^deringe to see them have uncertain abidynge upon Earth, who with so great
vnconstantnesse of faith do waver before God. After that the Kingedome of
David was erected, there seemed a more certain and grounded kind of a state
like to continewe, to have been stablished. But that lamentable slaughter of
the Pestilence, which by the space of three days after a monstrous manner
raged in the world, abated greatly that felicity. By and by after the death
of Solomon, the body of the Realm was divided, and the torn members ceased
not afterward to byte one another. And moreover both Kingdoms were miserably
turmoyled by foreign wars. Shall we say their destenie drane them thereunto?
Nay rather they themselves through their sins enforced and hastened the
vengeance of God. For even wherein they seemed most innocent, namely while
David goes through with numberynge of them, because it was the peculiar fault
of one man: yet the holy History says plainly that God was wroth with them
all. At length followed that great conversion little differinge from utter
destruction, when all the whole Nation was led captive to Babylon. But surely
if their own desperate stubbornness had not driven them hedlonges, they had
never come to this point of misery. Their return after threescore and ten
years, was unto them another birthe. Notwithstanding, as soon as they were
returned home, straight ways forgettinge so great a benefit, they degenerate
again into sundry kinds of naughtines. Some defiled themselves with Heathen
marriages: some (to unworthily to speak of) defrauded God of his te^thes and
first fruits. Other some settinge light, and neglectyng the buildinge of the
Temple, were wholly occupied in making gaye houses, and bestowed excessive
costs thereabout. This was too to foul an unthankfulness, and such a one as
every man must confess ought not to escape unpunished. And therefore, that they
enjoyed not tranquillity and prosperous fortune any long time together, they
themselves are in the fault. Now since the time that Christ the author of
peace and of all good things showed himself to the world, men might
assuredly have felt how certain and well fownded the felicity of his
eternal Kingedome is, if they would have suffered him to rest among them. But
the world was never shaken with more cruel te^pestes of war, nor never
drowned in so manifold and deep a sink of evils. The cause whereof is not
hidden in such darkness, but that by searchyng it may easily be found out.
At the time that Christ was borne, there was peace and singular quietness
euerywhere. Forty years after, or theraboutes, his Gospel was spread through
diverse coasts of the world. After it was published far and near, suddenly
as though fortune had changed her copy, things began to be on a turmoile
euerywhere. And whereof came so sodeine alteration, but that God for the
contempt and refusal of his Gospel, how much the sooner, so much also the
more manifestly, revenged so great unthankfulness. Therefore, when lewd men
charged the name of Christ with whatsoever evil happened in those days, it
was an easy matter for the godly teachers of the Church, to disprove their so
tryflinge slanders. And why not? For when Kings and their people had despised
the peace which God offered them, was it not right and reason, that they
should be set together by the ears, that one of them might wound another
to the death? And what can continewe in order among them, who refuse to
submit themselves to God? I speak not only of the open enemies, which have
wilfully striued against the wholesome doctrine of Godliness, but also of them
that have professed them selves Christians, how coldly and disdainefully many
of them, and with how false dissimulation othersome have kissed Christ. Such
as are offended at the examples of Gods severity in this behalf, would be as
ready to find fault with him, if he should hold his hand. But unless it
grieve us to open our eyes, to whomesoeuer God at any time manifested himself,
we shall see that they only were the let that their own felicity was not
placed in saulftie to endure a long time and of great continuance: and that
they became miserable through no other means, save their own fault. We know
that Jerusalem was the Fountain from whence Salvation flowed into the
vttermoste bounds of the Earth. All the sayings of the Prophets had promised
to it full instrauration at the cominge of Christ. Nevertheless it fell out
far otherwise. For whereas it retained scarce a thin shadow of the ancient
worthiness, it not only within a while after lost that that remained, but
was utterly cast down also and made a waste wilderness. What is the reason
that no man trauelleth in seekinge the cause of so monstrous a ruin, but that
the desperate wickedness of that nation, does openly cry out that the same
was the cause thereof? Rome was never plagued with so many cruel slaughters in
so short a time, as it has been since the Gospel came thither. How came it
to pass that the kingedome of Christ could have no steadfast continuance in
that City, wherein the lawless lust of the commonaltie had borne swinge so
long time? wherein wicked parttakinges had reigned? and at length also
intolerable Tirantes had borne authority? Undoubtedly because that when God
brought the Medicine of his Gospel thither, as the uttermost remedy against so
many deadly diseases, they like persons yt had sworn their own destruction,
prowdely reiectinge it, ceased not to fall from worse to worse. The very
self same thing, we may mark in this our age. Within these few years when
the Church being as it were newborn again, had had a glorious beginning,
we saw it soon after slide down and carried back again. Howbeit before the
Lord laid this punishment upon us, we saw the Gospel diverse and sundry
ways euerywhere filthely abused: in so much that the sudden turninge up of
things that happened, is not so greatly to be wondered at, as Gods long
sufferance in bearinge with the prodigious wickedness of our time. Among so
many thousand men as to outward appearance had very gladly denied the Pope,
and professed themselves Gospellers: how few I beseech you, fell to amendment
of their vices? Nay rather what did the greater part pretend, but that when
the yoke of superstition was shaken of, they might more licentiously give
themselves to all carnal liberty? Albeit therefore that they confessed the
doctrine of the Gospel to be true, yet where was there one among a number,
that submitted his neck under the awe thereof? Was not this as much in
effect, as to tread under foot the inestimable treasure of our Salvation?
And surely the sharpness of the punishment that ensued so wicked a contempt,
ought rather to put us in remembrance of the preciousnesse thereof, than to
engendre in our minds absurd opinions of the casual afflictions of the
Church. But rather it is to be wondered at, considering our so great
unthankfulness, that any part of the work remains which God has begone.

Now will I return to my purpose, from whence I have by little and little made
digression: That God is hereby better known to be the keeper of this Church,
because it has always been miserably vexed, than if it had flourished among
the greatest commodities, in peaceable joy and tranquillity. At such time as
the name of God was begone to be called upon in the householde of Seth, (as
Moses declares) no doubt but the Ofspringe of Cain, like as they were mo in
number and bolder in all mischief, so also they vaunted themselves over
proudely against them, being both few and given to meekness. How then could
the La^bes have any while continued saulfe among the Woulues, if they had not
been shielded with the helpinge hand of God? Afterward also, continually from
time to time, as the wicked sort grew in malice, so grew they in power and
ability to hurt: shall we say they stood by man's power and policy, who
lived like persons overwhelmed among so many outrageous beasts? Unless
peradventure any man will surmise, that the Giantes were of modesty restrained
from doing harm to the godly that were in their danger, of whom they knew
themselves abhorred, as an adulterous offspring. At length remained but one man
with a small household, who being commanded by the Lord to build the Arc, by
the space of a hundred and twenty years together, provoked against himself
the ragynge madness of them, that were altogether out of their wits against
God. For in seeking a new kind of Sanctuary to save his own life, he
threatened destruction openly to them all. How often (may we think) that he,
being provoked with their raylinge and lewd behavior, did earnestly stand
in contention with them on the behalf of Gods righteousness? now in such
a number of cruel enemies, must he not have stand to the hazard of as many
deaths, unless he had been delivered by the hand of God? Reckon hereunto
that if he had not been sustained by the power of God, he had of himself a
thousand times every year come to nothing. Afterward ensues a greater and
more heavenly miracle in the Arc, that being deprived of sky and air, he
found life no where but as it were in the grave: he had not where to draw the
breath of life, but where it was unlike but he should be stifled to death: and
finally that he could not otherwise abide in the world alive, except he
departed out of the world. When God had after a sort renewed the world, now
putting up the head out of the flood, there followed within a while after a
greater and more noisome flood of ungodliness, which overwhelmed all Nations.
Neither was this of ten months: but raginge a long continuance of years,
it gathered such strength, that the very household of Sem the holy
treasurehouse of God, had like to have been swallowed up, but that
Melchisedecke with a few other retayninge the pure worshippynge of God, stood
vprighte and not disceaued among innumerable waves: which was the only way
for him to swim to land. God to the intent to save Abraham, was feign to
lead him out of the deep whorlepoole of Idolatry. Moreover being brought
into the land which was appointed for his inheritance, he so wandered in it,
that one while he was driven to make contention for water, and another while he
was feign to remove otherwhere for the famine. In the Courts of two Kings, he
could find none other shift to avoid the danger of death, than by settinge
as it were to the spoil, his own wife more dear to him than his life. The
same, and also more sharp troubles, did his Son and his Sons Son endure
daily among cruel and savage people, as it were among wild beasts, not
without peril of their lives. Certainly he must be worse than stark
blind, that does not plainly behold the hand of God, in the defense of
their welfare. And it is not without cause, that David gives a singular
comme^dation to this aid of God, whereby they were in faulfgarde: when he
says, that Kings were forbidden to hurt the Lords anointed, or to trouble
his Prophets. They were few in number: they were aliantes and unknown men:
they wandered like Pilgrims from place to place, they were environed round
about with falseharted and outrageous people: they had no moment of time free
from some new kind of danger. I confess this was a disdeinfull sight for
proud men, and almost shameful to. How be it as I said before, In this
disdainfulness as it had been in a Glass, did better appear Gods
extraordinary defendinge his Church. Yea rather it is more evidently to be
seen, that the Church has not been saved out of one floudde only, but that
it has also nevertheless continued many ages, floting from time to time in
continual waves of euilles.

Anon after followed the bondage in Egypt, which had smally differed from an
universal shipwrecke, but that God put too his helpinge hand in time. I will
omit the reproach and over grievous burdens that were laid upon them, in
that they were kept like slaves to most vile and filthy works: and that
they were oppressed with such excessive miseries, that they had much adoo to
take breathe. But when Pharao had commanded all yt issue male to be utterly
destroyed, who would not have said that ye matter lay a bleeding? The Midwiues
lied, to the intent they would not become furtherers of the kings cruelty.
Finally Moses himself who afterward should be the deliverer of ye people, was
put in a wicker basket, and cast at the bank of the river. The welfare of the
whole Nation lay in despair, and the very name of them seemed to be utterly
blotted out. How wonderful then shall we judge this miracle of God, that they
which might have been ten times consumed, do not only remain saulfe, but
also do accomplish those incredible proceedings whereof Moises makes report.
But here the lewdnes of man shows it self to malicious, in regardinge the
works of God. For if they hear of any thing greater than they can conceive,
done by God for the help of his Church, they reject it as a Fable. What so
ever is common and otherwise customable, they despise it, affirminge it either
to have happened by chance, or at leastwise to have been brought to pass by
man's power and policy. If the state of the Church be less prosperous and
joyful than they look for, by and by they take occasion thereat to be
offended. And therefore because Moses reports that the grievous and slavish
work of brickemakinge was laid upon the wretched Jews as it had been upon
brute beasts: that their issue male was from the mothers womb delivered,
cruelly called for to be slain to death: that they fled privily away by
(...) out of order with Jewels that they had borrowed, like a sort of
rascalles: all this seems unto many an uncomely thing and against the honor
of the Church. Yea whereas he reports Jacob and his householde to have been
courteously entertained of Pharao, and that he was gently used, and placed in
the best pasture country, they impute it wholly to good fortune, whereas the
same one householde is said to have grown to a great people ere it was any
long time after: whereas the same Moses declares, that so many Miracles were
wrought by God, for the deliverance of the outcaste and forlorn Israelites:
because it was more than could be believed they scoff at it as a feigned
thing. To the intent therefore we may bring pure minds to the consideringe
of Gods works, we must first purge them of this lewdness borne and
bredde in them of Nature.

Least I may seem to frame an history, (which is no part of my present
purpose) it suffiseth me lightly, and as it were by the way to touch the
examples of Gods providence in preseruinge his Church, which are worthy to
be decked and set out with glorious enditinge. Albeit (to say the truth) the
order of this work, suffers me not to touch the tenthe part of them,
neither is it a matter so greatly requisite: so be it that the Readers may by
these few know this one thing which I intend: namely that how much the
Church was more oppressed under the Cross, so much the more notable was the
power of God in liftinge it up. From the first enteringe of the people into the
land of Chanaan, their own unbelief was the only let why they possessed it
not free from enemies and in quietness. Afterward it was assaulted with
continual invasions of enemies. Furthermore, when their power was decayed and
brought under foot, it lay open to the spoil and to be wasted. Moreover it
oftentimes changed masters, which nevertheless conspired all in one, who
might make most havoc of it. In so much that it may be a wonder how in so
many and so cruel destructions hanginge over it, it remained undestroyed.
Surely after the Ark of the Lord was taken, there was not an inche breadth
between it and utter despair: it was scorged with an exceedyng great
slaughter: almost all the flower of their manhood perished: being scattered
and dispersed, they minded nothing in the world but weepinge and lamentinge.
Howbeit, while, for the grieuousnesse of their euilles, they sought not any
remedy, first was given them a little breathinge time: afterward upon the
sudden beyond all hope or expectation, help shone upon them from Heaven. At
such time as Saul was slain, the like destruction ho^ge over their heads,
when David in the twinclinge of an eye restored things decayed. If continual
success of peace and prosperity had followed them, the rare felicity of that
people might have been set out with greater commendations, but so many
helps which God wonderfully sent the^, could not so well have been known.
Afterward when ten Tribes had rent themselves from the body, such a break,
specially among many enemies lyinge continually in the wind, to hurt them
whenever occasion served, seemed to threaten present destruction. Anon after
the Israelites degenerated into strange customs, and for the same cause they
were after a sort banished from the householde of God: as for the remnant
which is counted the Church of God, no man would think it should stand
long. And surely that people was oftentimes brought to such an afterdeale,
that being paste all hope of recovery, it stood in a maze lookinge for utter
destruction. In the time of Achaz when two most puisant Kings assailed even
Jerusalem it self, all the Country was turmoyled, as it had been burninge
with two fires at ones. Achaz being beside himself for fear, was like
enough to have been confounded at the first assault of his enemies. But
sodeinly without man's help that great fire was quenched and the smoke alayed.
Did not (think you) the glory of God show it self with full blaze in this
deliverance? At what time Seanacherih had invaded the kingdom destitute of
defense, he furiously set upon the fearful City, nothing furnished to make
resistance: Ezechias the King was in manner like a prisoner, there was no way
to escape out, there was no help within, there was no succor to come from else
where: now, while the enemy vauntinge himself over arrogantly is drawn
another way, does not this so sodeine alteration contrary to all hope, show
that it is true which was spoken before by the Prophet Esaias? that God had in a
readiness a way either to tame that cruel beast, or to hold him short? But
whereas anon after puffed up with a new victory he returns again, the Lord
showed another manner of proof than this of his grace and power in raysinge
the siege. For he calls him not from thence by men, either withstandeth his
assaults, and cutteth of his attemptes in the mids by ordinary means: But
with such a slaughter as never was heard of by the hand of an Angel,
taking his army from him in one night, he drives him naked and despoyled by
shameful flight far out of Iewrie, which he held with a great Host like a
conqueror. Assuredly this one deed is a sufficient example, that nothing
sometime is more expedient, than that the Church should be pinched with utter
distress, yt it may learn to thank the wonderful power of God for her
saulfe deliverance. And double unthankful were we, if we put a veyle wilfully
before our faces, to blemish the sight of Gods favor toward his Church, when
as God himself sets a clear mirror thereof before our eyes.

Now there cannot almost any deformity of the Church be fained so ugly to the
sight of the world, as the banishment of Babylon. The cruel sackynge of all
things, the foul destroying and wastinge of the Country, the castinge down
and defacinge of the City by fire and fury of the enemy, the horrible
overthrow of the Temple, the unworthy spoylinge of the holy furniture
thereof, how great liberty of vauntinge might they give to the enemies? And
the things that I have now reckened, do show how arrogantly the Chaldies
behaved themselves. By all likelihoode the worshippinge of God was euerywhere
rayled and scoffed at in all men's mouths. Howbeit these things were but as
certain preparatiues. The people being led to Babylon, was like a dead
carkesse as it were laid into the grave: sauinge that this difference there
was, that the torn members were scattered asunder, least they should grow
together again. There was no house of God any more, there was no Sanctuary,
no inklinge of Gods service, no solemn assemblies, no nor so much as the
name of a Church. And to the intent there should want no spite that might
be devised, the holy vessels were set out for a show in their proud and
vnpure feasts. Yea and the cruelty was so outrageous, that it became treason
to call upon God. But this so excessive heapinge together of all mischiefs,
makes the power of God to appear more manifest in restoringe the welfare of
his people. First of all, in that Daniell and his fellows were from bondage
advanced to such prehemine^ce, as has seldom been seen, to the intent they
might somewhat relieve their miserable oppressed brethren: It is by this
example apparent, yt the Church even when it seems utterly abandoned, is
nevertheless cared for of God. In yt the three holy men which were cast into
the furnace, escaped saulfe and sound again out, there appeared a token very
worthy to be had in remembrance, of the deliverance of the people, which
shortly after should ensue. As for the returninge it self of the people, it
was no less to be wondered at, than a certain rising again from death which
had never been heard of: so that the faithful might justly boaste in the
Psalm, how they were at that time like men in a dream. Now, in that
saulfe-conduct is given by the King, that the Temple is builded again at the
Kings cost, that men were forbidden to do the Jews wrong by proclamacions
under grievous penalties, we may be ashamed not to acknowledge God the author
of these things, saying they were miracles to so many unbelievers. It is not to
be said how much the consideration hereof may avail to the furtherance and
increase of our Faith. Whereby is convinced the unthankfulness of them, that
in so well ordered a Theater of the glory of God, do make to themselves a
stumblingblocke to pitch upon. Moreover at their return into their country,
suddenly they were increased by wonderful means, as well in number of men
as also in Riches. This also is no obscure miracle of Gods power, specially
forasmuch as their enemies gave them no respite to recover. For we know they
were beseeged with so many enemylike hosts, as there were nations borderinge
round about them. But to the intent that under the Cross the extraordinary
defense of God might shine the brighter, within a while after they were so
trodden underfoot and forworne with continual mischieues one in another
neck, that their utter destruction was apparent. Under the Empire of the
Persians, albeit yt their state was tolerable, yet notwithstanding like
sheep appointed to the slaughter, they were now and then at the point to go
to the shambles. Least Alexander should power out his outrageous wrath upon
them, he was restrained by warninge from Heaven. But when he was dead, and the
Kings of Syrie and Egipte, like savage beasts burning in madness tare one
another a pieces, and that there was no end of their outrage and cruelty one
against another, who would have hoped yt a nation lying in the mids between
them, and set open to the lust of them both, should have continued long? And
surely it could not have stand, being brought underfoot with so many and so
great mischau^ces, unless it had had God to keep it, and had been stayed up
with his hand. At length under the cursed tira^nie of Antiochus, being as it
were drowned into a deep whorlepoole, it had not so much as a sparcle more of
light in all the whole world. All ye country swimmed in innocent blood:
Jerusalem was covered with horrible heaps of Carkesses, as it had been with
pauement: In the temple was placed an abominable Idol: The ordinances of God
being abolished, ye Heathenish and unkindly ceremonies and customs of the
Gentiles usurped the Soueraintie: all the holy books were thrown into the
fire, to ye intent yt the truth of God should utterly pass out of the
remembrance of men. Who durst ones open his lips? Nay, whosoever did but
sigh for sorrow, and not rather defile himself with traitorous dissimulation,
he was forthwith drawn to the Butcherie. The Machabies with a handful yt
they had gathered together of themselves, lurked in caves of mountains,
wanderyng in penury among the wild beasts. Notwithstanding, in yt in so great
an afterdeale, there remained yet a remnant of godly men which should
afterward come abroad again, who can say but that they were preserved by the
wonderful providence of God. In that the books of Moses and the Prophets
escaped unhurt out of those flames, who can impute it to man's keepinge?
Finally the History of those times does much more certainly testify unto
us the providence of God in defendinge his Church, than if he had gloriously
and stoutely triu^phed over all people in the world. Other turmoiles also that
happened afterward, do set the same thing before our eyes to behold. For
although that even to the coming of Christ, sometime by outward wars,
sometime by inward discord, and sometime by the wickedness of Barbarous
Princes, the Jews were continually vexed and racked as it had been upon a
wheel: Yet notwithstanding it came to pass through the singular benefit of
God, that the Church held her own still among these troublous turninges. Here
may come to our reme^berance so many holy men, yea and women, who were feign to
swallow up the unworthy miseries that I have reckened. Some that lived till
they were very old, were driven of necessity to trace the long and manifold
mazes of evils, and at the last to die sorowfully, when they saw no end of
them. Surely these were stumblingblockes that might put them out of the right
race, and yet trauelinge through by faith, they followed constantly their
vocation. Now therefore ought their hearty courage to be unto us not only as
a wagon to ease us of our weariness, but also in steed of wings wherewith
we may fly over the high rocks, and the busshie and combersome wooddes,
and also all other steep and rough places. And the joyful fallinge out of
these things, which are witnesses to us of Gods faithful carfulness in
preseruinge his Church, if they take not from us all sense of offendinge, we
are more nice and squeymish than we ought to be. Yea rather this kind of
lothinge is not tolerable, if in ye plain path we through our own leude
imagination, do cast stumblingblockes in our way.

But if in his old people the misfortunes and calamities of the Church had
always this goodness in them, to bring the help of God out of hand with
them, and the greuouslyer they were pressed with the Cross, so much the more
evidently God showed that the Church was raised by his hand, and vphelde when
it was raised: we may much more plainly see the same under the reign of
Christ. If the Church through continual success in peace had enjoyed a
florishinge and pleasant state, since the Gospel began to be published to
the world, undoubtedly this had been an usual order after the manner of man,
which all men would have passed over in disdain. But seeing that against so
small and contemned a handful, by and by boiled out the hatred of all nations
and al states: seeing the name of a Christian was of long time euerywhere so
hated and detested, that every minute of an hour it was in all places at the
point of destruction: seeing cruelty was every where by sundry means
executed against al them ye durst give never so light and slender an inclinge
of Christianity: seeing the whole world conspired to put out the remembrance of
them from the earth: and that the Church nevertheless after a sort continued
from time to time: here does appear a certain unwonted power, and a certain
secret woorkinge, which cannot be expressed. This I say: when the dens of
wild beasts in forestes and mountains were Christian men's Churches: when
they could no where dwell in saulftie, and that they were utterly slau^dered
and hated of all men: who would not have been afraid to have professed the
Gospel, except he had been stirred thereto by the spirit of God? And yet
from time to time, many, even with strife of set purpose to take upon them
such dispight, flocked willingly into that miserable and slauishe fear.
As Soon as any one had professed Christ, he was not only caught to be put to
death, but cruel torments were also set before him: there was no pity of
sex, there was no pity of age. Was it not more than wonderful, that any were
found, which would be Christians of the price? As Soon as any one was taken,
he was straightly examined if he had any fellows. If at any time while he was
in torments the party that had with others conspired the death of the
Tyranne, held his peace, because he would not bewraye his fellows, all men
wondered at his constancy. In so many provinces, in so many Cities, do not
the innumerable examples of keepynge promise to the vttermoste, witness that
their tounges were governed by God? And whereas in every man severally, yea and
oftetimes in weak women too, the whole welfare of the Church lay in
ieoperdie, surely therein was a notable Miracle, that all had not within a
while been utterly rooted out. And yet among so many abatementes, not much
unlike to destructions, it ceased not algates to spread further. And that was
truly to triumph under the slander of the Cross. Yea rather he that shall
wey all circumstances indifferently as he ought to do, shall confess that
among innumerable deaths, there was a continual race of many resurrections.
That thing which for the difficultnesse thereof might seem incredible to us,
if any man would tell us that the like should happen hereafter: Now when the
same is come to pass, not only to despise it, but also to count it a thing
to be offended at, is not a point of wisdom, but of a malicious wilfulness.
Those were in deed the most violent bruntes, howbeit, other ages also were
not exempted from the same warfare of the Cross, but that they tasted of
harder encounters, which would at that time serve God sincerely and
faithfully. The Roman Empire had submitted it self to the kingdom of
Christ. The Church might seem to be placed in a happy seat of quietness
and glory. The barbarous nations also had yielded to the profession of Christ.
But in the mean while, Heretics and unbelieving men held the Soueraintie,
in so much that good and true shepeherdes being chaced by violence (and not
without reproach) from their Churches, lived like banished persons in unknown
countries: Yea and they had not been suffered to have lived in exile, had they
not hidden themselves from the Tirannie of their enemies. In that the Church
has often been left to the violence of so cruel persecutions, in that it has
lien welnere overthrown to be frode^ under foot of the enemies, this is far
from any likelihood of worldly dignity. But in that a small number of the
Godly, with invincible constancy of faith, has overcome so great waves of
persecutions, that the Church has out stood all the Tyrannes and Heretics*
and left unto posterity the true doctrine of the faith: this is surely a
plain witness of the power of God, which excels all the glories of the
world. So in the present calamity of the Church, there shines no such
dignity as may represent to men's eyes the heavenly kingedome of God: For the
vtterest enemies thereof oppressinge it in very deed, and yet garnishinge
themselves with the title of it as it were with a spoil, do no less cruelly
than proudely tread it under foot. If any man dare be so bold never so
little to stir against their wickedness, by and by like terrible
tormentours, with fire, swoorde, and all kind of torments they go nie to
chase the true Church out of the Earth. And if it chance to find any lurkinge
holes, somewhile it is so assaulted with force of arms, another while so vexed
with reproaches, and another while so tossed and turmoiled with threatninges,
and dreadful attempts: yt it represents nothing less than that kinglike
beauty of Christ so greatly commended of the Prophets. But saying that by
this their dreadful threatninge, and outrageous cruel dealinge, the ungodly
cannot so much prevail, but that the Church of God under the lowliness of
the Cross stands steadfastly upright: why do we not in this wonderful
preservation of God, willingly embrace his glory? If any skillful man would
consider with himself, how many things the wicked sort have practiced these
thirty years together, to destroy it, he shall be compelled to wonder yt it was
not a hundred times utterly destroyed. And now, whereas with in these two
years it has been pitifully rent, and the torn pieces thereof are yet almost
in the Lio^s mouth, although it breaks the hearts of many, yet the faithful
shall in the end perceive, that God does it to a right good purpose, to the
intent he may stretch out his hand more manifestly in deliueryng it. For we
are not wont to acknowledge it to be preserved by him unless he deliver it out
of very death.

Lastly to the furtherance hereof also makes another reason, namely yt it is a
thing more than necessary, that wilderness should be tamed and subdued by the
discipline of the Cross. We see how the Church, which in the mids of
persecution had flourished with spiritual cherefulnesse, has through to
joyful quietness grown out of order. At this day, when the Lord reyneth us
in with a hard and rough bit, we see how all me^ in all places almost do
wax wanton, and what would they do then if they had free scope to ru^ne at
rouers? when the profession of the Gospel reigned far and nere in Germany,
and that as yet the power was unappalled of such as seemed stout in defense of
the good case, and that upon confidence thereof this lamentable war was taken
in hand, which fell out vnluckely in the end: at such time as the hearts of
our part were encouraged with great hope, I said upon a time openly, that
there was more danger for us in our own victory, than in the victory of our
enemies. For there was no misfortune so greatly to be feared, as ye Gospel to
much triumpha^t (if I may so term it) which might puff us up with pride.
Neither does it repent me of this saying to this day. For if the Lord had not
in time prevented that Heathenish liberty, in process of time the malady
would have been almost incurable. Godly doctrine and wholesome admonishmentes
should have been nothing setby. Such as could not abide to admit any mean
discipline, would like unruly beasts with violent rage have broken all yoke. So
great a blotte of slander could not have been wiped from the Gospel, unless
they had been compelled by force and affliction to a modesty of living, which
heretofore they would not learn of their own accord. Again in this bala^ce
God showed how every man was minded. All men vaunted themselves gloriously
under shadow of the Gospel. Wicked Hipocrites bare most swinge in many
places. But after that this foil was taken, many Princes of great name were
by and by out of heart: the noblemen of the commonwealth (which was benommed
with fear I cannot tell how,) quayled of their own accord. Here their over
womanly feinthartednesse, or rather traitourly cowardnesse, did openly bewray
it self. We have seen in one nation mo ungodly and wicked backeslidinges from
Christ, within two years space, than the histories of all times and all
nations make mention of else where. How invincible the strength of faith is
where the hearts are sustained by the virtue of the spirit, it is made manifest
in others. The Heroical haultenesse of heart which the Lord has set forth
to be seen of all ages in one man being vanquished and taken prisoner, would
never have been believed but by such trial of the Cross. Certain other
notable examples of the same sort which I could readely rehearse, I pass over
for the nonce. But let every man wey with himself these and innumerable such
others. They say that now women are led unto death, to the intent that not
only me^, but also whole peoples should have the less pardon, who for the
gain of a small interest of transitory peace in the world, have not sticked
to deny the Son of God the author of eternal life, and to deprive
themselves of his heavenly kingedome. Finally, the Lord himself knows best
how much those things shall profit them, which now are commonly counted
for great euilles. It is our duty to take with stout courages what so ever
calamities happen, hoping for such issue as is to be wisthed for at the
Lords hand: and always to ground our selves upon this point, that how so
ever the Church is pressed for a time, our most dear Father which takes
singular care thereof, will never suffer that it be overwhelmed and decay. If
Christ must bear rule in the mids of his enemies, (as by the witness of
the holy Ghost is testified long ago,) his kingedome cannot be among us
without a kind of warfare and continual strife. If we be like sheep,
appointed to the slaughter, and that our adversaries burn in woodnesse like
Wolves: Let that precepte of the Lord come to our remembrance, that we
must possess our souls in patience, until such time as he may make perfect
his strength in our weakness. Surely the Apostles were in no happier case,
when they cried out boldly, why do the Heathen so furiously rage, and why do
the people imagine vain things? We also if we understood what that saying
means, to see God in Heaven, whenever he gives the ungodly bridle, we
being furnished with the same confidence that the Apostles were, shall
carelessly laugh all the world to scorn, although they were in harness.

There follow Offenses which the common people believe again to proceed of
the doctrine: but in very deed are the propre and natural issue, either of
lewdness, or of unskillfulness, or else of curiousness. The Scripture teaches
us in this wise of the corruption of our nature, that we bring with us a
native viciousness and malice from our mothers womb: whereby it comes to
pass, that an evil tree cannot bring forth other than evil fruit, until
we be new graffed again by the grace of Christ. Here man's reason gathers,
that men themselves are not only faultlesse while they sin, but also that the
fault is justly to be ascribed to God, who creates them such, that they
seem to be borne to sin. Let every man examine his own conscience, and he
shall out of hand hold his peace. For there we shall find that which the
Scripture so often testifies, how that the lewdness which cleaves in us, is
the welspryng of all vices: and that we therefore commit all euilles, because
we do covet yt which displeases God. How comes it then to pass that they
whom their own conscience finds guilty within, do busily seek here and
there for vain excuses to acquit themselves and others from the gilte? and
not so content neither, do make God also accessarie to their offense? If they
were not minded to deceive themselves wilfully to their own destruction, would
they not condemn the vice which they see in themselves, rather than lay the
fault thereof upon another body? But go to: for as much as they seek after
a sort to have some cloak (such as it is) to hide their blasphemies with, let
us show them at one word that they do shamelessely without any color say
evil. Shall he boast himself to be innocent, whom it is manifest to sin with
his good will? when they have said all that they can, in the end we come to
this point, that nothing is imputed unto them of God, save that which they
do willingly. And what man under the Sun would quitte them in wilful
misdeedes. Now shall it not be free for God to condemn, that which men do
lawfully condemn? But they stand in altercation with God, because he has not
given them a better mind and a vprighter heart: as who should say he had not
given them so at the beginning. For the lewdenesse that reigns in us, our
learning imputes not to Gods creation, but to the corruption of nature. They
make exception again, that it is against equity for them to suffer for
another ma^s fault. This exception might peradventure have some color, if
they being free from their own sin, could show that they were burdened
with an other man's fault. But saying they have in such wise lost their
rightuous nature in their first father Adam, that they are of their own selves
become sinful, why do they complain of wrong done unto them, as if they
were giltlesse? Uerely they do as rank thieves are wont, who, while they are
carried to punnishment, do fall a reuilinge and slaunderinge the Judge. And
such kind of men commonly as they are ready to commit mischief: so also
have they their tounges at will in raylinge. But what win they by their
malapert raylinge in this wise? For neither is their own shame made less
thereby, nor the judge any thing stained, and that they themselves know well
enough, but that being blinded with despair, they take a miserable comfort
of a foolish reuengement. Hitherto I have answered their blasphemies which
bewray their own wickedness openly. Howbeit as yet remain the slanders of
Sadolet, Pighius and such like, whereby they misreporte our doctrine, as though
it brought with it diverse and almost infinite absurdities. If there rise
thereof any Offense, it is because our writings are not perused, what should
I then do, but only exhort all those which being carried away with
preposterous Offense, do eschew the unknown truth, that they procure not to
themselves a double punishment of their rashness. For they do both defraude
themselves of salvation offered unto them: and besides that, they shall not
escape unpunished for giuinge hasty judgment with a lie, the cause being not
heard.

Now that Predestination is a sea of Offenses, how happens that? but only
by our own, either curiousness or malapertnesse? Here is meante of the
secret Judgment of God, through the brightness whereof, men's minds if
they approach over nie, must needs be not only dazeled and dimned, but also
utterly swallowed up. And yet as much as our capacity could bear, and as much
as was for our behoof, our Lord has declared in his Scriptures: namely that
we are all forlorn, sauinge such as he chosinge from death has redeemed to
life: and that the grace of Christ comes only unto them, who by free
election before they were borne, were predestinate to salvation: and that
others, like as they be ordained before to everlasting damnation, so also they
continue in their sins. To proceed any further if it were lawful, yet were
it not expedient. But now saying it were no less wicked than hurtful, to
rushe thorough from whence the Lord keeps us, as it were by holdinge over
his own hand: it were our duty to embrace reverently that which the Lord
delivers us, and to hold our selves contented there withal, without making
any further inquisitio^. For the right rule of being wise in this behalf, is
such a soberness as coueteth to know no more than is revealed in the
Scriptures. Certainly God would that nothing should be hidden from us, but
such as the knowledge thereof were superfluous, or more dark tha^ that our
capacity could atteine to the understanding of it. Wherefore we are the more
unthankful, but if we temper our desire of searching, according to the mean
which himself observed in teaching us, why marvel we then, if they throw
themselves headlonge into the bottomless pit, or dash themselves against the
rocks, who after the manner of madmen rushe violently against God. They accuse
God of cruelty, because he adiudgeth to damnation such as are yet unborn.
But they shall one day feel him a just judge: or rather they feel him so
already inwardly, although they acknowledge it not. They cavil that precepts
are given in vain concerning manners, that laws are made in vain, and that
judgments are unjustly executed in punishinge evil dooers, seeing all things
are ruled or rather rolled by destinies. As who should say God did not so
govern his elect with his holy spirit, and give over the castawaies to be
troubled by the Devil, that he makes the doctrine of Godliness and
exhortacions fruiteful unto the one, and holds the other as conuicte of
wilfulness and inexcusable, because they obeyed not his warninge. I omit how
little they profit by diffaminge the Providence of God with the slau^derous
name of destiny. For we neither dream of intricate knottes of causes with the
Stoikes, nor submit the governance of the world to the Stars, nor imagine a
necessity of things in the very nature of things it self. Howbeit the same
is it that Heathen me^ call fatal. The predestination of God therefore is far
another thing tha^ the Heathen destenie, but let this brawlyng about words
cease in this case. If (say they) that necessity of things be prefixed by the
eternal decree of God, it is superfluous to teach what every man's duty is.
For teachinge shall alter nothing of that which is already determined. But
they ought to have considered by the way, that doctrine was by God himself
ordained to this end, that it should be an vnderseruaunt to his secret
determinations. Whom by his eternal adoption he has predestined to life,
does he not by doctrine as it were by the hand stretched out, lead the^
thither as he had predestined the^? For what else is an effectual vocation,
than an acco^plishment of the election which before was hidden. He may by
sundry threats compel ye reprobates (to no purpose as it seems) howbeit in
as much as by this means he makes the^ inexcusable, herein also appears some
strength of ye doctrine. Foolish me^ perceive not in how goodly order, the
works of God agree among themselves. Herupon it comes to pass, ye they
rashly set at variance with the will, the doctrine which is nothing else tha^
the minister of his eternal will. Let us learn therefore that God speaks not
to me^, to thentent to reveal unto the^, or to correct those things which he
had determined with himself long before, but rather yt he might teach them by
trial, how firm and steadfast they be. It cannot come to pass that they
should perish, whom he has ones chosen from the beginning: and because he will
not have the^ perish, he commits them to the trusty tuitio^ of Christ.
Moreover to ye intent they may have Christ, to their shepeherd, it behooves yt
they be gathereded into his fold. Therefore when by giuyng ear to the voice of
their shepeherde, the elect do atteine salvation, it is nothing else but a
bringyng of their election unto his appointed end, by the outward preaching
of the Gospel. He commands the same doctrine also to be set before the
reprobates: and why? is it to the intent to disanull that that he had
determined of their damnation? Nay, rather that their wilful unbelief should
make more apparent, what avails the grace of the secret election? For what
brighter mirror ca^ there be made wherein this grace may clearly appear, than
when in the common doctrine, by the same calling of God, by the like
instrument of calling, there is so great difference of men, that some
obstinately refuse that, which othersome obediently embrace? Yet we see in the
mean while, how the word which is spoken by the mouth of a man, although
it amend not the hearts of the wicked, yet it strikes their consciences, and
restrains their malapartnesse as it were a bridle.

Now we must entreat of the Offenses which we have assigned to the second
sort. Many complain that the Gospel is the fountain of discord: because
that as soon as it springs up, there bud out debates with it: or rather as if
a trumpet were blown to some battle, men arm themselves one against another.
It is surely to be confessed that Christ has pronounced, that debate and
fightinge should spring up with the Gospel: but it is to be weyed upon what
occasion it comes so to pass. First if men rise wilfully against God, when he
goes about to bring them to conformity, we have told you before by what
means that happens. It is a hard matter that they that stand to much upon
the reputation of their own wisdom, should yield themselves willing to be
taught of Christ. But now when the lusts of the fleash, which reign in men
are so many, and like a sort of fierce and unruly beasts, do we marvel if
they make a tramplyng and stirringe against the yoke and the bridle? But it is
to much wrong to lay the blame of that evil upon the Gospel, the cause
whereof is in our selves. They do even as uprightly, who for fear of trouble
and for hate of discord, abhor from the doctrine of peace. They think
nothing to be better than a quiet state: what then if some Tyra^ne should by
his horrible and outrageous cruelty obtain thus much, that whiles he
rauisheth maidens and honest wives, whiles he spoyleth every good man of his
goods, whiles he murthereth the giltlesse like a cutthrote, all men amazed for
fear, should hold their peace: shall tyranny under this pretense deserve
praise? now if it be demanded what manner of peace this is, which many stick
not to purchase with the loss of the Gospel? this surely shall be the manifest
truth, namely to obtain sinful and perverse Religions quietly and without
stir, because Satan the worst of all Tyrannes, does without check take his
pleasure of me^ half dead. Notwithstanding as to the outward bondage of the
body, peradventure it were expedient rather to suffer sometime, than for the
recovery of liberty, to make insurrection which may burste out into
slaughter and confused wastinge. But when the matter touches the eternal
destruction of the soul, nothing ought to be so much set by, that we should
either desire or wilfully embrace deadly peace. Moreover hereby we defraude the
son of God of his pre-eminence. But better it is that Heaven and Earth
should be confounded together, than that the honor which his father has
given him should be diminished, and much less then be taken quite away from
him, and he made Jack out of Office. Shall we then live at debate with the
prince of life, to the intent we may enjoy peace among men? shall we make
open war against God, to the intent we would not be compelled to be at
variance with naughtypackes? shall we willingly stand at defiance with
Christ, by whom we are with the Angels reconciled to God? It is surely to
unworthy a reward. And when Christ describes the peaceable kingedome of
Satan, he does not teach us that it is therefore to be coueted: but rather he
promises it as a great reward, that a stronger than he encounteringe with
him, should bereue him of his usurped authority. For if we see the^ so
courageous, which ambitiously fight for soueraintie or for their liberty,
that they would not pass to abide any troubles: with how much more valiant
courage, ought we to set our selves against the tempestuous troubles, which
Satan stirs up to disquiet the kingdom of Christ? the Son shall rise
against his father: the father shall not spare the life of his son: one
brother shall lay wait for another. Are these things told before, to the
intent that me^ should shun the Gospel? and not rather that being warned in
time, they might not conceive any fear at the strau^genesse of the matter? For
I have not to do with any other, than such as abuse the name of Christ, to
color their painted peace. And yet I am not ignorant that troublesome persons
in mouinge seditions, are the bellows of Satan wherewith he kindles men
(otherwise quiet of themselves,) in hatred against the Gospel. So in our age
about the beginnynge of the Gospel springyng up again, he armed barbarous men
to proclayme open war against laws, judgments, and all kind of civil
policy. But as it is not unknown to us, what such kind of packing means,
so if we do ask peace from the bottom of our heart, we shall by assured
trial, feel it offered unto us of God by his Gospel, in such wise that we
shall have it steadfastly also among men. To swerve from the Gospel, to the
intent to prevent sedition, is a poinct of to much perverseness.

To outward appearance, this that follows is a iuster cause of Offense: that
as soon as the doctrine of the Gospel began to be published, as though the
vein of some spring had been opened, the wickedness of many spowted forth,
which had before seemed holy men. Howbeit it had been much more meet, that
this should avayle to the confirmation of the Faith. When Simeon assigns
this duty to Christ, to disclose the thoughts of many hearts, so little
does any man or none stand in denial thereof, that the sentence is to be
reioysed at. What absurdity then is found in the matter? Let us suppose it
had never been spoken, to the intent that without prejudice, the thing that
appears, may be esteemed so to be in deed. Whereas about thirty years
ago, religion flourished every where, and all men without gain saiynge
consented in the woorshippe of God, which was then commonly received: now
ungodliness and contempt of God gusheth forth euerywhere. First and formest I
say, it is no marvel if light do chase away darkness: for it is a common
proverb of old time, that the dungeons of man's heart are so deep, and the
nookes thereof so windynge, that it surmounteth almost al botto^lesse pittes:
now if man's dessemblynge be deceitful in any case, he dalieth with wonderful
lewdness toward God, where he ought to do it least. To the furtherance hereof
comes the wiliness of Satan: who partly by castinge a miste of ignorance,
and partly by disguisinge the service of God with visers of ceremonies, makes
a wonderful show of Religion where none is. All men that have eyes do see
that it has been so under the Popery. For there the consciences as it were
bewitched with the poisons of Circe, are brought in a maze by their long
windlasses. fleeting from the earnest meaning of God. For that same
unmeasurable heap of Ceremonies, is assuredly the den of thieves: because
the hypocrites being wrapped in those disguysinges, think they may do what
they list without check. If such security do take away the difference
between true and feined Religion, it is no marvel. And if at any time they
seem to approach any thing nere God, they do not to any other end so much
weary and disquiet themselves, than that the inward wickedness of the heart
being by such remedies appeased, should be at rest inwardly. Now, if by
bringyng in the light of the Gospel, hypocrisy be put to flight, and
wickedness openly discovered, the offense thereupon taken, is unrightful and
perverse. In old time among heathen men, no man was counted a dispiser of God,
except he were a manifest murderer, or a forger of Testamentes, or a forsworn
person, and wrapped in all kind of lewdness. For in as much as they had made
to them selves carnal Gods, nothing was more easy than to be religious. But
we see how sharply the Prophets do inuey against skorners: the which thing
out of all doubt, they do not without weighty causes. So the ungodliness
which showed it self in the Church of God, appeared to be none at all in
manner among the unbelievers: shall we therefore say that the law and the
Prophets were bellows to stir the same up? shall the pure Religion
therefore, which drew that Serpent to light, be made the less account of?
Yea verily even in the Church of God, Ismaell uttered not himself to be a
scorner, but after that Isaac was borne. He which before was next unto holy
Abraham, did suddenly burste out into wicked skornynge the grace of God, whereby
he deserved to be banished his fathers house. Ought such an example to have
alienated the householde of Abraham from his holy Ofspringe? Furthermore, that
which was lightly shadowed in Isaac, was needeful to be more clearly expressed
in Christ, and the History of the Gospel bears witness that it was so
done. For we know that since he was brought into the world, how much the
madness of them has boiled, which before times did brag them selves of the
title of Religion. Wherefore let this malicious opinion take his leave and be
packinge, that liberty to do naughtely springs out of the doctrine of the
Gospel, because it draws wickedness out of his lurkyng holes into the open
light. And rather let us be glad of this, that the thoughts are discovered out
of the hearts of many: howbeit, of this matter there is another reason also to
be marked: namely when some utterly refuse the grace of the Gospel offered unto
them: and some disdeinfully sippe of it a little with their lips: and
othersome proudely cast it of from them having received it before: does not
the unthankfulness of them all deserve, that God should punish it sore? And
undoubtedly he punishes sore in deed, when taking away the fealinge of
Religion, he casts them headlong into this horrible blindness. As many men
therefore as we see at this day like Lucian, scoff and jest at the whole
Religion of Christ: as many also as we see like Epycures, set themselves to
sale to all kind of naughtiness without the fear of God: so many examples of
Gods vengeance, let us know to be set before our eyes, which may commend
unto us the worthiness and preciousnesse of the Gospel. Paul says, that
they were woorthely given over to a reprobate mind, and to filthy and
shameful lusts, who unjustly suppressed such knowledge of God, as may be
conceived by the only beholdynge of the world: to the intent that they which
had defrauded God of his honor, being subject to utter reproach, might
receive the deserved hyre of their unthankfulness. The greater sacrilege
that the contempt of the Gospel is, so much the less marvel it is, if
crueller punishment be taken thereof. And why so? For shall we confess that
they deserved to be punished, who through their slothfulness suffered the
little sparks to be quenched, which appeared in the framynge of the world?
and would we have them freely mock God, who of wilful malice do ouerwhelme
and extinguish the full brightness of the glory of God, shinyng in his
Gospel? But if it be very good Justice, that God punish grievously the
contempt and castyng away of his grace, why are we offended to see the same
punishment (which is commendable) put in execution? nay rather it would become
us (as I have said already) that like as by this means God avouches the
majesty of his Gospel, so the reverence thereof should be stablished in our
minds: how can the Gospel be entertained as it is worthy, whereby he
offers and gives him self to us in the person of his son? And yet many
do scarce vouchsaufe the common honor upon this incomparable threasure: some
tread it underfoot: some without remorse of conscience prefer the vain
pleasures of the world before it: and many (as though it were some maygame,)
do turn it in jesting to a heathenishe pastime: but what followed theruppon?
whereas before was at least yet some fear of God settled in their minds, now
like a sort of dogs they bark against God. And in this their sharpnes of
wit they greatly delight them selves, or rather take themselves for half
Gods, because they dare turn up their tails against the clouds. But if it
be a monstrous thing for a man to be turned into a beast, they are so much
the more to be lamented, in that they are not touched with any sorrow for
their evil: they laugh smoothely at the foolish toys of the Papists: but
themselves are unworthy that ever they should return to the papistrie: for
it is not convenient that their end should be like other men's, who have
partly had in derision, and partly in contempt the holy blood of Christ, the
everlasting truth of God, and the light of life. And assuredly the contempt of
the Gospel which now reigns, is a certain foretoken of some beastly kind
of life. For, saying that this is the last remedy to cure men's vices, namely
when God shines upon them with his Gospel, whom soever this remedy helps
not, it is most certain that they are incurable: and they which wittingly and
willingly do either jest away or drive away their Physician, do wilfully
procure themselves any death. Now to conclude this title, such as deem
ungodliness a heinous mischief (as it is in deed) they judge by the
grieuousnesse of the punishment, in how ill part the Lord takes the contempt
of his Gospel: and by warning thereof are confirmed in faith and obedience to
him. It is known to every man, that Agrippa, Villanouan, Delet and such like,
did like Giauntes with one eye in their forehead fearyng neither God nor manne,
ever presumptuously despise the Gospel: at the last they fell to such
madness and outrage, that they not only spewed out most abominable
blasphemies against the son of God, but (as much as pertains to the life of
ye soul,) did think themselves to differ nothing from Dogs and Hogs.
Othersome, (as Rabelayse, Deper, and Gouean) after they had tasted of the
Gospel, were stricken with the same blindness. And why happened this, but
because they had by their wicked malapertnesse of jesting and scoffing,
heretofore profaned that holy pledge of eternal life? I name a few, whosoever
are of the same stamp, let us know that the Lord does as it were with his
finger point them out to us for an example, to the intent we should carefully
continue in the race of our vocation, least the like happen unto us.

Furthermore forasmuch as these forlorn men by their slidynge, or rather by
their headlong falling down, do not only offend the weak, but also do
shead abroad the poison of their ungodliness, to the intent to bring all the
world in belief that there is no God: I must set my self at defense against
this stumblyng block also. And that does the holy Ghost, while he warns us
that there shall come mockers which shall trouble our hope with skoffinges:
but the same spirit affirms that unstable souls shall be in danger of their
enticements. To the intent therefore that we may be out of peril, we must
gather strength in Christ. It is a solemn custom among these vnpure Dogs,
that the more liberty they have to belk out blasphemies, the more they play
the scoffers. So by their merry iestyng in talking at the table, they girde at
all the principles of Religion. And first of all they wind themselves into
their matter by overthwart nippes, or covert conceytes: howbeit all tends to
this end, to blurre out of men's minds all fear of God: for at length they
burst out into this opinion, that all Religions are devised of man's brain:
that there is a God, because men list to believe so: that the hope of the life
to come was invented to food forth the simple withal: and that the dread of
doomes day is but a bug to fear children with. These songs of the Meremaydes
are to apt to delight the ears of many men, but it is such ears as are
already tickled with the same itch of themselves. For we see some so greedely
snatch at, and hunte for those things that make to the taking away of the
feelinge of godliness, that having in manner scarce perceived the sound of a
few words, by and by they raunge from the eternal and unchangeable truth
of God. And surely whosoever has but meanly traueled in the word of God,
when he shall have tried that our faith is far otherwise grounded than upon
opinion, he shall not so easly waver. And they that bear the seal of the
spirit printed in their hearts, it is far unlike that they should be
overthrown with the assaults of these engines. But this is it that Paul
means where he says: That me^ make shipwrecke in the faith, after the time
that they have fallen from a good conscience: whereby he means both that
this is the keeper of right understanding, and that it is no wonder though they
have nothing steadfast among them, which are tossed among the sundry waves
of their lusts. There is no cause therefore why we should be troubled with
this Godlesnesse, which now partly rages euerywhere through the whole world,
but specially reigns in the Courts of Kings and Princes, in judgment
places, and in other glorious trades of living: for if I should demand of
one that had skill in things, (yea and it were even of those, who cannot rid
themselves from this temptacion,) which of them all there did harborow a good
conscience, their answer would be in a readiness, that it is bannished a
great way of: wherefore then do we wonder at that shipwrecke of Faith, which
Paul teaches must needs follow? Moreover if they so warely keep money
bestowed in coffers, as many as are any thing smitte^ with the love thereof,
what excuse shall he lay for him self, which being fenced with no guard of
God, does set him self forth wilfully to the spoil, if he be robbed of the
heavenly treasure? specially considering we know that nothing is so hurtful
as these copwebbes of the wicked. For it is not my mind to extenuate the
peril that may come by them, but rather I admonish and testify, that no
Serpent has so venomous a blast as they, and therefore it behooves us to be so
much the more waker and careful to beware of them. By the way, I say that al
such shall be free from this contagion (be it never so pestiferous) as have not
forslowed to root themselves deep in Christ. Neither is this my saying, but
the saying of Paul: that we ought to grow in Christ until we come to be
perfect men: least we be any more subject to the subteltie of men, which go
about to deceive us. Notwithstanding, we must harken also to another
exhortation of Paul: namely that forasmuch as we are ensured to the Son of
God upon this condition, that we should keep our promise of marriage unto him
inviolate, we ought in especially to beware that the Devil corrupt us not with
his flattering enticementes. For if the woman which has given ear to
allurementes of baudrie, seems to have given already some sign of
unchasteness, it appears that those souls are scarce chaste, which delight
to be moved to false forsaking their obedience to God.

The reason of all errors is not much unlike herunto. The faith of many
quayleth: and some do utterly fall from the Gospel, because they conjecture
it to be the seed of error. As though any man should give over tillage and
sowinge of the ground, because the pure seed does oftentimes degenerate into
cockle. To the intent the strangeness of the matter should not abashe any
man, Christ warned us that it should come so to pass. For albeit that in that
place he co^pareth Hypocrites to darnell, and the true and natural Sons of
God to wheat: yet he shows how this is the accustomed fraud of Satan, to
corrupt and defile the heavenly seed of God by all ye means he can, to the
intent it should not come to fruitfulness: we know that the world lay a long
time barreyne like a waste and untilled ground. Now has God sowed the
doctrine of his Gospel by his Ministers: do we marvel if Satan do
intermedle as many corrupt errors as he can? For what whole wayne loades of
false opinions has he not brought in immediately with the first springynge up
of the Gospel? I do omit the innumerable multitude. But what ca^ be devised
more prodigious than the dotinges of Valentine, of Montane, and of the
Manichees? Now it is to much folly, that they which count it for a miracle
that the light of the Gospel was not quenched in so thick darkness, or
which heartily rejoice to hear, that the strength thereof has continued
unappalled against so many assaults, should be offended at the doctrine of the
Gospel, because now also Satan sullieth it with the darkness of his lies.
Howbeit, forasmuch as men do sundry ways stumble at this rock, I will
briefly show, yt there is no kind of Offense, the which they incur not of
their own accord, either through their slothfulness, or else some other
singular vice of their own. They which simply make this one objection, that
sects do bud out of the doctrine of the Gospel, partly are glad to seek
startingholes, and partly, through overmuch lightness do lay the cause of
evil upon the Gospel, which rests otherwhere. Who so ever will vouchsaufe
to open his eyes, he shall plainly see that the Gospel is not only the pure
and clear truth of God, but also the best bond of holy unity. Now if
Satan rise up against it, to the intent he may darke^ this light with the
clouds of errors, and rende the unity asunder, wherein the sons of God do
knit themselves together, he does but his office. For he is both the father
of lies, and also the author and craftesmaister of all debate. It were our
duty therefore, so much the more earnestly to labor in searchinge out the
truth, and to embrace it the more constantly when we have found it. These men
do not only abstain from all such endeavor and fly from it, but also do
set this as a shield of defense against God, that they be not compelled to
obey his commandment. Othersome, al be it that they seek not means for the
nonce how they may reject the wholesome doctrine, yet because they take
occasion at every light blast to starte back, they have nothing which they
may justly allege for their excuse. But you will say, they fear not without
cause, least if being uncertain which way to go they should yield themselves
pliable, they might through this pliablenesse, be snarled in the snares of
errors. This is in deed somewhat: but there was a better prouiso than this,
for that danger: namely to submit themselves to God by godly humility,
modesty, soberness, and reverence. For Christ has not for nothing promised
that the door shall be opened to them that knock: neither is he endewed with
the spirit of judgment and discretion from the Father for nothing. Also it
is not for nothing that the Lord promises by the mouth of his prophet Esaias
to become an attendant scholemaister to his people, always ready at their
back, to direct their steps. Finally, neither to deceive nor to beguile us,
does he say that the way of life is showed to us in his word. Whereby it
appears, that a great part of men do wittely covet this thing, to despise
remedies, and to wax numme in their own evils.

And whereas we see many, which being entangled with this or that error, are
led astray from the right way: it never happens but by the just vengeance of
God. First Augustine truly names pride the mother of all Heresies. For there
was never yet any master of error, whom leude desire of vaineglory puffed
not up to his own hedlonge falling. We know that God is a faithful teacher
to the little ones: we know that Christ calls the humble and meek to him to
be his disciples: wherefore such as swell with pride, it is no marvel though
they be driven out of this school, and be carried up and down with their own
wauerynge speculations. As many as in this our age falling from the pure
doctrine of the Gospel, have begone to be teachers of false opinions, we
shall find that al of them being taken with the disease of pride, have forged
punishment of the wit, both to themselves and to others. In steed of many
let the only example of Seruet suffice. For he being puffed up with Spanish
pride, and swellyng moreover with his own arrogancy, determined this to be
the best way for him to get him a name, if he snapped at all the principles of
Religion. Whatsoever therefore has of antiquity from the very time of the
Apostles been by the Fathers left, concerning the three persons in God, and
received from time to time continually by the godly, he not only rejects as
unsavory, but also with to outrageous railing, tosseth and turmoyleth it: now
that same currish rage of bityng and barkyng, which all the writers of that
rabble do utter, does sufficiently testify what manner of spirit stirs the
man. But if ye come to the matter, ye shall clearly perceive, that their
greedy hunger, being inflamed with vnstau^ched thirste of vaineglorie, has
caused them to quaffe up all kind of most absurd dotages so desirously, that
they have made themselves dronken therwithal. He surmiseth that the word of
God was not, before such time as Moses brings in God speaking in the
beginnynge of the world. As who should say, that then first of all he began
to be, when he showed plainly his so great power: and not rather that he
declared a proof of his eternal being. He in such wise Deifieth Christ's
fleash, that abolishynge the truth of his manhood, he makes his Godhead which
is spiritual, to be palpable. And yet calling Christ God with full mouth,
he deuiseth us, I cannot tell what manner of shadowye Ghost: as if ye would say
he had from the beginnynge been nothing but an Idaea of Plato: and that of any
other right he was not the son of God, but because he was conceived by the
holy Ghost in the womb of the Uirgin. In the mean while, he heapeth together
many cartloades of speculations, which have so little color or none at all,
that any man being in his right wits may easly perceive, that none could not
so play the dizard, but he that is bewitched with the love of him self. But if
that as soon as the truth of God has put up her head, proud wits are
both by their own ambition moved, and by the Devil driven, either to darke^,
or else to pervert it with their leude gloses and frantike opinions, there is no
cause why we should be troubled as with a strange matter. Wherefore as we have
said before, that pride is the mother of al Heresies: so the vainenesse of
them that make themselves disciples of such masters, is the continual nource
to cherishe the same. As often as any error is spread by the false prophet,
Moses affirms us to be tried whither we love God from the heart. To what end
is that, but that we may know, that none other are led away from the pure
doctrine, but such as under a false profession did cou^terfaite holiness? As
for the faith which is steadfastly rooted, these engines can so little
overthrow, that they do rather make manifest the firmness thereof: like as
Paul writes, that when sects do reign in the Church, those which are tried
be made manifest. Whereby it is the less wonder, that as soon as any blast of a
new sect blows, many slide aside hither and thither, saying very few have
ye fear of God imprinted in their hearts. So much the less becomes it us to
stagger with the multitude.

To take occasion of leude behavior of the Gospel, has now from old time
been customable to many. Not without cause do the Apostles so oftentimes give
warning of bridelyng our liberty, least it should be turned into a fleashly
licentiousness. For evermore the fleash at every light occasion, does by and
by auau^ce it self. But as bondage is a hard thing and contrary to man's
nature: a great sort (by what means so ever they may shake of the yoke) do
deem that the blessed life consists therein. Under this pretense the bondme^
in old time, (as though by proclamation of the Gospel they had been called to
liberty,) were puffed up with stubburnnesse: in so much that some of them
wrested themselves from subjection of the Kings and Magistrates. Likewise at
this day many of the rascal sort, having taken a smatch of the Gospel, do
boaste themselves arrogantly: householde servants do take hault and stout
stomachs to the^: very many forgetting al shame and modesty, dare presume any
thing. But this is worst of all, that many do in such wise set themselves
free from the obedience of God him self, as if by adoptinge us to be his
sons, he had abrogated from him self all fatherly right and authority over
us. Surely it is a foul lewdness, and with the unworthiness thereof might
grievously wound all godly minds. But let the wrong done to God burn us,
rather than we should double it. We hear what Esaias has testified of the
meekness of Christ: we hear what Christ preaches of him self: Learn of
me (says he) because I am meek and lowly of heart. And for this cause (as
Paul admonishes,) when he was in the shape of God, he abased him self, to
the intent we should learn humbleness of him. Seeing that the Son of God
descended from the heavenly throne of his majesty down hither, that being
cladde with our fleash, he might abide not only the state of a servant, but
also the utter reproach of the Cross, which of us may not be a shamed of our
selves to look so loftely, that we should either be, or seem to be any thing
at all. Those that excel in great riches and honors, to the intent they may
make themselves conformable to the example of their master, must needs (as it
were forgettinge their own greatness) come down to ye baser state. It is
therefore to preposterous an arrogancy of the lower sort, if they begin to
take highly upon the^ under pretense of the Gospel. For great men are not
commanded to depart with their right, to the intent that men otherwise being
abiectes, should usurp the right of other men. But this doctrine does not
only prescribe unto any several person the bounds of his duty: but also
ministers chastisementes unto us, wherewith to rebate the malapartnesse of
lusty mates, and by the way it turns the envy and blame of this evil from
the Gospel. It cannot lightly otherwise be, when miserly wretches endewed with
no riches, no authority, no wit, nor no estimacion, as soon as they have
learned to prate of the Gospel, do step stoutely in, not without contempt
of others, but that so great an unworthiness shall make men of good nature
and that have any heart, to stomach the matter. Howbeit the folly of a great
sort is so childishe, yt it ought rather to move us to pity them, tha^
provoke us to stomach against them. Notwithstanding, let us grant there is
that greatly offends us: shall our stomackyng against so foolish a pride,
light altogether upon the very author of all modesty?

Behold on the other part, many defilinge (as much as in them is) the
profession of the Gospel with their dissolute and filthy life: whereupon
rises another stu^blingblocke, next cousin to that which went before. And
surely saying that we (as Paul testifies) by living holyly and honestly, do
adorn the Gospel, look how many do cocker themselves with a licentiousness
of living, so many reproaches and spots of Christendom are there. And it is
not to be doubted but that the horrible vengeance of God hangs over the
heads of all such, as by their leude behavior do diffame the doctrine of
godliness, and make the holy name of God a laughing stock to others. They
shall one day feel how intolerable a crime it is, to have profaned the holy
threasure of the Gospel: and how it was not spoken in vain, that they should
not escape unpunished that abuse the name of God. They shall feel how
precious the souls are to God, to whom through their evil example they have
foreclosed the way of Salvation. First it is a point of to much lewdness, to
confess God with their mouth, whom they deny in their deeds, as Paul
says: and to pretend to be the Disciples of the heavenly wisdom, when their
whole life argues a manifest contempt of God. But this is more than an heinous
wickedness, to abuse the Gospel to the clokyng of our naughtiness. I speak
now of the common practice, wherewith false and naughty men do wind
themselves in, to deceive, to defraude, and by all means to hurt. I have
seen some ere this, that were not ashamed to color their baudrie and vnpure
bargayninges under the shadow of the Gospel. Othersome that are less wicked,
do not withstandyng by their dissolute living, both defile the Church with
the filth of their vices, and also stayne the Gospel. Moreover it is a thing
miserable and to be lamented at, that the wickedness of men should not only
be imputed to the doctrine of holiness, but also that the same should be
shamefully slaundred in their person. But there is another byle of the Church
more to be lamented, that the sheapeheardes, (I say) the sheapeheardes
themselves (who mount into the pulpit, that is to say the holy judgment seat
of God, to the intent they should excel all other men in pureness of life,)
are now and then most filthy examples, either of naughtiness, or of al other
evils. Whereby it comes to pass, that their sermons obtain no more credit or
estimation, than if a player should play an interlude upon a stage. And yet
such men make complainte, that they are had in contempt among the common
people, or else in scorn pointed at with the fingar. I do rather wonder at the
sufferance of the people, that women and children bedaube them, not with dirte
and dunge. They extol the worthiness of the ministry with full mouth: but
they remember not that the cause why no honor is given to their ministry, is
by reason that they themselves defile it with their filthy living. For as it
was truly said of one in old time: be amiable to the intent thou may be
beloved: so it behooves them that will be had in estimacion, that they purchase
them reverence by their gravity and holy conuersacio^. And would God the
Church might be purged and disburdened of such a sort of rakehelles. But it
falls out far otherwise for the most part. For whereas they kuow
themselves to be woorthely despised, their evil conscience may abridge their
liberty. Finally, forasmuch as they may perceive that for the shamefulnesse
of their evil living, they are underlings to all men, either shame and fear
restrains them that they dare not hiss, at such times as they ought
earnestly to exact that which they perform not themselves: or else they are
compelled to bear with offenders and to flatter the^. Besides this, they are
slothful bellies, who to the intent that having taken their farewell of all
peinfulnesse, they may settle themselves to idleness and pleasures, could
find in their hearts to let Heaven and Earth to be confounded together. Many
of them also for hatred of virtue, do willingly bear with the vices, as well
of themselves as of other me^. And the people to requite them with the like
good turn, do love, embrace, and cherishe them and none other, and to the
intent to have them as patrones of their faults, maintain them with their
defense. Notwithstanding they cease not to object, that the corrupt living of
the pastors, is a stumbling block that they come not to Christ. Surely it is
to frowardly and impudently: neither is any man worthy to be excused, whom
other men's sins withholde from coming unto Christ. Which is no more to
say, than if a man would refuse to drink of a fountain, because he would
allege it to be grown about with briers and thorns, whereas nevertheless he
might with small labor and less danger ouerpasse the lettes. Because they
see diverse having the Gospel in their mouth, live wickedly and naughtely:
behold the Gospel say they. How much more of right should they with sorrow
acknowledge, that great wrong is done unto God, when the living answers so
evil to the doctrine. If the clouds cast a miste upon the earth, no man is so
mad or so leude, to call the Sun mistie. But great is the difference between
the clerenesse of the sun, and the clerenesse of the Gospel. For although
mistes may darken the Sun, yet the lewdness of men can not bring to pass,
but that the brightness of ye wholesome and godly doctrine, may shine
through, whereby our life (all darkness being wiped away) is reformed into
true righteousness: shall we then confess the Sun to be clear, even when
it is hidden? and shall the sins of me^, (what sort soever they be of,)
dazzle our eyes, when we see the bright light of the Gospel, and the glory of
Christ shininge therein?

As concerning the Guides themselves, Christ knew already, that it redounded
most to the slander of the doctrine, if they live filthely. To the intent to
turn away this stumbling block, he exhorts men to obscrue that which they
command, although they do not with the least of their fingers touch the
burdens, which they lay upon othermens shoulders. It was at that time the
office of the Scribes, to instruct the people in the law of God, as long as
they were in ye chair of Moses, they were the interpreters of Gods law: and
at home or in place of open assembly, they were full of fraud, pride,
cruelty, perjury, and adventured licentiously upon all things. Nevertheless
Christ wills, that the authority of the word of God, remain unto it
untouched. This admonition was not peculiar to one age, but rather at this day
also the heavenly voice cries in our ears, yt howsoever ye pastors lead a
life not altogether agreeable to their profession, yet it is lewdly done, to
misreport the Gospel any whit therefore. As surely, it is an unseemly matter,
to measure by the perverse living of men, the rule which God has prescribed
for us to live well by. Uerely they shall one day come to reckning, and they
shall feel how that saying was not denou^ced for nothing: that it should now
be better for a man to be drowned in the bottom of the sea, with a millstone
about his neck, than to offend any one of the least. Howbeit, in the mean
while it behooves us to hie us toward the mark, the same way which the
Lord has paued.

Nevertheless the Offense in this behalf is doubled, when the heynousnesse of
the mischiefs is increased with private hurt. Some being ge^tly enterteined
as guestwise, do either privily go away laden with theft, or else beguile
their Host and Hostess by some other means, or else allure the maid servants
to whoredom, and sometime also adventure to try the wives themselves. Some
being their crafts masters in catching, do leave them stark naked, to whom
they had promised mountains of Gold: some deceive in lendinge: some deny
restitution of things laid to gage: some are unfaithful in fellowship: some
spend the money wastfully, which they had received of alms of good and
thriuinge men, either in whorehuntyng, or dicing, or other riottous excesses:
some lash out in idle expenses that which was lent the^ to further their
industry with. And unto these wickednesses many have the company of their
wives. Some stick not to break the most holy bond of wedlock, deceiving
their wives, and casting away their children. There are mo examples of such
wickednesses, than that a short beaderoll can comprehend them. Certainly it
cannot be, but that the lewdness of these men, must strike a sore and grievous
wound in honest natured minds. And specially it must needs be, that good men
are dismayed, when having but a slender piece of money, they see themselves
spoiled thereof and brought to utter poverty, under pretense of the Gospel,
as if they had fallen into the hands of robbers. And this is to be registered
among the harder sort of our exercises, that we are compelled to look upon
them, which so without check make their game of the Gospel. But if God, by
the mouth of Paul, do woorthely forefede us, that albeit we find many
unthankful and lewd persons, yet we should not be weary of doing well:
and that he do it to the intent that if any good man should have need, our
duty should not be unperformed: how much more diligently ought we to take
heed, that the lewdness of men bring us not to such a waywardness, that we
become unthankful and impious toward God. And therefore like as it becomes us
to watch earnestly, that no door be left open to such varlets to do harm,
by preventing their secret practices in time, and by endeuoryng (as much as in
us lies) that deceites and evil doings be punished straightly by the
Magistrate, to the intent that such as make a mockage of Gods word, and such
as reprochfully scoff at the Church, may according to their deserts have the
hangman for their master, and the gallows for their school: so must we
again somewhat more diligently take heed of the crafts of Satan, least by
castyng in our way the loss of a little transitory money, he shake us quite
from our heavenly treasure. For that is it that he goes about, and it is more
pernicious unto us. Whosoever has faith in Christ (says John) he
sanctifies him self. Those that aspire not to this sanctifiyng, forasmuch as
we know they falsely pretend the name of Christ, what reason is there, that
they should trouble and hinder us with their lewdenesse? The Gospel is the
bread of life: and yet it is a hard matter to bring to pass, that all men
should digest it, when as of many that seem to swallowe it greedely, few do
take the taste of it thoroughly. Finally, when Christ compares his Church to
a barnefloore, where ye wheat is so mingled with the chafe, that for the
most part it lies hid under it, he likeneth not strangers to the chafe,
but such as under profession of the Gospel, keep place among the godly. To
what purpose also should he have testified that he will not know many in the
last day, which shall boast themselves to have been preachers of his Gospel,
and object that they have wrought miracles: but that there must needs be some
such in all ages? Sometime also it comes to pass, that they which otherwise
fear God from their heart, or at leastwise are not altogether reprobates, do
by fallinge into some filthy fault, shame both themselves, and the pure
Religion which they follow. How great was that trespass of David, when
followyng his own lust, in rauishyng another man's wife, he not only shed
the giltlesse blood of one man that had deserved well at his hand, but also as
much as in him lay, delivered all the people of God to destruction? If I
listed to gather together Offenses of this sort, which were able to pervert
even the Heroical men, what monstrous wickednesses saw the holy Patriarch
Jacob at home in his own house? After that his daughter was forced, Simeon and
Leui through as outrageous cruelty, as unspeakable trayterousnesse, murdered
the Sichimites. His sons being thus embrewed with slaughter, conspired the
murder of their Brother. At length to increase the heap of mischieues, it came
to pass that his first begotten son committed incest, in companiynge with
his stepmother. And yet the Church of God was at ye time enclosed within one
house: I abstain from recitinge any more examples. But at this day diverse do
search out a few Offenses with Linxes eyes, to the intent they may not have
ought at all to do with the whole Church of God, as far as it stretches
eueryway, with this one example I am content to have admonished my Readers,
that the faith shall be to unstable, if at the several ruins of men, it do
from time to time wax faint. In the mean while, this is to be held for an
infallible rule: that it comes to pass by the determinate counsel of God,
that evil men are evermore mixed with the good. By this means both the
constantnesse of the faith is tried, and we be exercised to patience, and the
desire to pray is quickened, and the stingyng of the pricks do move us
earnestly, to walk warely and wisely, and the contempt of the world rises
thereupon, and together with desire of departing hence, mindfulnesse of the
heavenly life increases. But if the cause lie hid, yet let us know that a
part of our warfare, which we must follow during all the race of our life,
does consist in these exercises.

Greatly also anoyeth the lightness which is commonly seen in diverse, whereas
at the beginning they show a marvelous feruentnesse, that flame within a while
so vanishes away, that ye would say it was kindled of straw. Othersome,
although they stand furthermore somewhat better to their tacklyng, yet by
little and little they wax cold. That thing which comes to pass, partly of
vainenesse, partly of slothfulness, and partly of earthly cares: the
unskillful impute it to repentance. And therefore least it might repent them to
late of proceeding to far, they leap back again betimes. If any being
dismayde, with fear of death or persecutions (which, the more pity, happens
to many) do fall from the Gospel, upon their inconstancy is framed a
foundation of Offense. Foul surely is their fall: but in what sort so ever we
deny Christ all of us, shall he therefore deny him self? Nay rather he
shall evermore remain perfect, and always from time to time nevertheless be
like him self, as Paul also admonishes. Far otherwise it would become us,
to be reformed by such examples as these be: namely, that being warned of our
weakness, we might carefully take heed, that the same happened not to us.
After the time that Paul had declared the Jews to have fallen from the favor
of God, he shows their fall to be so dreadful, that he exhorts and warns
others to beware. If then the falling away of one man or two, do utterly
dismaie them, whose carfulness ought to be quickened, when whole nations do
fail, who would not impute the fault to their perverse judgment?
Notwithstanding it is not my purpose to extenuate their fault, which as much
as in the^ lies do make feeble the weak souls. Only I would admonish such
as waver when other fall, how malicious this amazedness is: he has denied
Christ who would have thought it? He has taken his leave of the Gospel, whom
all men believed to have been more firm tha^ a rock. That man is now luke
warm: and another is colder than Ise, when both of them were so fervent, that
it was a wonder to see. But they that so speak, do not consider that some are
therefore vanquished with fear of death, because they have not as yet
conceived an assured hope of the life to come: and that othersome are stiff
for cold, because worldly cares do alaye the heat of the spirit in them.
But what booteth it us to draw unto us wilfully the infectio^ of other men's
diseases, seeing remedy is at hand, if it be not refused? why do they not
rather settle themselves in that so wholesome admonishme^t of Paul? For when
he had spoken of Hymenaeus and Philetus, whose falling might have stricken great
fearfulness into all the godly, by and by he adds that, which was able to
assure them up. This seal remains: The Lord knows who are his. Therefore
let him depart from iniquity, whosoever calls upon the name of the Lord.
For as much as those twain were known and notable persons: Paul saw it
could not be, but that they by their headlonge falling, should compel some at
least wise to waver. Notwithstanding, he exhorts the chosen, to lean
quietly upon the defense of God: and he denies, that there was any danger of
frettynge out the mark of salvation, which he had graven in them: warnyng them
by the way, that no man profane the holy name of God, by counterfaite
invocation. John also saw this stumblingblocke, to come through them, which by
sheading abroad the venim of their wicked doctrine, did at that time greatly
anoye the Church. But while he testifies it so to come to pass, to the
intent it should be manifest that all are not of the company of the Godly
which take the name upon them, he shows therewithal a mean to overcome the
same stumblyngblocke, which might trouble many. What shall a man say of
Alexander the Copper smith? when of a noble disciple of Christ, he became
first a renegate, and afterward a most deadly enemy, is he not set forth for
an example to others? What think ye of Demas? when he embracyng this world did
shamefully forsake the Gospel, ought he to draw the rest with him into the
same Labyrinth? when in another place Paul makes mention that he was forsaken
of all men, does he give liberty to betraye the Gospel? when he complains
that he was rejected of Phigelus, Hermogenes, and all the men of Asia, does he
open a window of so wicked a departinge, unto others? Nay rather, by such
instructions all the Godly are awaked, to the intent their security should
not be in danger of the Devils deceites. They are commanded to set before
them, that everlasting sign of Gods election, in stead of a buklar against
all assaults, in such wise that they seal up their faith also with a good
conscience. For as much as I have to do with such kind of me^, as will be
counted Christians, to the intent I stand not ouerlonge talkyng of the matter,
let them read the two Epistles of Paul to Timothy: the which I suppose will
suffice to appease their minds: unless peradventure they will either turmoyle
with themselves for ye nonce, or else seek vain pretenses to fall from Christ
wilfully. And surely with sound and wise men this one thing will be able to
uphold their faith, ye it were lewdly done to measure the eternal truth of
God by ye swimmyng inconstancy of men. But they yt are so witty to take
liberty of sinnyng by evil examples, why do they not observe so many
wonderful examples of invincible constancy, which might woorthely stablish
their faith among whatsoever storms of temptations. This our age has seen
good store of martyrs go chierfully and vnfearfully to death. Neither might
men only boaste themselves hereof, but in ye woma^kinde also did God show a
strength surmou^tyng the strength of man. Surely ye old stories do not make
report of any hearty women, which the women yt Flanders and the County of
Arthoys has brought forth a ten years ago, do not match. Shall then the
false forsakyng of a few, overthrow our faith? shall that same holy blood
(whereof every drop are seals to as many godly hearts,) vanish away without
estimation or strength? Although it be so vile to the^, yet shall it not be
without glory before God. Neither shall they escape unpunished for
accompaniyng themselves wilfully to their own decay, the miserable forsakers
of Christ: and for neglecting them that with stretched out hands call us
unto Heaven.

I come to that let, which in our time has kept many from coming any thing
near to Christ. For they have seen the chief Doctors of the newespringynge
Churhe, not only disagree among themselves in contrary opinions, but also
sharply encounter one against another. Here a doubt entered into their minds,
how much they were to be believed that at the first beginnynge dissented. Yea
and fear came upon them, least they should unadvisedly leap so far, as
from whence they might not retire. Specially that same unhappy contention as
touching the Sacraments, it can scarsly be expressed how many men's minds it
troubled. How singular a practice of Satan this was to cast a chokepeare
into fearful consciences, I my self have proved to mine own harm. But like
as I afterward perceived my self to have been rather hindered by mine own
fault, than withhelde by any just cause, so I am not afraid to give the same
judgment upon all other men. I confess there is in such disagreements, that
which may perce those that be already meetely well confirmed: and much more
those that be unskillful and nouices. But I say: men ought to gather their
wits about them, that they may continewe in going toward him, who is never
sought in vain. For it was not to the intent to deceive us, that he promised,
that if we knock it shall be opened unto us: and that if we ask, it shall be
given unto us. They which boaste themselves to be detained still in Papistrie,
for the hatred they bear to the dissensions which they see in our part: have
no color of excuse. I speak of a thing to well known. There is no point of
Religion whereof their school divines do not daily contend. How contrary
their opinions be, how hatefully they sometime carpe, and sometime gyrde one
another, their own books bear witness. Yea rather they count it a glorious
matter to profess diverse sects. And therefore the innumerable brawlinges and
bickerings of the Papists, do nothing offend these good men: and yet one
siely disagreement among us, so wounds them, that they utterly abhor from
all the whole doctrine. Surely in one thing the Papists are to agreeable, that
is in babbling who may babble most against the Gospel, no less leudly than
stubburnely mainteyninge their own wicked superstitions. But when they come
among themselves again, they do nothing else than strive one against another
with hoarce and co^fused chattering. I know that the Monks and other bablers
of the same hear, are so brazen faced, and so far paste all shame, yt they
scarre the siely people from taking any taste of the Gospel, chiefly by this
reason, because we are not fully agreed among our selves. As though the walls
of schools did not sound again of their contentions. As though all their
books (as is aforesaid) were not stuffed with repugnant sentences. But I
marvel not that they do so malapertly, who take lamentable wickedness for
virtue. But how comes it to pass, that well sighted men, (to whom none of
these things yt I speak of is unknown,) do pretend themselves to be moved
with this Argument? Is not this as much as to shun the light of set purpose?
And in so doing they vaunt of their own wisdom, that they entangle not
themselves in dangerous dissentions: deridyng the^ as taking no heed, who
nevertheless dare seek the way of Salvation. But, in as much as I see no
better remedy to correct their pride with, than to set them light: I turn me
to the simple, who knowing their own unskillfulness, had rather absteyne from
desire of scarchyng out the truth, than to put themselves in peril of
errynge. When on the one side Luther, and on the other side Oecolampadius and
Zwinglius, employed their labor earnestly to restore Christ's kingdom, that
same unhappy contention, concerning the holy Supper of the Lord, rose
privily up, into the society whereof many others were drawn. That from the
conflict of these graunde Capitaynes, there came fearfulness into the hearts
of the raw Soldiers, it is more to be lamented than to be wo^dered at,
notwithstanding the raw Soldiers are to be admonished, that they be not
troubled out of measure, in as much as it is an ancient policy of Satan, to
draw the servants of God (otherwise well minded,) to strife among them
selves, to the intent he may hinder the course of the wholesome doctrine: who
would willingly yield to the snares of the Devil? So the dissension between
Paul and Barnabas, proceeded even to open defiance. So the dissension between
the same Paul and Peter, did burst out into manifest conflict. In these three,
al men acknowledge (as I said) the policy of Satan: and why the^ are they
blind in this present business, where their own salvation is handled? Some
(...) will make exceptions, that those co^tentions were not touching the
doctrine. What? when some would needs have the Ceremonies of Moses law
kept still, did not the doctrine come in question? But the Scisme proceeded so
far forth, that it divided in manner all the Churches: will they say it had
been meet the Gospel should have been rejected, for that dissentions sake? It
is well known that Luther, and they that stood in contention with him, were
wise men, and garnished with singular gifts of God. In ye whole sum of
godliness they agreed wonderful well. They taught, as it were with one mouth,
which was the right and sincere woorshippe of God: to purge the same from
innumerable superstitions and Idolatries, and to set it from men's leude gloses,
was their whole endeavor. Ouerthrowyng the affiance in works, wherewith
miserable men were made dronken and altogether bewitched, they taught that al
Salvation was laid up in the grace of Christ. The power of Christ which
either had been cast under foot, or else lay drowned, they nobly advanced
again. Which is the true order of calling upon God, what is the operacion and
nature of Repentance, whereof faith springs, and what fruits it brings
forth, which is the lawful government of the Church, they teach without
any variableness at all. Only in the Sacraments there was some disagreeme^t.
And yet I dare avouch this without rashness, that unless their minds had
been partly exasperate with overmuch earnestness of the contentio^s, and
partly filled with wrong suspitio^s, the controversy was not so great, but
that it might easily have been reconciled. But if in that heat of disputation,
the controversy could not be discussed orderly as it should be, what lets
now at leastwise, but that the turmoyle being pacified, the simple truth
should be heard? We agree very well among us upon the true use of the
Sacraments. We do all in general affirm that the Sacraments were for this
purpose instituted, to seal up the promises of God in our hearts, to be
furtherers of our faith, and to be witness of Gods grace: we advisedly show
that they are not empty or naked and dead figures: seeing that the use of the^
through the power of the holy Ghost is effectual, and that God by the secret
woorkyng of the same holy Ghost, does truly perform whatsoever he thereby
declares. And therefore we confess that the Bread and Wine in the Supper of
our Lord, are not empty pawnes or tokens of the Communion, which the
faithful have with Christ their head: because our souls enjoy him as their
spiritual food. Of all these ye doctrine is agreeable in all places. What so
great stu^blingblocke do prouds men find in this behalf, that should stop
up the way of the Gospel? But in definyng the way, the manner is somewhat
diverse. I confess surely that all me^ speak not so distinctly as were to be
wisshed: either because every man has not the like gift to dispute plainly
and clearly, or else because that all have not atteined one measure of faith.
Whereas there remains as yet much of the thick darkness of the Papistrie,
if it be troublesome to any man to have it narrowly and plainly set forth,
whatsoever makes to the discussing of the darkness of their errors, he
bewrays him self to be a malicious shunner of the light. Now whiles we lift
men from the earth to heaven: while we carry the^ from dead elements to
Christ, because we ascribe the cause of righteousness, salvation, and all good
things to his mere grace: while we ascribe to the holy Ghost all the efficacy
of the signs or Sacraments: and like as God is the only author and
performer of spiritual life, we challenge wholly unto him that which is his
own: while we reject al gross gloses, wherewith it is manifest that the
world has been deluded: while we take away the carnal manner of Christ's
presence, and the perverse woorshippyng of him in the Sacrament: They that make
a stumblyng block thereof, for as much as they wittingly and willingly stumble
at Christ, they are worthy to crush themselves together. I have proved in
this case, that there are many which take delight to prete^de Offenses, because
it pleases them to be blind in the light.

Moreover, that which I have briefly touched before, is to be called to
remembrance, that although alteration of things do minister occasion of many
faults: yet every thing is wont to be noted more narrowly, and to be found
fault with more straightly, if ought be then amiss: than if no alteration had
happened at all. How deep a goulfe of ignorance was in the Papistrie, how
horrible the miste of their errors was, it makes us astonished to remember. It
was a great miracle of God, that Luther and others that labored with him in
restorynge the doctrine of godliness, could by little and little wade out of
it. Diverse do cavil that they are offended, and come not to the Gospel, or
else proceed not in their race already begone, because they have not seen all
things at one instant: and because so high a piece of work was not polisshed
every inche of it at the first day, who sees not how excessive this
deintinesse is? For they do in likewise, as if a man should accuse us, that at
the first dawning of the day, we do not yet see the noone Sun. Nothing is
more common than these co^plaintes, why was not exactly prescribed unto us by
and by, what it behooved us to follow? why was this hidden more than other
things? shall there be any end at all, if it be suffered from time to time to
proceed any further? Undoubtedly they that talk so, do either envy that the
servants of God should profit, or else it grieueth them yt the kingdom of
Christ is promooted to better and better. The same waywardness appears in
every small trifle: which although they deserve not to be so lightly pardoned:
yet they ought not to exasperate us in such sort that we should loathe the
Gospel. Let the Monks and other Masters of the popish Synagoge babble never
so unsavory old wives tales, let them deforme the Scripture with never so
absurd gloses: and these good men can find in their hearts to bear with all
this. But if any thing happen to pass from any of our sort not so aptly
applied, they allege that they are kept from hearing us, as it were by some
heinous Offense, odious to God and man. They patie^tly bear with wrestinge the
testimonies of the Scriptures, with sentences ilfauoredly hanging together,
and with frivolous reasons in their old writers: But if they find the
hundredth part in the writings of our men, they will not only condemn us all
which shall be giltlesse, but also they will count the whole doctrine to be
worthy to be absteyned fro. Nevertheless I do not here take upon me the
case of such as by scriblynge do alaye their own itche. For it is to be
wisshed, that such as are of that sort, should give over blurryng of paper.
But eue^ as I grant not that the foolish toys of a few are parcially to be
cherisshed: eue^ so all men see how vnrightful a thing it is, that for
weariness hereof, all the whole doctrine of the Gospel should be made
unsavory. It is undoubtedly true that I have said before, that in the mids
of the light of the Gospel, are more clearly perceived the things that erst
lay hid in the dark night. But to wink willingly and carelessly at all manner
of faults in the one party, whereas in the other ye search over narrowly for
things to carpe at: I say is the property of one that desirously coueteth and
forgeth to him self stu^blingblockes. For the Offense which is ministered to
the^ by the living of some not correspondent to their profession, grows not
upon any other ground. If the life of them only which boaste themselves to be
folowers of the Gospel were corrupt and dissolute, the cause of their Offense
might be deemed more beautiful. But seeing that wickedness flows generally,
almost through the whole world, what shall we say, but that that old
complainte of the Poet does well agree to our age also. The age of our
parents worse than the time of our grau^dfathers, has engendered us lewder
than themselves, who ere it be long shall leave a more sinful ofspringe after
us. And to what purpose pertains that warning of Christ: that the latter
age shall be like the time of Noe, and that there shall be an horrible floudde of
iniquity, wherewith the earth should be overwhelmed, but that such a poole of
wickednesses, should sharpen the desire of hastinge, to such as of their own
accord are making haste toward Christ? For this purpose makes also (as I
said before) the just punishment for despisinge the Gospel. For they that
have abused so holy a treasure, who can deny but they have deserved, that the
Lord should cast them into a reprobate mind, to give over themselves to all
kind of wickedness. And it is not otherwise to be hoped, but that me^ should
euerywhere more and more wax Heathen like, of whom we see few free from this
sacrilege. Howbeit, I add another cause to these causes above said: namely,
that they are malicious and wrongefull judges, whom the vices of men do drive
from the Gospel. They say how diverse do behave themselves neither godly nor
honestly, which glory in the Gospel. But this question should have been
demanded of them first, whither the Gospel changed them to the worse? He
that was a whoremonger (say they) or a dicer, or otherwise dissolute of
living, is the same man he was still at this day. Uerely the vices which in
Papistrie they bear with, they begin to detest so sodeinly, that for hatred
of them they abhor the very doctrine of holiness and innoce^cie. I fear
not, that they which by their filthy and wicked life, do dishonor the
Gospel, should think me to be their patron. And therefore (I suppose) I shall
have the more liberty to rebuke them, that impute all the corruptnesse of the
Papacy to the Gospel. If there be any holiness there, the Monks, by consent
of them all, do challenge it to them without all controversy. And why should
they not? when in their Cloisters is resident an angelical perfection? But for
all that, we have not from any other place a more filthy puddle of all vices.
If any man will reply, that since from thence only come impostumes, it is no
marvel if they send forth their stinche wheresoever they become: it is an
easy matter for me to wash away such a frivolous slander. For first and
formest if any goodness were there, it is most certain, that by the wonderful
providence of God it was brought out, as gold should be brought out of a
du^ghill. What Monks had Germany in our age, that either in doctrine or
holiness, may be bold to compare themselves with Luther, Bucer, Oecolampadius
and such like, unless they do it without all respect of shame? whom shall
the Italians set against Bernardine Ochine, or Peter Vermill? Also out of the
Cloisters of France there issewed diverse, who with their brightness might
have shadowed many reproaches and shames of their order. I confess there were
but few that turned from their Monkerie unto us, who are worthy to be named
for honors sake. And what wonder is it though many Angels come not out of
Hell. In that only Loath of all the Sodomites escaped alive, we do woorthely
attribute it to the excellent power of God. But what Sodom ever was there
fraughted with so many monsters of filthiness, as swarm at this day in the
dens of Monks? And therefore am I wont to say: if the tenth part of them
that fleet thence under the name of Christianity, do give themselves truly
to Christ, the world goes very well on our side. But rather we daily see
Christ defrauded of his tenthes: in so much that scarce the twenty part
comes to his share. Such of them as give occasion of Offense, I say not that
they are so much lewd of nature, and ill spoken of for their own faults, as
hated for their filthy and wicked trayninge up in Monkerie. For in that they
be slouthful bellies, and scoldes, and falseharted, and unthankful, and
vnnurtred, and busibodies, and filchers, and of slauishe nature, and lecherous,
do not all these things smell of their Cloister trade of living? Every
several order has several rules sequestered and distinct one from another:
howbeit the common rule well near of them all, is patched together of those
virtues which I have rehearsed. For if the best which God has drawn out of
that mire, do acknowledge the skurfe that they have there taken, to stick so
fast by them, that they must labor from day to day in wipinge away the
reffuse: a man may judge how sore the the infection reigns among the common
sort. Then let those, whom such kind of Offenses hinder, receive that is
their own, and they shall find the way plain and level. Surely if I were a
magistrate, and that I had sufficient goods to maintain the charges thereof,
I would never set at liberty a Monk new crepte out of his den, under half
a years trial at the least, and that should be thoroughly done to, ere he
should use the common trade of living and society of men: and as many as I
saw clad still in their Monkishe weed, I would either shut them up in
prisons, or else send them away as unruly beasts into some wild forest.
Moreover to wash from the Papacy, the filthiness which is known to be
proper unto it, and to lay them upon the name of the Gospel, is a point of to
much slau^derousnes. But why do I dispute of one kind? For if the Papists
object to us the dissolute living and scarce honest behavior of a few men,
we may of as good right and better, return the same and greater reproaches by
double upon them. Would God they gave us not so plentiful matter. It is to no
purpose to tell how freely whoredom reigns among them without punishment:
what liberty there is of scolding and quarrelyng: how all kind of
wantonness is permitted commonly: with how great reioyceme^t reign among
them lawless pompes, unchaste dau^cinges, and other things of the same sort.
Surely there is none of all these things, which (that I may glory after a
sober manner) is not prohibited among us by public proclamacions, and
restreined by some discipline. Wherefore it is not to be feared, if we be
compared with the Papists, that we should be found fully as ilfauored as
they. When we remember our evil doings, there is cause why we should be
greatly ashamed. But (which is a thing to be lamented,) their extreme
filthiness makes us to seem almost good and undefiled men. It is a wonder
therefore that they, who are so coye in bearing with the vices of our me^,
should be steeleharted in sufferynge the wickednesses of the contrary part.
Wherein they not only do us wrong, but also are most unthankful to God. For
in the mean time they pass over very many examples of rare godliness,
holiness, and all other virtues: whereby it became them rather to be provoked
to the love and reverent fear of the Gospel, than for the faults of some to
be moved to hatred or contempt of it. They allege that not many amended, since
they professed the Gospel. But I pray you, how many may we bring forth of the
contrary part, whose wonderful conversion does beautify our Gospel? And
seeing they enforce us to gloriyng, which so maliciously do darken the glory
of the Gospel, there is no region which does not daily behold princely
triu^phes of our doctrine in this behalf. The adversaries themselves also,
although they dissemble it, yet are they ready to burste for madness, because
they see men, who heretofore were given to riotte, wanto^nesse, unchasteness,
vain pompes of the world, covetousness, and rauin, now wholly framed to
soberness, temperance, chastity, modesty, and upright dealing. And if they
seek at our hands for such as have led the whole process of their life
continually in virtue and glorious fame, we are not destitute of a very great
number of such. I could name a great sort, who excellinge sometime with high
co^mendacio^ in the Papistrie, do now since they were endewed by God with
pure knowledge of his Gospel, by expressinge the lively image of virtue in
their life, show themselves to have had no more but a shadow of it before. But
least this talk may for some appearance of boastynge be odious, I will
conclude shortly. If the examples both of men and women do thoroughly move any
body: singular godliness testified as well in death as life, uprightness,
chastity, and temperance, ought to be much more available toward the
co^firmacion of the faith, than it were meet that the disordered life of
otherme^ should anoye it.

Now let us pass to the last sort of Offenses: which I said to consiste
partly of surmised slanders, and partly to spryng of malicious cauillatio^s,
which froward me^ fetchyng a far of, do unjustly wrest upon the Gospel. Of
slau^ders I purpose to speak this before: that is no marvel if lewd persons
by spreadyng them far abroad, endeavor to overthrow the credit of our
doctrine among the simple. For it is not convenient that we should be
exempted from the common law of the servants of God. Surely Paul was not so
waywarde to make those complaints for nothing, which are to be seen
euerywhere in his wrytinges. Many things, of his wisdom he suppressed with
silence: many things, of his modesty he did forgive: many things, of his
noble courage he swallowed up and said nothing: and yet we see how often he
co^playneth that he was spightfully slau^dered through the congregacions. I
speak of sinistre backebitinges, wherewith malicious persons did burden him,
being absent and knowing not of it, before persons to light of credit,
unskillful of all things, and ignorant of the truth. For it is to well known
how the servants of God, yea and the Son of God too, have with open
slanders been openly assaulted. But the Devil when he sees he can profit
nothing by open assault, assayleth the good name of the godly privily, as it
were by mines. Therefore when Paul was going of his hard souldierfare in
countries far of: when through a thousand dangers he endeavored to enlarge
the kingdom of Christ: having continual conflictes with sundry enemies,
ru^nynge hither and thither of purpose and desire to gather nations far
distant asunder, into the unity of the faith: cowardly and currish whisperers
burdened him behind his back with undeserved slanders. Which of us may
require to have his good name untouched of all ye snatchynges of wicked men,
seeing that Paul's pureness of living was not able to defend him? Yea rather
(as he witnesses him self to have done) let us go through with vnapalled
courage by infamy or good name. For it is no less behouefull for the
servants of Christ, to set light by slanderous reports: than to be free
from the enticementes of vaineglorie. For Satan by burthenyng the^ with
wrongful misdeemynges, seeks either to break, or (at leastwise) to hinder
their cheerfulness in doing well. But like as it is nothing convenient ye
we should be moved out of our standing, as often as we are ill spoken of for
doing well: so they are not troubled but by their own fault, who in
admittynge whisperinges and false accusations do show themselves to light of
belief. How many things did the enemies of Luther surmise and invent upon
him, both in sermons and books that they put forth, by the space of whole
five and twenty years together? There are nolies so prodigious which they
durst not forge and blaste out against us. Picart a doctor of Paris, a man of a
troublesome brain, and therewithal frentike, (but yet of such estimacion
among his own sort, that al his old wives tales are counted for Oracles,) as
he playde the dronke^ bedlem, according to his custom in the pulpit, was so
bold to say, that we utterly denied there was any God. Undoubtedly he is not
ignorant yt he lies shamefully: but for as much as such me^ are purposed and
bente to assault us by any means that may be, they think the law in their
own hands, to blab out against us, whatsoever may cause us to be behated. And
surely seeing they know as well as may be, that they are destitute of all
reason, (but if they make the miserable people as very doltes as themselves:)
it is no marvel that they are compelled of necessity to abuse that for a
shifte. Howbeit whatsoever it pleases them to surmise, yea even without
color, ought not forthwith to obtain so great credit. But it is so
ordinary, that it is counted for lawful. If I should make rehersall how many
absurd and childishe toys they have devised of me: it were danger least I
should wrappe my self in their folies. I say no more but this: if there be
such law determined against us, that ye more unbridled and unshamefast our
enemies be to belie us, so much should the case of the Gospel be the worse,
and so much of the credit thereof should be abated: there is no cause why so
wrongful judges may complain, that stumblingblockes are cast in their way,
which they show to be a thing of their own voluntary seeking: and we may
saufely say with Paul: he that is ignorant, let him be ignorant still.

I come to another spice of backbityng, which not only comes out of the
same woorkehouse of Satan, but also is forged almost upon the same stithie.
This only difference there is, that those former, of whom I have spoken,
being open and sworn enemies, do diffame the Gospel in their ministers to
the people: and these of whom I purpose to speak hereafter, do so wind
themselves in, under the name of the Gospel, that nevertheless by overthwart
murmuringe, they withdraw as many as they can from Christ. These are partly
hungerstoruen vagabondes, which will ouerwhelme thee with carteloades of
slau^ders, if thou cram not full their gorges: and partly naughty lewd
fellows, who being dispatched from our company for their own fault, or else
deprived of some office for ill doing, hunte for a new living in another
corner: and yet both sorts of them have their minds and tongues in their
belly. Othersome, being a little more deintie, as not so much pinched with
hunger, and yet shunnyng the Cross, to the intent to have a cloak for their
cowardlinesse, do ouerloade the pure doctrine of the Gospel with fables,
feined by themselves. I said a little before how there are a great number of
Dranes that roue abroad, to get somewhat by pilferie, or by deceit. Such
being now so known by their own packinges, that they can find place no more
to beguile folk in ye Churches of Christ: departinge aside some otherwhere,
do power out any thing they can imagine against us impudently, to the intent
to get themselves favor, by bringynge us in hatred with the unskillful. But
what will those good men prescribe us, which conceive cause of Offense upon
their vanity. We see asseheaded Monks, who yet were wont to stuff the
paunche, that if ye cram not meat into their mouths, by and by they wax
fiery to sanctify battle (as the Prophet terms it.) We see others also not
unlike the Monks. They promise all to become half Angels, so they may
happen upon a measurable trade of living, saying they will be contented with
bread and water. But that same brag of sufferance, anon after vanissheth
into smooke. And they themselves after they have within a while given a proof
of their slothfulness, being weary of work, steal privily away. I
confess, that many having desired a state of living in vain, (as it must
needs come to pass, where many come flockinge to ask at ones) do depart.
And I am not hard to believe, but that some are not so liberally helped, who
notwithstanding were more worthy of relief: either because in men unknown
so exact choice can not be had, or else because those that be the bolder sort
in crauinge, take up the place before the fearful and shamefaste do come: or
because we do not ever judge rightly, or because that being near spent with
giuinge out, we are compelled to send away either empty, or at leastwise
slenderly relieved, such as come out of season. And yet such as should have
somewhat more color, have also come sieldomer, and speak more gently. The
complaints of the other sort fly abroad euerywhere. And what manner of ones
be they? Bespred with most mo^struous lies. Howbeit much more lewdely do they
rail, which being either driven hence for their misbehauiour, or drawn
hence by false reniyng, do hawk for the favor of richemen by slanderous
means, to the intent to fill their mawe with likkyng their disshes. For this
is not hidden, that there are many found which would desire to have the
Gospel quiet for them, and free from all trouble: when as they are ashamed to
confess the truth, how the fear of the Cross does let them that they
cannot satisfy the Christian profession. If there be any vices in the Churches
of Christ, they covet to inquire them out, that they may not seem tied to
their nest without cause. Uerely (say they) if in us be reprehended clokinge
of Idolatry, in other places also is nevertheless committed offense diverse
ways. And still they seek pretense by their lies, which it is most certain
to be forged by such varlettes, in favor of them. It likes me to allege
briefly two or three examples, to the intent that hereafter no man be deceived,
except it be wittingly and willingly. There was one Cortese minister of the
word in the cou^tie of Monsbergard: who being driven from thence, went to
Neoconium: where findyng colder entertainment than he hoped for, to the intent
he might revenge him self, being furthered with the help of certain like
him self, he did many and great displeasures to the godly brethren. Howbeit
findinge him self at length discouraged, he craved forgiveness humbly (which
is an ordinary with those foxes) and through his deceitefull pretense of
repentance, he not only pacified the displeased brethren, but also at such
time, as he fained him self to be doubtful in certain questions, obtained
their letters unto me, wherein they desired me friendly, that I would go
about to resolve him. I entertainyng the man at mine own table, heard him
patiently: in so much that with abundance of tears he affirmed al scruples
to be now voyded from him. At his departure also I gave him wherewith to bear
his charges by the way. From that time forth gaddinge over all France, he
ceased not to speak evil of me like a lewd fellow. Another I know not of
what country (who had given him self a name of the Cornell tree,) being
accused to have done diverse things unseemly for the servant of Christ, was
by the judgment of the convocation of Lausan, commanded to suspende his
ministry, until his case were tried better. Anon after as he carried
letters to Berue, suspectinge they were not made as he would wish, he
delivered other of his own cou^terfettinge: and understanding that his
lewdenesse was found out, because he could not wash his hands of the
matter, he took his heels into another quarter. And all these things were
done in mine absence without my knowledge. Now he reports every where that I
drove him out by force, because he refused to subscribe to mine Heresies.
Another who was to great a tavern hunter, being sharply rebuked by me, never
left feastyng and banquettinge by stelth, until he was run very sore in
debt: when leauinge his householde he crept privily away. I was gone of a
journey to Arge^tine. There was between us no varia^ce, no suspicion of
Offense, but that I had a while been a let that he cast not him self away. And
because he had been of the covent of the Austine Friars, he walked up and down
before their den, declaringe lamentably that he was banished, because that he
also had withstood my Heresies. But I do not so much pass for the lewdness
of him and such as he is, as this unworthiness grieueth me, that the good
Fathers, who daily learn out of our Books, do not stick in stead of
rewardinge us, to charge us with the offenses which they have drawn out of
those their own puddels. But I play the fool in busiynge both my self and
the Readers, in gathering these husks together: but that it behooued as it
were to be represented in the persons of a few, what is wont to be done of
most men every where and daily. Toward some we are to rough and unappeasable.
But it were good to know what manner of Clemency they require at our hands: we
being wrongfully hurt do forgive, and take no reuengement, though it be in
our hand to do it. This is not inoughe for them: but they will moreover be
received into our bosoomes, none otherwise than if they had always been most
faithful unto us: what a thing is this? That being deceived, betrayed, and
cruelly misused, we should not be bold to look to our selves afterward. But
it repents them. Uerely, being very Crocodiles, they will with one little
tear purchase credit of goodness. This therefore, is that our vncourtuous
rigor, that we do not wilfully yield our selves to the^ to cut our throtes.
But I let pass to speak of our private injuries. God shall be greatly offended:
an open fault and of very ill example shall be commmitted, yea and some shall
heap wickedness upon wickedness: being convicted they confess tone half
of the fault themselves. And yet when they have confessed, if all things be
not in as good state with them as if they had never done amiss, they cry out,
that by our rigorousnesse they are driven to despair. I say that repentance
being so holy a thing, cannot be esteemed upon cold signs. To go further
with them, what repentance boast they of, who are so smally humbled with the
acknowledgyng of their fault, that within three days after they dare with a
brazen face vaunt themselves in the pulpit? It was the fasshion of Monks to
keep secret what wickedness so ever was in their fellows for reverence of
their order. Many would wish that this custom were brought into the Church
of Christ. But I hold opinion that there can no better prouiso be made for ye
honor of the Christian name, than if the Temple of God be clean purged from
filthiness.

But now I have spente to many words in repeating the slau^ders, wherewith
such varlets as are departed from among us, do through my sides ouerthwartly
wound the Gospel: I return again to the general slanders, wherewith the
manifest and sworn enemies do openly assault the doctrine. This is the
slander most frequented among them: that we under pretense of Christian
liberty, do set free all things at the lust of our selves and of other men:
and that our doctrine tends to none other end, but that men being loosened
from law, and awe, should take their pleasure without measure or modesty.
What our doctrine contains, large volumes are able to show. But ye may
understand that it is as free for our enemies to lie, before them that are
kept from readinge our writings, as it is superfluous for us to make excuse
before the Readers. Nevertheless, first I would know what yoke of discipline
it is a Gods name, that is so grievous, that it co^pels us to fly to this
sanctuary. For the rigorousnesse of the Papacy was never yet so great, but
that it was lawful there to go a whorehuntinge, to dau^ce, to exceed
vnmeasurably in all riottousnesse, to feast and banquet, to play at dice, and
by all means to use misbehauiour through the whole year: condicionally that
once after yearly pardon, those that had lived so lewdly, discharged their
stomach into the Massemongers ear, as it were by vomittinge after a surfeit.
To what purpose the^ was it, to seek this last remedy of despair, in such
dissolute lice^tiousnesse? Certainly if there were any, never so desirous of
alteration, yet they never began to make a do, before they were past all hope
of co^passinge their desire otherwise. Now there could not any unruly or
wanton desire have tickled us, which might not have been borne with,
unpunished under the Papacy. But the blowers abroad of the praise of the
Papacy, are too too much to be laughed at, while they preach their straight
orders of discipline, as if they were the laws of Sparta. For who would believe
a Monk with plumpe and ruddie cheeks, boasting of his fasting? who ca^
think that they are sparinge, who are euerywhere known to be drowned in
ruffianrie? To conclude in one word, almost all the popish Clergy, is a
wide sink of all kinds of wickedness, which does not only breath out his
stinch far and wide, but does also infect with his deadly venim all other
orders or degrees of the world. But admit we grant that all things are
ordered holyly and chastely among them. Yet for that they say we loosen and set
at large the chastity of manners, which men were straightly bound unto by
their laws: I will appeal to none other witnesses, for the disprouinge of
this lie, than those which are daily quarelynge with us, complayninge that al
their old liberty is taken from them. I will say nothing but that which is
thoroughly known to all men. As many among us as being lecherous, riottouse,
or lewd, covet to do as they list, ye should say they be the very Soldiers
of the Pope hired to assault the Gospel. Neither dissemble they the cause,
that they cannot away with this ancient and sad severity (as they term
it,) which erst lay hid in old forworne papers. The rage of these men at
least wise were to be pacified, to the intent these good defenders of chastity
might persuade that we give the fleashe as much liberty as it will crave. But
for as much as they kick and spurn so much against our rigorousnesse, to whom
the discipline of Papistrie was sweet and delectable, it may be easy for any
man to gather hereby, that our doctrine is far wide from that unbridled
parcialitie, whereof they accuse it. Nay rather many of the Papists do
aggrauate this spite upon our doctrine, that it takes almost all mirth and
gladness out of the world.

Three things specially they object against us: wherein they accuse us to covet
a licentiousness of doing what we list. Because we have abrogated auricular
confession: because forbiddinge of meats is condemned: and because we make
free unto all men the use of Marriage. They cry out that shamefastness is
taken out of the world, but if the necessity of confessinge bridle it. Uerely
it is a wondrous thing that the spirit of God, neither in the old Church,
nor of many ages after Christ's coming, did use this bridle. Shall we then
say, that all that time wa^ted shamefastness, when holiness, chastity, and
all virtues florisshed chiefly? Albeit the rigor of discipline were at that
time exceedinge sharp, yet notwithstanding there was not this bridle, without
the which these good patrones of modesty think nothing should be in
sauftie. But it is most false which they boaste of, that the lusts of men are
hereby restrained. For who sees not, that in like manner as dronken men do
ease themselves by vomit, to the intent that anon after, as if they were fresh
and fasting they may return to glutting themselves new again: Even so the
Papists utter their secreate whisperinges into the Priests ear, to the
intent that being lightened of their former fardell, they may more boldly
heap sin upon sin. They pretend by their words, to confess themselves
to God. But I say it is the common intent of them all, to disclose their
priuities covertly to the Priest, to the intent they may be hidden from God
and man. And therefore we see that after they are dispatched of their theeuishe
mumbling, they follow their lusts far more carelessly than before. But let us
grant them that some are so kept in awe with that slavish fear, that they
abstain from sinninge: yet infer they slanderously upon us, that we seek
fleashly liberty in this behalf. We condemn the law of Innocent, which
binds the consciences with the necessity, from which God absolueth and
sets free. Let them reason the matter with God, who so precisely forbids
that any man should snarle him self in such snares, or suffer the souls
which Christ has redeemed with his blood, to be snarled. We say it proceeded
of traiterous boldness, yt the Remission of sins was bound to the device of
man. If we cannot auouche unto Christ, his right and honor, otherwise than by
taking upon us this reproach which they charge us with: it is verily the
greatest honor to us that may be. Assuredly they are perverse and lewd,
which thereupon conceive cause of Offense. For the taking away of difference
of meats, the excuse is ready and easy to make. They say that the rain is
let lose to the fleash to wax wa^ton intemperately, because it is permitted to
eat fleash as well upon the friday as the monday. As who would say, there were
no riot or excess, save in eatinge of fleash. Furthermore, who knows not,
that always the deintiest fare has ever been of fish? and that at this day,
the kitchens never smooke better, nor the tables are more busily laid, or
furnished with more plenty and variety, than upon fishedaies? Away with
those toys: that we allure simple souls with delicates. For the question in
variance between us is not of delicate meats. But the Papists, whereas they
ca^ with all their hearts suffer the gull to be glutted upon the friday with all
superfluity and sweetness of meats, (fleash only excepted:) affirm it
unlawful to touch porke or beofe: and we leave to every man's conscience the
liberty that God has granted. Therefore we dare determine, that there is no
more religion in vile inwardes of beasts, than in a fish sumptuously sauced.
Surely a spare and sober diet, as becomes us, we commend: neither shall any
man find that our wrytinges or sermons do even thus much bear with excess.
But rather every side of a leaf of our wrytings shall witness with us, that
we are somewhat above the Papists in enforcinge men to temperance. And taking
away the superstition of the day, we teach that it is lawful to use sparely
and thriftely, such things as by Gods benefit we have in store. What
sweetness of liberty is there so great herein, that it should enforce us to
turn ye world vpside down? Surely if I were minded to delight my mouth, I
would for one half year, choose me other manner of meats rather than fleash.
My acquaintance know I am very much delighted in fish, and certain other
things, from which I willingly abstain, least I should bie my delicates with
the loss of my health. I confess it is a fondness, to confute such slender
slanders. But my Readers must bear with me, if in settinge my self against
Offenses, I play the fool a little. Wherefore it needs not to tarry any
lengar, about these toys. For this part of doctrine which I entreat of,
consists of two members. We uphold that it is unlawful for the consciences
to be entangled with man's laws, which should be ruled by the only word of
God. Although that nothing were more profitable than this kind of exercise:
yet not withstanding we say it is a wicked boldness, when men make a law to
bind the souls with an inward fear. For God chalengeth this right to him
self alone, that he be our lawegiuer and our Judge. Therwithal we say, that
extreme wrong is done unto Christ, while ye liberty purchaced with his
blood, is brought to nothing. For by his benefit we are so much in better
case than the people of the old law, in that we are set free from observation
of days and choice of meats. Furthermore, with Paul we deny that the
kingdom of God consists in meat and drink: and therefore that men are
deceived by an evil superstition, when they take abstinence from fleash to be
a part of holiness. Finally, we do nothing but subscribe unto Paul, who
plainly affirms it to be a Devilish doctrine, to forbid meats as unclean,
which God has hallowed to man's use, that he may eat freely of them with
thanks giuyng. Of no Offense ought to be had so great regard, that it should
be lawful to hide in silence things so needful to be known.

But yet this crime is not altogether washed away, in as much as our
adversaries brag that we can abide no fasting, the which our Lord every where
highly commends. First, for as much as our Books and sermons do cry out
against this slander, we need to labor the less in confutinge the same. But
they will reply upon us, that we have disanulled the decrees that were long
ago stablisshed for fasting. I confess so, and that we were compelled
thereto for very earnest and weighty causes, so that they deal very lewdely
with us, in imputinge to us as a fault, a thing godlily and justly taken in
hand. It was believed upon an old forworne opinion, that the Lenton fast
proceeded of the institution of Christ. This error is light to seemyng, but
yet an error in deed, and such a one, as is in no wise to be borne withal.
It is an easy matter to show without any trouble, how foolishly and vnsauorly
it was devised, and how rashly it was believed. For if Christ would by his
example allure us to a yearly fast, why did he it but ones in all his life,
and not yearly? why did he not by and by stablishe the custom among his
Disciples? why did not the Apostles immediately after his resurrection keep it
as a rule prescribed of their master? And why should we more follow the fast
of Christ, than the old people the fast of Moses? which of the Prophets or
faithful men, took example at Moses to do the like? now put to that other
part: namely that it is such an error, as cannot be winked at, without great
damage to our faith. No man doubts but that the doctrine of the Gospel was
sealed with that miracle, to the intent the authority thereof should be the
certeiner. And therefore the Evangelical history reports, that Christ was
not a hungered by the space of.xl. days. That which Christ did by the power of
his Godhead, to the intent to exalt the reverence of his doctrine above man's
reach, while the Papists cou^terfet the same as if it were subject to their
own power, do they not (as much as in them lies) darken the wonderful power
of Christ, and cancel that holy seal wherewith the truth of the Gospel was
ratified? In other fastings we easily show, that when me^ thought they pleased
God, they did exhibit a gross woorshippe unto Idols. In that days are
appointed in honor of whom they should fast. The Scripture condemns it of
wilful superstition. That they stablishe a woorship of God therein, and
imagine it a meritorious work, it is not only a foolish and vain trust,
but also an utter ungodliness. If we follow Paul as our Author, it shall be
lawful to us to pronounce in general, that such outward exercises wherein
the chief point of godliness consists not, do little profit. And this
cannot be spoken, but that that precise rigorousnesse of exactinge fast, which
reigns among the Papists, may justly be condemned, as long as they permit
to neglect necessary duties. Yea rather a man may cry unto them out of the
mouth of our master him self: O ye Hypocrites, ye have made the
commandments of God of none effect, for your own traditions sake: now
although weightier caces do move us to speak, yet sodeinly they make us
mainteyners of glottonie and all intemperance. And yet the lewdness of the^,
against whom I dispute, is unworthy to have so rightful and earnest a
defense made against it. For what law I beseech you, does the Pope forbid by
his fastinges? or rather make for his fastinges? That a man should no taste
any meat before noone, and the^ abstain from fleash: and to be short that
contenting him with his only dinner, he should that day forbear his Supper.
Moreover, this is the usual manner, that the fill themselves well the night
before, ere they go to bed, to the intent a two hours fasting may be the
more tolerable: that the same day they fast, because they are allowed no more
but only their dinner, they cramme in as much as their croppes will hold: and
that the next day after they take up their pennyworthes with surfettinge. After
they have so carelessly dalied with God, as if it were with some boy, this also
they add to the heap of their lewdness, that the measurable and spare diet
is broken by us. But I say, that although they be dissolute in all their whole
life, yet they no where fall more grossly into a beastly intempera^ce, than in
their fastinges.

Somewhat also remains to be spokeoke^ of Marriage. Our adversaries surmise,
that we for women's sakes have moved as it were the war of Troy. To the
intent I omit others at this present, they must needs grant, that I at least
wise am free from this slander. By means whereof I have the more liberty to
refell their unsavory chatteringe. Whereas under the Tirannie of the Pope I
was always free to take a wife, since the time the Lord took me out of it, I
have many years lived a single life. After the death of my wife, a woman of
singular example, it is now a year and a half, since I have lived a single
life again. These things which shall perchance seem to make little to the
purpose, I have for this consideration spoken by the way, partly that thereby
the malicious vanity of our adversaries may be reproved: and partly that all
men may bear witness I do not plead a private case. But what goodness then
do these mainteiners of chastity bring? Marry they say, that Luther and
others being stirred thereto by the ticklyng of the fleash, have both given
themself liberty to marry, and also drawn the common sort of Priests,
Monks, and Nonnes into the like allurementes. The things which might be
truly declared of the chastity of several persons, whom they falsely and
maliciously diffame, I pass over of set purpose. For what were more foolish,
than for such to fly out of the Papistrie as cannot live chaste? Ye may well
think there were no liberty for sacrifisinge Priests, Monks, and Nonnes, to
fulfill their lusts, unless they sought the^ a new sanctuary a great way
of, with their great trouble. As though all the Cloisters, Celles, and
Fraytries, of the Monks and Nonnes, did not stink of all kind of fornication
and uncleanness. Their prodigious lusts I do not here touch. But to what
purpose is it to dissemble a thing known, as how that from those lurkinge
holes, chastity and shamefastness, for the most part, were so banished, that
the greatest number of them had there some liberty at leastwise, to play the
harlottes. What shall I say of the sacrifising Priests, who are so little
ashamed of their lecheries, that it is now a glorious matter for them to set up
remembraunces of the^ every where. Surely, that I may speak most favorably,
there is no need at all that muttonmongers should remove out of the Papistrie.
And yet I do not utterly deny, but that some Monks fly out of their cages,
to the intent they may freely among us feed on the laced mutton, which
there they do but snatch at by stealth. But I dare take themselves to
witness, how great odds there is between marriage, and the voluptuous life
which they led in their lobbies. And therefore diverse, because they by and
by smell how much streighter the chaste dwellinge together of man and wife
is, tha^ the popish single life of wiuelesse wantonness, do retire betimes to
their own nestes. Othersome being more desperate, fly over to Rome or to
some other place, whither fortune carries them. And this is one of the
Angelical virtues of the Cloisters.

Nevertheless, admit that many do peruersly abuse our doctrine: yet it
ought to be seen how just cause there is of Offense. God has created
mankind under this condition, that man should perform the office of a head to
the woman, and the woman again be an helper to the man: and so in a mutual
bond he knitte both the sexes together. Before man was corrupted, marriage was
given and permitted to them for a great benefit. This benefit of God to be
wrested from man being mortal, I say is not to be suffered. Now unto the first
institution of God, is come a greater necessity, by reason of incontinencie of
the fleashe. For the holy Ghost has not in vain by the mouth of Paul,
appointed this remedy for the auoydinge of fornication, that every man should
have his wife, and every woman also have her own husband. Christ and the said
Paul do not in vain give warnyng, that all are not apt and meet for single
life. And would God the disease of incontinencie were less known in this our
nature grown out of kind. God, to the intent to remedy this vice, has not
only ordained marriage, wherein man may lawfully dwell with woman, but also
with loud voice calls unto the lawful use thereof, all that are burned of
their own fleash. The Apostles, Martyrs, and other chiefest of the Saints
used this benefit. A wonderful estimation of single life arose sodeinly, and
put marriage quight out of conceit and reputation. Notwithstanding, the
abstinence from marriage was but at will for a time, until that superstition
set open the gate to Tirannie. First therefore were the Priests prohibited
marriage, at length the prohibition crepte to the Deacons too. The Monks and
Nonnes, being entangled in the snare of their Oath, gave over the right that
God had granted them. Hereupon the world began to think none hallowed to
God, but only singlefolke. This cruel fury raged so far, that they noted
the married life to be very reproachful as an unholy kind of life. First,
although such a change had had good success to see to, yet we say it had his
beginning of Devilish audacitie. But the holier virtue that Chastity is, so
much the wickedder and more detestable is forced singleness, which is most
certain to be replenished with all kind of filthiness and uncleanness. The
Papists extolt virginity with wonderful commendatio^s, to the intent they
may seem like the Angels, whosoever abhors marriage. As who should say, they
had wo^ne at our hands, that out of marriage there were nothing but all chaste
and virginlyke. But they seem to have their beds void of wives of their own,
for this purpose only, that they themselves may be occupied in defilynge other
men's. For who knows not how it is a common saying among them, that seeing a
Monk, or a Priest, is disbarred the right of taking a wife as all other men
do, it is good right and reason he should help him self some other way. And
to the intent there should be no default on their part, almost all of the^
follow lustely this kind of hunting. There is no fitter pursuit for Bawdry
than confession, as whereby they do not only wind into their own claws,
such women as are guilty of any misbehauiour, but also do assign them over
from one to another, and therefore now the matter is come to this point, that
such as are contented with Lemans in their houses, are counted among the rest
to be chaste and temperate. Their privy filthiness and unspeakable incest, I
omit. And surely I would not meddle with these neither, though they be commonly
known, but that it is needful the Readers should be admonished by the way,
how honestly the adversaries of our doctrine deal with us, while they accuse
it of dissolute licentiousness, because it permits lawful marriage for the
amendment of so cruel mischieues. Though they burst, which cease not to
adorn with forged praises, the constreined singleness of the popish
Clergy: yet it is most certain, that in most part of them is the
bottomless pit of all uncleanness: and I say that in them which seem to
be chaste, is nevertheless an vnpure puddle. With such partly privy flames of
lusts, and specially manifest abhominatio^s, does God (as ye may perceive)
revenge that Diuelishe audacitie, for that despisinge ye benefit of marriage,
like Giauntes they build Babilonishe towers, wherewith to vanquish God and
nature by plain force. And so it behooved to come to pass, that at least wise
men might learn, that, and none other, to be the true chastity, which Gods
rule prescribes unto us. But because we restrain the beastly lasciviousness,
whereof there is no measure in the Papistrie, by the bridle of wedlock: we are
reported to disanull modesty by settinge carnal liberty at large. And what
marvel is it? saying that Christ and Paul were vpbrayded with the like
thing: as if they had broken the yoke of the law for the nonce, to the intent
that men might use their wills in steed of law. For they would not have
purged their doctrine, from slanders so carefully, but if they had been
compelled by the lewdness and spightfull maliciousness of their enemies. But
as many as be curable, I trust they will be pacified with this short excuse,
that they forge not a stumblynge block to themselves, of so light and
frivolous a matter.

This also has some color: that our doctrine is disagreable to antiquity and
the consent of all ages. And therefore the Papists brag themselves most
therein, specially when with blowynge of trumpettes they sound those high
names of the Fathers, and the Church. Because it is known well enough, how
odious and suspected a thing newness in Religion is: under the same pretense
they fray the unskillful from our doctrine. And I confess surely, that if any
new thing be brought, it is not to be heard. But of this crime there is no
better or certainer purgation, than that we will nothing to be admitted,
unless it be proved by clear and substa^tiall testimonies of the Scripture.
And herein it appears that the Papists are duller than Oxen and Asses,
which at leastwise know their stall: who having forged to themselves a
newcome God, have so forgotten the true and everlasting God, that they have no
sight at all in the antiquity of the heavenly Oracles. Notwithstanding, they
allege that we pretend Scripture falsely, who endeuer to subvert all the
consent of the au^cie^t Church. It is a common old stale slander of theirs,
but yet so foolish, that I would be ashamed to bestow much time in confutinge
it: besides that, a long volume were needful for the matter. And our books
do abu^dantly bear witness, that if the allegations of the old men be
sought, our case is by them more furthered than hindered. Albeit it be manifest
enough, that the doctrine of the ancient Fathers, is no more agreeable with
the corruptions of Papistrie, than a sheep is like a Woulfe, yet
notwithstanding they pick out certain sayings of theirs, and sometime also
words, as peruersely as lewdly, wherewith to deceive the rude, and such as
are not exercised in the readyng of them. As often as we object the testimonies
of the Fathers against the^: although they see themselves overwhelmed with the
weight and number of the^: yet because they think themselves to be out of all
danger of gu^ne shot, they carelessly despise us, and laugh at us. For the Sea
Apostolic is so great, that it easily swalloweth up all the Doctors that ever
were. Neither is any thing readier with them than this exception: that they
pass nothing for any determinations of the Fathers, as long as the holy sea
of Rome has decreed otherwise. Therefore among them, all the whole company of
the Fathers shall not be esteemed at a hear, unless they list themselves: but
if any thing perchance has been spoken by any one of them dnaduisedly, it
must by and by bind us with so great devotion, that it is unlawful to
dissent from it never so little. I say once again that this prodigious and
confused Chaos of the Papistrie, is so unlike the ancient government of the
Church, as that there is not more difference between fire and water. But if we
seem to eger and full of clamor in condemnynge them, the Fathers would be
much more vehement, if they lived at this day. Take this too, that these good
sons, which toss the name of the Fathers to and fro like a tennisball, seem
to choose all the grossest errors for the nonce, whereunto unless we give our
assent, they cry out upon us, that we are the enemies of all antiquity.
Melchisedech offered bread and wine to Abraham as he returned from battle. The
old doctors think it a sacrifice, which thing they have transferred to the
holy supper of Christ. It is almost a childishe error. And yet of their so
famous wrytinges, nothing likes the Papists so well. Now least I should
stand to long upon this part, they that have perused the writings of the
Fathers, and can judge but meanly, shall sufficiently understand, that we are
furnisshed with their authority to assault the Papacy. And though they were
laid as indifferent between both, yet will they draw nearer unto us.
Whereupon then is builded such a pile of Offenses? But what if we grant, that
the pure verity of God cannot by us be avouched and restored, but that that
same consent of many ages which they vaunt of, would advance it self against
us, (as I confess that a thousand years since all thing have so decayed,
that new broodes of monstrous errors and superstitions have crope out of the
shell from time to time) yet what find they in such dissentinge as this,
worthy to be offended at? If comparison be made, certainly those first under
whom the Church flourished, either deserve to be counted lawful Fathers
alone, or at leastwise, do challenge of right the chief degree of honor
among the Fathers. But the good Papists (such is their gentle nature) do
celebrate the memorial only of that corrupted age, which had now much
declined from the ancient sincerity. And at length all their complaints come
to this point, that we disanull at this day, the custom which has been
received these eight hundred or these thousand years. But if the old Proverb
be to be believed, which also has been commonly used among them: an evil
custom is nothing else, but the auncientnesse of error. And we know that the
longer of continuance an evil is, the more hurtful it is. In times past this
sentence of Cyprian was counted worthy to be rejoiced at: that we ought not
to look what other men had done or said before us, but whatsoever Christ has
commanded, who is the first of al, that is to be followed. No man also will
deny, but this was well and advisedly spoken of Augustine: that Christ
attributes not to him self the name of custom, but the name of truth. Now no
man dare stir though never so lightly, the stinkyng herb Camarina of
corrupt custom, which has rested a long continuance of years. Yea rather
forebroken rigorousnesse in mainteyninge chief absurdities is waxed so
strong, that they not only refuse the reprouynge of them, as coming out of
season, but also do persecute it cruelly with fire and swoorde. That same
Heathen man says, that like as the custom of right speaking is to be fetched
at learned men's hands: so the custom of well living is to be fetched at the
hands of good and honest men. Shall the lewd and corrupt custom of men,
carry us away forcibly as some violent tempest without judgment or choice,
who have Christ to direct us? To the intent I may conclude this place
briefly, if that thing may take place with us, which out of all controversy
ought to be a grounded principle among all godly men: that the doctrine of
Christ is not subject to the prescription of years, this surmised
stumblingblocke shall hinder no man, at leastwise from the desire to search.
And when it shall be fully agreed upon, that we have from Christ that which we
bring forth, who will be so overthwart as wilfully to fleet unto men, from the
eternal wisdom of God, and the voice of the heavenly Master.

It offends many, because they see almost the whole world to be against us.
Neither are the defenders of the evil case negligent, or to seek what they
should do, but with the same engine do stryke the rude and weak: saying it
is against all reason, that a few men should be credited, and all Christendom
beside welnere neglected? And to tread these under their feet, they chiefly
arm themselves with the holy title of the Church as with a mace. But I would
feign know, how such as are enstraunged from the Gospel, by reason of our
fewness, may maintain their faith against ye Turks? As for our part, if we
being but one man condemned all the men of his age by his faith, there is no
cause why the great multitude of unbelievers should move us from our places. In
the mean while affirm that cause of Offense to be not only scarce probable,
but also unjust and shameful, where the respects of men are weyed before ye
word of God. And why? shall not Gods truth stand sure, except it please
men to believe it? Rather (as Paul says) let every man remain a lier, and
let them acknowledge God to be true, unto whom he vouchsaueth to manifest him
self. And we have already in another place showed, why the greater part of
men does so hardly yield themselves serviceable to God. So much the less
then is it convenient that in so great stubburnnesse of the world, we should
direct our faith after example of the multitude. But Christ gives a token,
that whither the Egles resort, there is the Carrion. I deny not verily, but
that if at any time all the Egles shall be gathered together into one place, then
the conversion of the whole world is to be hoped for. But forasmuch as
Christ means not there all sorts of Egles, but such as follow the lively
sent of his death: who sees not, that that saying is to be restreined to a
few, if any man will perchance take exceptions that we are not excused by the
example of Noe, if we withdraw our selves from that congregation which
holds the name of the Church? when Esaias commanded to leaving the
conspiracy of men and follow God only, he meaned not strangers, but even
such as at that time most gloried in the name of Gods people. And Peter when
he makes the Church like the Arc, because when the world perishes, a
little handful of men is saved as it were by a flood: gives sufficient
warnyng, that we ought not to hang upon the multitude. Why then have miserable
men pleasure, to seek occasion of wauerynge and staggeringe, among the
variable blastes of the world, when God stays us upon the everlasting
fundation of his word? why had they rather wave among the storms of
opinions, than harbrough at ease in the sure haven of certain verity, to
which God calls us. But very great reverence is dew to the Church. I
confess so truly: and I willingly also put this more to it, that the
understanding of the Church is so linked with the native doctrine of the law
and the Gospel, that it is woorthely called the faithful keeper and
interpreter of the same. But between us and the Papists is the odds: that
they think the Church not to be the pillar of truth, otherwise than in
sittynge as a judge over the word of God. And we on the contrary part
uphold, that because the Church submits it self reuere^tly unto the word
of God, the truth is by it retained, and delivered unto others from hand to
hand. And therefore the word of God has no more authority among them, than
the Church as it were by intreatance grants unto it: and they turn the
interpretation of the whole Scripture to the judgment of the Church, even
after the same manner that the Lesbians in old time were want to make their
mason work by their leaden rule, as the old Proverb reports. There is
therefore no place of the Scripture so clear, which being bowed (or to speak
more properly) writhed to this Lesbian rule, takes not a strange shape. And
yet the chief contention between us consists not upon this point alone. But
after the Papists have installed the Church in Christ's throne, to determine
Religion at her own pleasure, and to judge of the Scripture without appealynge
from her, by and by they take the law (such as it is) into their own hands.
We on the otherside, because it is as easy a matter, as dangerous to be
deceived in, will have it discussed which is the true Church. Surely it is no
new thing, that those are sometime cruel Wolves, which occupy the rooms of
sheapeherdes: and that they are wicked and rank traitors to God and his
Church, in whose hand the ordinary Souereintie is. What cause then is there
why vain hobgoblins should make us so afraid, that we should not (as
becomes) try whether the same that bears the name of the Church, be the
true Church or no? Paul affirms the Church to be the pillar of truth: but
yet the same Paul foretells both the falling away of the world now
converted, and that Antichrist should reign in ye mids of Gods Temple. It is
known well enough that he sustained the like encou^ters as we are exercised
with at this day, when the Jews taking pride in the name of the Church,
cried out upon him that he was a forsaker of his order, and an Author of
Scismes and troubles. They report themselves to be descended from the very
Apostles by continual succession: verily after the same manner that Caligula
and Nero succeeded, Valerius Publicola, and Lucius Brutus. For they clinge unto
the Apostles, as if there were not an unmeasurable Chaos put by them, which
might break all aliances betwixt them, if there were any. Because the dunghill
of the popish Clergy is against us, they will have us no less pressed with ye
perverse doom, than if the Angels condemned us out of Heaven. Uerely with the
same pride, did the Scribes in old time reject Christ, because none of the
Princes or Pharisees had believed in him. And forasmuch as they are determined
to stand to their tacklynge with tooth and nail, even to the utterance, for
maintenance of their tyranny, and yet are destitute of true reasons: it is no
marvel though they rappe out vain soundes. But I would desire all them, unto
whom the false usurped name of the Church is an occasion of Offense, that they
would ones find in their hearts to open their ears and their eyes, least the
deceitful image of a body, pull them from their head: and a harlot disguised
in the apparel of a bryde, carry them from their spouse Christ. For what
marks I beseech you have they, whereby they may know the Church of Christ,
in all the whole band of the Romish Antichrist? Unless peradventure while
they see the Pope in his Awbe, with ye cross thrown at his feet, the
Cardinals in scarlet: the Bishops glitteryng with myters and croysiers: and
the rest of the inferior rabble every one with their several cognisa^ces,
being contented with these tokens they desire none other Church, than such a
one as appears in disguisinges like maskers and players of enterludes. For
what else is there to be said to these trifelyng fellows, when having so
often, so pitthely, and plentuously, been by us confuted, they persist still
nevertheless in taking upon the^ the title of the Church?

I said at the beginning that none almost were here deceived, but such as
being loathe to come to Christ, do procure lettes to themselves from a far
of. The time has been that this same scruple has hindered many simple and
godly souls: but at this day (I say) there are few that object the Offense,
risinge upon the name of the Church, against the wholesome doctrine, except
it be such as maliciously and proudely vaunt themselves against Christ. Like
lewdness is it, that they demand miracles at our hand, wherewith they being
amazed, are at length compelled to yield unto God speaking by us. And I say,
that seeing our doctrine bears evident witness to it self, that it has been
confirmed by all the miracles which have been since the world was made: these
men which forgetting the old miracles gape after new, for as much as they are
so astonished at the manifest power of God, and so blind in the clear light,
are no less monsters themselves, than if we should see a man turned into a
beast. Because diverse are enriched with holy goods, and othersome have meetely
well appeased their hungar for a time, the enemies of the Gospel report, that
we were led to alter things for desire of spoil, than for any good zeal to
Godwarde: and many which hawke for a pretense to put by the Gospel, give their
assent to these malicious sayings. Surely for my part, if there be any that
have spoiled the goods of the Church, to fill their own pouches, I excuse
them not. And my Books are manifest witnesses, how much I abhor from such
sacriledges. But as I am not minded to make my self a patron or advocate of
the defaultes of our part, if any be: so the slander is not to be borne with,
that the malicious persons charge us withal, how we made our pray of all
whatsoever was taken from those filthy Seagulles, that is to say, the
chapleynes of Ball and the Monks. Certainly whereas the popish impiety is
abolished, there at leastwise part of the revenues, which whores and baudes
devoured with the Priests, is now bestowed upon the poor. Somewhat more is
bestowed upon schools tha^ was wont to be: true Pastors are found, that
minister the doctrine of Salvation to the people: expenses are allowed to
maintained the state of the Church, and those not small. Although this defense
do not acquit us before God, (which thing I confess with a good will:) yet
it declares that Offense is maliciously gathered thereupo^, against the
doctrine of the Gospel. But they show how it is manifest, for what purpose
we have been moved to take this cause in hand, in as much as almost all being
occupied about lookyng to their private affairs, are slothful in exactyng
discipline, in correctinge vices, and in increasinge and mainteynyng the
kingdom of Christ. Wherefore then do not they rather warm us with their
heat, than they fryse unto our coldness? Let the co^plaintes of Aggaeus
touching the neglectinge of the Temple be read. There a man may behold as it
were painted in a table, the slothfulness of our age, was not therefore the
building of the temple again a very holy work of God, because at that time
every man being busied about his own house, cared not for the Temple of God?
Ought any man therefore to shrink, because he saw some not only cease from
so needful a duty, but also wickedly defraude God of his first fruits and
tenthes? But this is surely the thing that I spoke of before, anon after the
beginnynge: that many being enta^gled with the unholy friendshippes of the
world, do covet any Offenses that may be against Christ, rather than to
offend the wicked enemies of the healthful doctrine. This lewd ambition
ministers unto them both wit to forge Offenses, and eloquence to bark at the
Gospel with currish maliciousnes. Besides that, being not content with
snatchyng at the present evils, they seek with like maliciousness for
somewhat to gnawe upon hereafter. For they surmise that they foresee at hand
the desolation of the Church, which hangs over it by means of inward
dissension. These forecastynge men, wonder that we be no more moved bereat: and
to the intent to bring us in hatred, they gather that we are altogether
careless, or that we would not pass though the earth were set on fire. So I
remember, the bishop of Aquileia did ones reason with me in communication
between us two alone, how horrible a destruction was to be feared, if we did
not shortly bring our discordes to an end. And all his whole talk tended to
this end, that it could not otherwise be, but that one time or other ye matter
must come to trial by the swoorde, if we were so stiffly bente to maintain our
quarrel. Of the which war, this would be the issue, that learning should
be extinguisshed, barbarous confusion brought in, and humanity it self in
manner be taken out of the world, and as the fault of these euilles sticked in
us, so were we like to abide all the blame. Yea (quod he) and it must needs
come to pass, that this religion, in defense whereof ye stand so stoutly,
must perish together with learning. That which I answered at that time to
him alone, let them take it as spoken to them all. We surely, are neither so
dulwitted but that we can call to mind whatsoever Satan practices, nor yet
so savage and beastly to neglect it without regard. As for peace and
quietness, we not only wish the continuance of them, but also (as much as in
us lies) seek to mainteyne them. Of good order and civil policy, we are as
desirous as he that is most. How careful we are for the maintenance of
learning, it needs not to preach it in words. But seeing that Christ
commanded his Gospel to be preached without al exception: what sequel so
ever ensewe thereon, we ought to obey this commandment. Algates men take to
much upon them, if they hope for better success by their own devises, than
by the mean that God has appointed. Why not? Imagine they God to be blind
and unadvised, to cast his Church in danger without consideration? Nay rather
seeing he is the best orderer of things of all others, it is our duty to
overcome al anguishes, be they never so troublesome, with this one saying of
Abraham: the Lord shall provide: shall we think you be careful of this
society between man and man, and shall God the woorker thereof have no mind
at all of it: shall the Church being miserably forsaken of her only sovereign
and mainteiner of her welfare, lean unto our providence? But we are worthy
to be held excused, if executinge obedie^tly the office that God has enjoined
us, we let God alone with his part. And seeing David declares it to be his
peculiar work, to assuage ye troublesome waves of the Sea, to pacify wars,
and to break the chariotes and the spears: this assurance ought to be enough
to encourage us in the auouchyng of that doctrine, which only procures us
his grace and blessing. Notwithstanding, what issue so ever our attemptes in
the end have, there shall never be any cause why it should repent us to have
performed, both godly and acceptable obedience unto God: and (which may
comfort our heaviness even in our greatest afflictions,) to have faithfully
furthered both ye glory of Christ, (which is more to be esteemed than all the
kingdoms of the world,) and also our own souls health, (which is more
precious than all the world.)

Now that I have reckened up the Offenses in general, which we find by
experience to be hurtful, all the children of God are briefly to be admonished
again, that being armed with the remedies by me showed, they rather keep
Christ still for their foundation, than by their rash and lewd runnyng upon
him, make him to themselves a stone to stumble at, and a rock to dashe
against. It cannot otherwise be but that in this world, many occasions of
Offense must from time to time be fathered upon the faithful. From the which
not eue^ Christ him self was free. Yea rather it is scarsely to be hoped for,
that they should step one pace, but that the Devil cast some stumblingblocke
in their ways. So must they walk through innumerable Offenses. But albeit the
variety of them be manifold, and the heap thick packed, yet shall none be a
Christian, but he that wadeth through them with victory. Christ says, that
Peter him self was a stumblingblocke unto him, when he assayed to call him
back from sufferyng death. But did he retire back when he was assaulted with
occasion of Offense? Nay rather perceyuinge Satan in Peter, he badde him
auaunt. To the intent we should know that we must abide the same encounter as
well as he, he tells us all in general, it cannot otherwise be but Offenses
must come. But even as he assures those which are his, that they shall never
be free from Offenses: so excuses he no cause of Offense. For when he bids
the right eye should be put out, if it offend any man, he admonishes us that
there is nothing of so great valor, that in respect thereof we ought any whit
to be led from the mark. If we were so diligent in auoydinge Offenses, that
none of us would spare his own eyes, I should not have needed to spend so
much labor in putting away Offenses. I grant it is a sore encounter and
above our strength, but Christ says not in vain, that he has warned his
disciples they should not be Offended. For there is none other cause why we are
unable to vanquishe and put to flight Offenses, saving that we harken not to
Christ, when he speaks to us. Surely it is true that he speaks in another
place, how they that stumble do stumble in the night. For wherefore serves
the light of the Gospel, but to set before our eyes the stumblynge blocks in
showing us the way. But some man will say, that a let although it be seen,
yet will it not cease to hinder our race. But I have showed already, that if
our own niceness let us not, Christ alone is sufficient to overcome all
Offenses, saying that by his heavenly power he lifts us up above the world.
And if we ought so valiantly to resist the Offense, which inuadeth us against
our wills, and fliyng from it, they shall have the less to lay for
themselves, who thorough a certain lewd disposition, are of themselves
inclined to Offenses. Paul puts us in remembrance, that the same thing
happened to the Jews, who albeit they in no wise sought Offense of a set
purpose, yet because in going about to stablishe their own righteousness,
they were not subject to the righteousness of God, they stu^bled at Christ:
yea and with a deadly shipwrecke dashed against him, as it had been against a
rock. But the perverseness, or peevishness of such as willingly take hold
of Offenses offered, or else desirously draw unto them those that are a far
of, is in no wise tolerable. And why so? Seeing that Paul testifies how he
forgets his former life, to the intent he may make speed to atteine the
higher vocation that is above, exhorting us by his own example to make the
like haste: shall any man gather Offenses a far of, to hinder his own race
without punishment? Now if God have punisshed a preposterous zeal so sore in
the Jews, what think we shall be done to these that stumble wittingly and
willingly, or rather which damme up the way, otherwise plain of it self, with
stu^blingblockes heaped together on al sides? but specially what pardon leave
they for themselves, who make themselves bucklars of the vices and wickednesses
of me^, to beat back God withal? For if even the faithful themselves be
forbidden to look one at another, least any thing should hinder their course:
how should Christ pardon us, if we stand gazing far about us, seeking of set
purpose the thing yt may stay us? Such we may truly and aptly compare unto
swine, unto whom by reason of the native love they have to stinche, nothing is
more sweet tha^ to wallow themselves in mire and durte. The cruel vengeance
of God shall light upon all swine that are so greedy of Offenses, whither they
hunte for them, or whither they delight in that they are offered unto them, so
yt their daily offenses heaped one in another neck, do drown them in
everlasting destruction. For it is good justice that they which are wilfully
blind, should be made so blind in good earnest, yt at length the disease be
past al help. Let us in the mean season, when we hear Christ cursing al
those that give occasion of Offense to the weak, look advisedly to our
selves, yt no Offense at al happen through our fault. Nevertheless, seeing it
behooves that Christ be a stone for the reprobates, and for the faithless
world to stu^ble at, only let us be blameless or faultlesse, to take up the
Offenses vnfearfully as often as Satan thrusts them upon us, or else let us
be armed with ye only title of Christ. And therewithal let another sentence
of Christ come to our mind. For when his Disciples objected that ye Phariseis
were offended, he bade them not pass of them, because they were blind
themselves, and the guides of the blind. He adds also a notable saying:
Every plantyng that my Father has not planted shall be pulled up by the root.
Surely we must deal in such sort, as we may seek the soul health of all men
so near as we can: but for as much as it is not given us of God, to save them
whom he has condemned to destruction, let that perish which must perish, as
is in the Prophet Zachary. For if it had liked Paul to take away the Offense
of the Cross, it had been an easy matter for him, to have coined some awke
and ouerthward reasons for the purpose. But he so much abhors from this
device, that he counts it a great absurdity to have it taken away. Ye may
perceive he kept well in mind that which he says in another place, that
although unto the reprobates we be a savor of death unto death, yet
nevertheless we cast a sweet savor unto God. Finis.

Praise be to God.

Imprinted at London, by William Seres, dvvellyng at the weastende of Powels,
at the sign of the Hedghogge.

Anno Domini. 1567.


