THE INSTITVTION OF Christian Religion, vvrytten in Latin by master Ihon
Calvin, and translated into Englysh according to the authors last edition. Seen
and allowed according to the order appointed in the Queen's majesty's
injunctions.

Imprinted at London by Reinolde Wolf and Richard Harison. Anno. 1561.

Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.

The Printers to the Reders.
Whereas some men have thought and reported it to be a fault and negligence in
us for that we have so long kept back from you this book being so profitable a
work for you, namely sith master John Dawes had translated it and delivered
it into our hands more than a tweluemoneth past: you shall understand for our
excuse in that behalf, that we could not well emprinte it sooner. For we have been by diverse necessary causes constrained with our earnest entreatance to
procure an other friend of ours to translate it whole again. This translation,
we trust, you shall well allow. For it has not only ben faithfully done by the
translater himself, but also has been wholly perused by such men, whoes
judgment and credit all the godly learned in England well know and esteem. But
sith it is now come forth, we pray you accept it, and use it. If any faults
have passed us by oversight, we beseech you let us have your patience, as you
have had our diligence.

Ihon Calvin to the Reader.
AT the first setting out of this work, because I did not look for that
success, which the Lord of his unmeasurable goodness has given, I had (as
men use to do in small works) for the more part lightly passed it over. But
when I understood that it was received with that favor of all the godly, which
I never durst have desired, much less have hoped for: as I verily felt in my
heart that much more was given to me than I had deserved, so I thought it should
be a great unthankfulness if I should not at the least after my sclender
abilite endeavor to answer so favorable affections toward me, and which of
themselves provoked my diligence. And this I attempted not only in the second
setting fourth of it: but how often sins that time the work has been emprinted,
so often it has been enriched with some encreasce. But although I did not then
repent me of the labor that I had employed: yet I never held my self
contented til it was disposed into that order which is now set before you. Now
I trust I have given you that which may be allowed by all your iugeme^tes.
Truly with how great endeavor I have applied my self to the doing of this
service to the Church of God, I may bring fourth for an evident witness,
that this last winter, when I thought that the fever Quartaue had summoned me
to death, how much more the sickness enforced upon me, so much less I spared
myself, til I might leave this book to ouerliue me, which might make some
part of thankful recompense to so gentle provoking of the godly. I had rather
in deed it had been done sooner: but it is sone enough if well enough. And I
shall then think that it is come abroad in good season, when I shall perceive
that it has brought yet more ple^tiful fruit than it has done heretofore to
the Chirch of God. This is my only desire. And truly full ill it were with me,
if I did not, holding my self contented with the allowance of God alone,
despise the iugementes of men, whether they be the foolish and froward
iugementes of the unskillful, or the wrongful and malicious of the wicked. For
although God has thoroughly settled my mind to the endeavor both of enlarging
his kingdom, and of helping the common profit: and though I am clear in mine
own conscience, and have himself and the Angels to witness with me, that
sins I took upon me the office of a teacher in the Chirch, I have te^ded to
none other purpose but that I might profit the Chirch in mayntayning the pure
doctrine of godliness: yet I think there is no man, that has been snatched
at, bitten, and torn in sonder with more sclau^ders tha^ I.Vuhe^ my epistle was
now in printing, I was certainly informed that at Augsburgh where the assembly
of the states of the Empire was holde^, there was a rumor sprede abroad of my
reuolting to the Papacy, and the same was more gredely received in the courts
of Princes than was mete. This forsoothe is their thankfulness who are not
ignorant of many trialls had of my steadfastness, which trialls as they shake
of so foul a sclander, so they should with all indifferent and gentle judges
have defended me from it. But the Deuell with his whole route is deceived if in
oppressing me with filthy lies, he think that by his unjust dealing I shall be
either the more discouraged or made the less diligent: because I trust that
the Lord of his unmeasurable goodness will grant me that I may with eue^
suffera^ce continue in the course of his holy calling. Whereof I give to the
godly reders a new proof in this setting fourth of this book. Now in this
trauail this was my purpose so to prepare and furnish them that be studious of
holy Divinity to the reding of the word of God, that they may both have an
easy entry into it, and go forward in it without stombling: for I think
that I have in all points so knitt up together the sum of religion, and
disposed the same in such order, that whosoever shall well have it in mind, it
shall not be hard for him to determine both what he ought chefely to seek in the
Scripture, and to what mark to apply whatsoever is contained in it. Therefore,
this as it were a way being ones made plain, if I shall hereafter set fourth
any expositio^s of Scripture, because I shall not need to enter into long
disputations of articles of doctrine, and to wander out into common places: I
will always knitt them up shortly. By this mean the Godly reder shall be eased of
great peine* and tediousness, so that he come furnished aforehand with the
knowledge of this present work as with a necessary instrumente. But because
the entente of this purpose, does clearly as in mirrors appear inso many
commentaries of mine, I had rather to declare in deed what it is, than to set
it out in words. Farewell friendly Reader, and if thou receive any fruit of my
labors, help me with thy prayers to God our Father.

At Geneua, the first day of August in the year. 1559.
Augustine in his vii. Epistle. I profess my self to be one of the number of
them, which write in profiting, and profit in writing.
To the most mighty and noble Prince, Francisce the most Christian king the
French king his sovereign Lord, John Calvin wishes peace and salvation in
Christ.
WHen I did firlie set my hand to this work, I thought nothing less
(most noble King) than to write any thing that afterward should be presented
to your majesty. Only my mind was to teach certain introductions whereby
they that are touched with some zeal of religion might be instructed to true
godliness. And this travail I took principally for my contremen the
Frenchemen, of who^ I understood very many to hunger and thirst for Christ,
but I saw very few that had rightly received so much as any little knowledge of
him. And that this was my meaning, the book it self declares, being framed
after a simple and plain manner of teaching. But when I perceived, that the
furious rage of some wicked men has so far prevailed in your realm, that in
it there is no room for sound doctrine: I thought I should do a thing worth
my travail, all in one work both to give an instruction for them, and to
declare a confession to you: whereby ye may learn what manner of doctrine that
is, against which those furious men burn in so great rage, who at this day
trouble your realm with sweard and fire. For I will not fear to confess,
that I have in this work comprehended in manner the sum of that self same
doctrine, against which they cry out, that it ought to be punished with
prisonment, banishement, condemnation without judgment, and with fire, that it
ought to be chaced away by land and sea. I know in deed with how heinous
informations they have filled your mind and ears, to make our cause most
hateful unto you: but this of your clemency ought you to weye, that there
shall be no innocence, neither in words nor deeds, if it may be enough to
accuse. Truly if any, to bring the same in hatred, shall allege that this
Doctrine whereof I now go about to yield account unto you, has been long ago
condemned by consent of all degrees, and atteynted by many iugementes already
given in judicial courts: all that he says shall amount to no more but that it
has partly ben violently thrown down by the ^anding and power of the
adversaries thereof, and partly ben traitorously and fraudulently oppressed with
their lies and subtle practices and sclaunders. Herein is violence showed, that
without hearing the cause bloody sentences are pronounced against it: here in
is Fraud, that it is without deseruyng accused of sedition and euel doing. And
that none may think that we wrongfully complain of these things, you your
self can bear us witness, most noble King, with how lyeng sclaunders it is
daily accused unto you: as, that it tends to no other end but to writhe
from Kings their scepters out of their hands, to throw down all judges
seats and judgments, to subuerte all orders and civil gouernementes, to
trouble the peace and quiet of the people, to abolish al laws, to undo all
proprieties and possessions, finally to turn al things vpsyde down. And yet
you hear the smallest portion. For horrible things they spread abroad among
the people: which if they were true, the whole world might worthily judge it
with ye mainteiners thereof, worthy of a thousand fires and gallows, Who can
now marvel that a common hatred is kindled against it, where such most
wrongful accusations are believed. Lo, this is the cause that all degrees
agree and conspire to the condemning of us and our doctrine. They that sit to
judge, being ravished with this affection pronounce for sentences their
freconceiued determinations which they brought from home with them: and think
that they have well enough discharged their duties if they command no man to
be drawn to execution, but such as are found gylty either by their own
confession or by sufficient witness. But of what fault? of that condemned
doctrine, say they. But by what law condemned? Herein should have stand the
succor of defense for them, not to deny the doctrine it self, but to
maintain it for true. But here is all liberty ones to mutter utterly cut of
from us.

Wherefore I do not unjustly require, most victorious king, that it may
please you to take into your own hand the whole hearing of the cause which
hitherto has been troblesomly handled or rather carelessly tossed without al
order of law, more by outrageous heat than judicial gravity. Neither yet
think, that I here go about to make mine own private defense, whereby I may
procure to my self a safe return into my native contree, to which although
I bear such affection of natural love as becomes me: yet as the case now
is, I not miscontentedly want it. But I take upon me the common cause of all
the Godly, yea and the cause of Christ himself, which at this day having ben
by all means torn and trodden down in your kingdom, lies as it were in
despeired case, and that in deed rather by the tyranny of certain Pharisees,
than by your own knowledge. But how that comes to pass, it is not here
nedeful to tell: truly it lies in great distress. For thus far have the
ungodly prevailed, that the truethe of Christ, be not destroyed being chaced
away and scattered abroad, yet it lies hydden as buried and unregarded: as for
the silly poor Chirch it is either wasted with cruel slaughters, and so
driven away with banishmentes or dismayed with threatens and terrors that it
dare not ones open her mouth. And yet still they continue with such rage and
fercenesse as they are wont, thru^ting strongly against the wall already bending
and the ruin which themselves have made. In the mean time no man steppeth
fourth, to set himself in defense against such furies. And they, if there be
any such, that will most of all seem to favor the truth, say no more but
that it were good to pardon the error and unskillfulness of ignorante men. For
thus the good natured men forsoothe do speak, calling that error and
unskillfulness which they know to be the most certain truth of God: calling
them ignorante men, whoes wit they see that Christ has not so despised but
that he has vouchesaued to communicate to them the mysteries of his heavenly
wisdom. So much are all ashamed of the Gospel. It shall be your office (most
noble King) not to turn away your ears nor your mind f^o^ so just a
defense: specially when so great a matter is in question: namely how the glory
of God may be maintained safe in earth, how ye truth of God may keep her
honor, how Christ may have his kingdom preserved whole among us. This is a
matter worthy for your ears, worthy for your judgment, worthy for your royal
throne. For, even this thought makes a true King: to acknowledge himself in
the governance of his kingdom to be the minister of God. Neither does he now
use a kingdom but a robbery, which reigns not to this end that he may
serve the glory of God. And he is deceived that looks for a long prosperity
of that kingdom, which is not ruled by the scepter of God, that is, by his
holy word: forasmuch as the heavenly Oracle can not prove vain whereby it is
proclaimed, that the people shall be scattered abroad where prophecy sayleth.
Pro. xxix.xviii.
Neither ought the contempt of our baseness to withdraw you from this
purpose. We verily know right well, how poor and abiecte silly men we be,
namely in the sight of God miserable sinners, in the sight of men most
despised persons, yea and (if you will) certain excrementes and outcastes of
the world, or whatsoever vil^r thing may be named: so that there remains
nothing for us to glory upon before God, but his only mercy whereby we are
without any our deserving received into the hope of eternal salvation: and
before men, nothing but our weakness, which among them it is taken for a
most great shame to confess so much as in countenance. But our doctrine must
be auaunced hye above all glory of the world, must stand unvanquishable
above all power: because it is not ours, but the doctrine of the living God
and of his Christ, Dan. ii.xxxii. Esai. xi.iiii. Psa. ii.ix.
whom the Father has appointed King to bear rule even from sea to sea, and
from the rivers even to the ends of the earth: and so to bear rule, that
strykyng the whole earth with the only rod of his mouth, he may break it with
all the iron and brazen strength, with all the golden and silver glittering
thereof, as it were potters vessels: as the Prophets prophecy of the royalty
of his kingdom. Our adversaries in deed do cry out to the contrary, and say
that we falsely pretend the word of GOD, whereof we be most wicked
corrupters. But how this is not only a malicious sclaunder, but also a notable
shamelessnesse, you your self by reding our confession, may according to your
wisdom judge. Yet here it is also good to say somewhat, either to move you to
willingness and hedefulnesse, or at the least to prepare you a way to the
reding of it. To. xii.vi
Paul, when he willed al prophecy to be framed to the agreablenesse of Faith,
has set a most sure rule whereby the expounding of Scripture ought to be tried.
Now if our doctrine be examined by this rule of Faith, the victory is allredy
in our hands. For, what does better or more fittly agree with Faith, than to
acknowledge our selves naked of al virtue, that of God we may be clothed? emptye
of all good, that of him we may be filled? the bond servants of sin, that
of him we may be made fre? blind, that of him we may be enlightened? lame,
that of him we may be made straight? feeble, that of him we may be vpholden? to
take from our selves all matter of glorieng, that he alone may be glorious on
hie, and in him we may glory? When we say these and such like things, they
interrupt us and cry out, that by this mean is overthrowen I wot not what
blind light of nature, fained preparations, freewill, works meritorious of
eternal salvation, together with their supererogations: because they can not
abide that the whole praise and glory of al goodness, virtue, righteousness,
and wisdom should remain in God. But we read not that they were blamed that
have drawn to much out of yt fountain of living water: Iere. ii.xiii.
on yt contrary side they are sharply rebuked which have dug to themselves
pittes, broken pittes, which are not able to hold water. Again what is more
agreeable with Faith, than to promise to themselves that God will be to them a
favorable Father, where Christ is acknowleged to be a brother and procurer of
favor? than assur^dly to look for all things joyful and prosperous at his
hand, whoes unspeakable love toward us has proceeded so far, that he has
not spared his only begotten son, Romans viii xxxii.
but that he gave him for us? than to rest in sure loking for salvation and
eternal life, where we think upon Christ given of the Father, in whom such
treasures are hidden? Here they stepp in against us, and cry out that this
certainty of affiance is not without arrogance and presumption. But as nothing
of our selves, so al things ought we to presume of God: and we are for none
other reason spoiled of vain glory, but that we should learn to glory in the
Lord. What is there more^ Consider (most mighty Prince) all the parts of our
cause, i. Timo. iiii.x. Ioh. xvii.iii.
and think that we are worse than any kind of wicked men, unless you plainly
find that we are in troble and railed at because we put our trust in the
living God: becaue we believe that this is the eternal life, to know one true
God, and him whom he has sent Jesus Christ. For this hope some of us are
bound in irons, some are whypped, some are carried about in mockage, some are
condemned without judgment, some are most cruelly tormented, some escape, away
by flight: but al are distressed with troble, al are most terribly accursed,
torn with sclaunders, and handled in most heinous wise. Now look upon our
adversaries (I speak of the degree of Prestes, at whoes beck and will the
other exercise ennimities against us) and consider with me a little while, with
what zele they be carried. As for the true religion, which is taught in the
Scriptures, and which ought to be holden certain among al men, they easily
give leave both to themselves and other to be ignorant of it, to neglect and
despise it: and they think that it makes small matter what every man believe or
not believe concerning God and Christ, so that he do with an unexpressed Faith
(as they call it) submit his mind to the judgment of the Chirch: neither are
they much moved if it happen that the glory of God be defiled with manifest
blasphemies, so that no man lift up his finger against the supremicie of the
Apostolic sea, and authority of our holy mother the Chirch. Why therefore do
they with so great cruelty and fercenesse fight for the Mass, Purgatory,
Pilgrimages, and such trifles, so far fourth that they say that without most
expressed Faith (as I may so call it) of these things, godliness ca^ not
stand, whereas yet they prove not that any of these things come out of the
word of God: Why so, but because their belly is their God, their kitchen is
their religion: which being taken away, they think that they shall not only
be no Christians, but also no men? For though some of them do plentuously glutt
themselves, and other some live with gnawyng of poor crustes: yet they live
all of one pott, which without these warning helps should not only wax
cold, but also thoroughly freese. Therefore how much more every of them is
careful for his belly, so much more earnest warrier he is for their Faith.
Finally they all endeavor themselves to this, to keep still either both
kingdom safe, and their belly full: but of pure zele none of them shows any
token be it never so little. Neither yet so do they cesse to sclau^der our
doctrine, and by all the colors that they can to accuse and defame it, whereby
they may bring it into hatred or suspicion. They call it new, and lately
forged: they cavil that it is doutefull, and uncertain: they demand by what
miracles it is confirmed: they ask whether it be mete that it should prevail
against the consent of so many holy Fathers, and the most aunciente custom:
they press upon us to confess it to be schismatic, which moves war
against the Church, or that the Church has lain dead in many ages in which
no such thing has been heard of. Last of all they say that there need no
arguments, for (say they) it may by the fruits be judged of what sort it is,
namely which has bredde so huge a heap of sects, so many turmoyles of
seditions, so great licentiousness of vices. Truly full easy it is, for them,
to triumph upon a forsaken cause before the light believing and ignorant
multitude. But if we might also have our turn likewise allowed us to speak,
verily this sharp heat would sone be cooled wherewith they do so with full
month and as licentiously as vnpunishedly some against us.

First whereas they call it new, they do great wrong to God, whoes holy
word deserved not to be accused of newenesse. To them in deed I nothing dout
that it is new, to whom Christ is new, and his Gospel is new. But they which
knew that preaching of Paul to be old, Romans iiii xxv.
that Jesus Christ dyed for our sins, and rose again for our justification,
shall find nothing new among us. Whereas it has long lain hidden unknown,
and buried: that is the fault of the ungodliness of men. Now sith it is by
the bountifulness of God restored to us, it ought at least by right of full
restitution to receive again the title of auncientie.

Out of the same fountain of ignorance springs this, that they take it for
doutful and uncertain. This verily is it which the Lord by his Prophet
complayneth, that the ox knew his owner, Esa. i.iii.
and the ass his masters stall, but his people knew not hymn. But howsoever
they mock at the uncertainty of it: if they were driven to seal their own
doctrine with their own blood and with loss of their life, men might see
how much they set by it. But far other is our affiance, which dredeth
neither the terrors of death, nor yet the very judgment seat of God.

Whereas they require miracles of us, they deal unreasonably with us. For we
coin no new Gospel, but hold fast the self same Gospel for confirming of
the truth whereof all the miracles do serve that ever Christ and his Apostles
have done. But this thing they have special above us, that they can even to
this day confirm their faith with continual miracles. Yea but rather they
allege miracles, which may weake^ a mind other wise well stablished: they are
so either tryflyng and worthy to be laughed at, or vain and lyeng. And yet,
although they were never so monstrous, they ought not to have been of any
value against the word of God: forasmuch as the name of God ought both in
every place and every time to be hallowed, whether it be by miracles or by
natural order of things. This false color might paraduenture have made the
better show, Mar. xvi.xx. Act. xiiii.iii.
if the Scripture did not inform us of the lawful end and use of miracles.
For, Mark teaches that the signs which followed the preaching of the Apostles
were set fourth for the confirming of it: Likewise Luke also says that the
Lord did bear witness to the word of his grace, when signs and wonders were
showed by the hands of the Apostles. Wherewith wholly agrees that saying of
the Apostle, that when the Gospel was preached, Hebr. ii.iiii.
salvation was confirmed by this that the Lord did bear witness to it with
signs, and wonders, and diverse powers. But those things which we hear to
be the sealinges of the Gospel, shall we turn to the destroyeng of the credit
of the Gospel? those things which are appointed only to stablishe the
truth, shall we apply to confirming of lies? Therefore it is mete that the
doctrine, which (as the Evangelist says) goes before miracles, Ioh.
vii.xviii. and viii.l.
be first examined and tried. If that be allowed, then it may lawfully take
confirmation of miracles. But of a true doctrine (as Christ teaches) this is
the mark, if it tend not to the seking of the glory of men, but of God.
Sith Christ affirms this to be the proof of doctrine, miracles are
wrongfully esteemed which are drawn to any other end than to glorify the
name of God alone. And we ought to remember that Satan has his miracles,
which although they be iuggling deceites rather than true powers, yet are such
as may decciue the ignorante and unskillful. Magicians and enchaunters have
been always famous in miracles: wonderful miracles have nourished idolatry:
which ye do not prove to us that the superstition of Magicians and
idolatrers is lawful. And with this batterynge ram in old time the
Donatistes did shake the simplicity of the common people, for that they
excelled in miracles. Therefore we do now make the same answer to our
adversaries which Augustine then made to the Donatistes: In Iho. trac. 13.
that the Lord has made us ware against such miracle workers, when he
foretold that there should come false Prophets, which with lyeng signs and
diverse wonders should, Mathe. xxiiii.xxiiii. 1 Thessalonians. ii.ix. ii. Corin.
xi.xiiii. Hieron. in prefa. Ierem. ii. These. ii.xi.
if it were possible, bring the elect into error. And Paul has given warning
that the kingdom of Antichrist should be with all power, and signs, and lyeng
wonders. But these miracles (say they) are done not of idols, not of sorceres,
not of false prophets, but of the Saints. As though we knew not that this is
the craft of Satan, to transfigure himself into an Angel of light. In old
time the Egyptians worshipped Jeremy which was buried among them, with
sacrifices and other divine honors. Did not they abuse the holy Prophet of God
to idolatry? And yet by such worshipping of his tomb they obtained that they
thought the healyng of the styngyng of serpents to be the just reward thereof.
What shall we say: but that this has been and ever shallbe the most just
vengeance of God, to send strength of illusion to them that have not received
the love of truth, that they may believe lieng? Therefore we want not miracles,
and those certain and not subject to cauillations. As for miracles which
they bring forth for themselves, they are mere illusions of Satan, forasmuch
as they lead away the people from the true worshippyng of their God to
vanity.

Moreover they do sclaunderously set the Fathers against us (I mean the
ancient Fathers and the writers of the age as yet more uncorrupted) as though
they had them for mainteners of their ungodliness: by whose authority if the
debate were to be ended, the better part of the victory (to speak even most
modestly) would bend to our side. But whereas many things have been excellentlye
well and wisely written of those Fathers, and in some things, that has
happened to them which is wont to happen to me^: these good natural children
forsothe, according to the rightenesse that they have both of wit, judgment
and mind, do worship only their faults and errors: and those things which
are well spoken, they either mark not, or feign as if they knew them not, or
do corrupt them: so as a man may say that their care was altogether to gather
dong in of the gold of the Fathers. Then they oppress us with importunate
cryeng out against us, as despisers and ennemies of the Fathers. But we do so
not despise them, that if it were the matter of my present purpose, I could very
easily prove by their consentyng voices the greater part of these things that
we say at this day. But we so read their writings, that we always remember,
that all things are ours, to serve us, not to have dominion over us: and that
we are Christ's alone, whom we must obey in all things without exception.
Who so keeps not this choice, shall have nothing certain in religion: Pro.
xxli.xxviii. Psalm. xlv.xi.
forasmuch as those holy men were ignorant of many things, do oftentimes
strive one with an other, yea and sometimes fight with themselves. Not without
cause (say they) we are warned of Salomo^, that we pass not the old bounds
which our Fathers have set. But there is all not all one rule in the boundyng
of fields, and the obedience of Faith, which ought to be so framed that it
forget her people and the house of her Father. If they have so great delight to
use allegories, why do they not rather expound the Apostles, than any other,
to be their Fathers, whoes appointed bounds it is not lawful to pluck up?
Acatius tripartit. hist. lib. 3. cap 6. Ambros. de offic. lib. 2. cap. 28.
Siridio^ tripart. hist lib. 1. cap 1^. Tripart. hist. lib. 8 cap. 1. August. de
opere monach. cap. 17.
for so did Hierome expound it, whoes words they have registered among their
canons. But if they will have the bounds of the same Fathers, whom they
mean, to be steadfastly kept: why do they, so often as they list, so
licentiously pass them? Of the number of the Fathers were they, of whom the
one said, that our God eats not, nor drinks, and that therefore he needs
neither cups nor dyshes: the other said, that the holy things require not
gold, and that those things please not with gold which are not bought with
gold. Therefore they pass the bound, which are in the holy things so much
delited with gold, silver, yuory, marble, precious stones and silks, and
think that God is not rightly worshypped, unless altogether be dissolutely
set out with exquisite gorgeousness, or rather with outrageous excess. A
Father was he which said, that he therefore did freely eat flesh on the day
in which other absteined, because he was a Christian. Therefore they pass the
bounds, when they accurse the soul that tastes flesh in Lent. Fathers were
they, of whom the one said that a Monk which labors not with his hands,
is judged as evil as a violent taker or (if you will) a robber: the other
said, that it is not lawful for monks to live of other men's goods, although
they be continually busied in contemplations, in prayers, in study. This
bound also they have passed, when they placed the ydoll and harrell bealies of
monks in stews and brothelhowses to be fatted with other means substance. A
Father was he, which said that it is a horrible abhominatio^ to se any image
painted either of Christ or of any Saint in the temples of Christians. Neither
was this pronounced by the mouth of one man alone, Epipha. in epist. a Hiero.
versa. Council. Ehbert. cap. 36. Ambros. de Abra. lib. 1. cap. 7. Gelasius Pap.
in Council. Roman. Chrysos. in. 1. cap. Ephesians. Cali. Papa de co^secr. did. 2.
Gelas ca. Lo^perimus. De consecr. did. 2. Cyprian. epist. 2. lib 1. de Lapsis.
August. lib. 2. de peccat. mer. cap. vlt. Apolon. eccles. histo. lib. 5. cap.
12. paphnutius. tripart. hist lib. 2. cap. 14. Cypria^. epist. 2. lib. 2.
August. cap. 2. co^tra ^rescon. gra^mat.
absteyned from the other: and the other Father stoutely mainteyneth, that to
the Christian people the blood of the Lord ought not to be denied, for the
confession whereof they are commanded to shed their own blood. These bounds
also they have taken away, when they have by an inviolable law commanded the
self same thing which the one of these Fathers punished with excommunication,
and the other reproved with a strong reason. A Father was he, which affirmed
it to be rashenesse to determine any thing of a doutefull matter on the one side
or the other without clear and evident witnessyngs of the Scripture. This
bound they forgot, when they stablished so many constitutions, so many canons,
so many maisterly determinations without any word of God. A Father was he,
which among other heresies reproched Montanus with this that he was the first
that had charged men with laws of Fastings. This bound also they have far
passed, when they commanded fasting with most straight laws. A Father was he
which denied that marriage ought to be forbidden to ministers of the Chirch,
and pronounced a man's lyeng with his own wife to be chastity: and Fathers
were they, which agreed to his authority. Beyond these bounds have they
gone: when they severely enjoined unmarried life to their sacrificers. A Father
was he which judged that only Christ ought to be heard, of who^ it is said.
Hear him: and yt we ought not to have regard, what other me^ which were before
us have said or done, but what Christ (which ye first of all) has commanded.
This bound neither do they appoint to themselves, nor do suffer other to
have it appointed them, when they set both over themselves and other any
masters whatsoever they be rather than Christ. A Father was he, which
affirmed that the Church ought not to set it self before Christ: because he
always judges truly: but the judges of the church, as men, are commonly
deceived. They breakyng through this bound also, stick not to affirm that
the whole authority of the Scripture hangs upon the awardement of the
Chirch. All the Fathers have with one heart accursed, and with one mouth
pronounced it abominable, that the holy word of God should be entangled with
the suttleties of Sophisters, and brawlynges of Logitians. Do they hold
themselves within these bounds, when they go about nothing else in their
whole life, but with endless strives and more then Sophistical brablynges to
wrappe and encombre the simplicity of the Scripture: so that if the Fathers
were now raised to life again, and should hear such an art of brawlyng
which these men call Speculatiue Divinity, they would believe yt nothing
less is done than any disputation had of God. But my talk should sprede it
self beyond due bounds, if I would reckon up how boldly these men shake
of the yoke of the Fathers, whose obediente children they would seem to be.
Truly both months and years would be to little for me. And yet they are of
so extreme and desperate shamelessness, that they dare blame us for that we
stick not to pass the ancient bounds.

But now whereas they call us to Custom, they nothing prevail. For we should
be most unjustly dealt with, if we should be driven to yield to Custom.
Truly if the judgments of men were right, Custom should be taken of the
good. But it oftentimes happens that men do otherwise. For, that which is
seen to be done of many, by and by obteineth the right of a Custom. But the
state of men has scarcely at any time ben in so good case, that the better
things pleased the greater number. Therefore for the most part of the private
vices of many has been made a public error, or rather a common consent of
vices, which now these good men would have to stand for a law. Who so have eyes
do see that not only one sea of euels has ouerflowed, many poisonous
pestilences have invaded the world, that all things run hedlong to ruin:
so that either the matters of men must be utterly dispeired, Decret. did 6 ca.
Si, e^t de consuet.
or we must lay hand unto, or rather use violence upon so great euells. And
remedy is by no other reason driven away, but because we have now long time
accustomed us to euells. But be it that public error have place in matters of
common weal: yet in the kingdom of God his only truth is to be heard and
regarded, to which by no succedyng course of years, by no custom, by no
conspired agreement, may any prescription to be limited. So in old time Esase
taught the elect of God, that they should not say. Conspiryng, to all things
in which the people said Conspiryng: Esa. viii.xii.
that is to say, that they should not conspire together to the wicked agreement
of the people, nor should fear and dread the peoples fear: but rather that
they should sanctify the Lord of hosts, and he should be their fear and
dread. Now therefore let them as much as they list object against us both
passed and present ages, if we sanctify the Lord of hosts, we will not be
much afraid. For whether it be that many ages have consented to like
ungodliness, he is strong to take vengeance to the third and fowerth
generation: or if the whole world together conspire into one self same
wickedness, he has by experience taught what is the end of them that
offend with the multitude, Genesis vii.i. Heb. xi.vii.
when he did with a general ouerflowyng destroy the whole kind of men,
preseruyng Noe with a small household, which should by his faith being but one
man condemn the whole world. Finally an evil custom, is none other than a
common pestilence, in which they do nevertheless dye that dye with company of
a multitude. Epist. ^. lib ^. and epist ad Julian. de here baptiza^.
Moreover they ought to have considered that which Cyprian says in certain
places, that they which sin by ignorance, although they can not clear
themselves from al fault, yet may seem after some manner excusable: but who so
obstinatly refuse ye truth offered by the grace of God, they have nothing to
pretend for their excuse.

As for their dooble horned argument, they do not drive us to so hard a
streighte with it to compel us to confess, that either the Chirch has lain
dead a certain time, or that we have controversy against the Church. Truly
the Church of Christ has lived and shall live, Mathe. xxviii.xx.
so long as Christ shall reign at the right hand of the Father: by whoes
hand she is vpholden, by whose succor she is defended, by whose power she
keeps her safety. For he will undoubtedly perform that which he has ones
promised, that he will be present with his even until the endyng of the
world. Against it now we have no war at all. For we do with one consent
together with all the people of the faithful honor and worship the one God and
Christ the Lord, in like sort as he has always ben worshipped of all the
godly. But they themselves not a little way err from the truth, when they
acknowledge no Church, but which they see with present eye, and go about to
compass it about with those bounds in which it is not enclosed. Upon these
points hangs our controversy: First that they affirm that the form of
the Church is always appearyng and to be seen: then, that they set the same
form in the sea of the Chirch of Rome, and in the order of their prelates. We
on the contrary side affirm, both that the Church may consiste of no
appearyng form, and that the form it self is not contained in that outward
shynyng show, which they foolishely have in admiration, but has a far
other mark, namely the pure preaching of the word of God, and the right
ministration of Sacraments. They are in a rage, unless the Church may be
always pointed out with a finger. But how often happened it fit the people of
the Jews to be so deformed, that there appeared no form at all? What form
think we to have shined. i. Kin. x^^ xi.
when Helias bewailed that he alone was left? How long sins the coming of
Christ has it lain hidden without form? How syns that time has it ben so
oppressed with wars, seditions, and heresies, that it shined out on no side?
If they had lived at that time, would they have believed that there was any
Chirch? But it was said to Helias, that there were preserved seven thousand
men, which had not boowed their knee before Baal. Neither ought it to be
doutfull to us but that Christ has always reigned in earth sins he ascended
into heaven. But if the godly had then sought any discernable form with
their eyes, should they not by and by have been discoraged? Contra (...).
And verily Hylarie accounted it even already in his time for a most great
fault, that being occupied with the foolish admiration of the dignity of
Bishops, they marked not a deadly pestilence lurkyng under that visor. For thus
he says: One thing I warn you, beware of Antichrist: for you are ill taken
with the love of walls: ye do ill worship the Chirch of God in houses and
buyldynges: under them ye do ill thrust in the name of Peace. It is doutefull
that in those Antichrist shall sit? Mountayns and woods, and lakes, and
prisons, and caves are safer for me. For in these the Prophets when they were
either abydyng or thrown into them, did prophecy. But what doothe yt world at
this day honor in his horned Bishops, but that it thinks them to be holy
prelates of religion, whom it sees to be heads over great cities? Away
therefore with such foolish estemyng. ii. Tim. ii xix.
But rather let us leave this to the Lord, forasmuch as he alone knows who
be his, and sometime also takes away from the sight of men the outward
knowledge of his Chirch. That is (I grant) a horrible vengeance of God upon the
earth. But if the wickedness of men so deserve, why do we seek to withstand
the just vengeance of God? In such wise the Lord has in times past taken
vengeance of the unthankfulness of men. For because they would not receive his
truth, and had quenched his light, he suffered them being blinded in sense,
both to be mocked with lies full of absurdity, and to be drowned in deep
darkness, so that there was no face of the true Chirch to be seen. Yet in the
mean time he saved his both being scattered abroad and lyeng hydden, in the
myddest of errors and darkness, from destruction. And no marvel. For he can
skill to save both in the very confusion of Babylon, and in the flame of the
burning oven. But whereas they would have the form of the Church to be judged
by I wot not what vain pompous show: how perilous that is, I will rather
point unto than declare, least I should draw out my tale into infinite length.
The Pope (say they) which holds the Apostolic see, and the Bishops that are
anointed and consecrate by him, so that they be trimmed with fillets and
miters, do represent the Church, and ought to be taken for the Church: and
therefore they can not err. How so? because they are pastors of the Church,
and consecrate to the Lord. And were not Aaron and the other rulers of Israel
also Pastors? Exodus xxxii.iiii.
But Aaron and his sons after that they were made prestes, did yet err when
they made the calfe. After this reason, why should not the four hundred
Prophets which lied to Achab, have represented the Church. But the Church
was on Micheas side, i. Kin. xxii xi. Ier. xviii xviii.
being in deed but one man alone, and unregarded, but out of whoes mouth came
truth. Did not the false prophets in resemblance bear both the name and
face of the Chirch, when they did with one violent assault rise up against
Jeremy, and with threatnyng boasted that it was not possible that the law
should perish from the priest, counsel from the wiseman, the word from the
Prophet^ Jeremy alone was sent against the whole company of the Prophets,
to declare from the Lord, that it should come to pass, that the law should
perish from the priest, counsel from the wiseman, and the word from the
Prophet. Did not such a glistering show shine in that Council which the
Bishops, Scribes, and Pharisees assembled, to take aduises together for the
killyng of Christ. Now let them go and stick fast in the outward visor,
that they may make Christ and all the Prophets of God, schismatikes: and on the
other side make the ministers of Satan, the instruments of the holy ghost. If
they speak as they think, let them faithfully answer me, in what nation and
place they think that the Chirch remained sins the time that by the decree of
the Council at Basile Eugenius was thruste down and deprived from the estate
of Pope, and Aymee set in his place. They can not, though they would burst for
it, deny that the Council, for so much as concerns outward solemnities,
was lawful, and summoned not only of one Pope, but of two. Eugenius was there
condemned of schism, rebellion, and obstinatie, with the whole flock of
Cardinals and bishops, which had with him practiced the dissolution of the
Council. Yet afterward being borne up by the favor of princes, he recovered
his papacy safe again. That election of Aymee, which had been orderly made by
the authority of a general and holy Synod, vanished away in a smoke: saving
that he himself was appeased with a cardinals hatte, as it were a barking dog
with a piece of bread cast unto him. Out of the bosom of these herelikes,
rebels, and obstinates, are proceeded all the Popes, Cardinals, Bishops,
abbotts, and Prestes that have been sins. Here they are taken and can go no
further. For, to whether side will they give the name of the Church? Will they
deny that the Council was general, which wanted nothing to the outward
majesty: namely, which being solemnly summoned by two bulls, and well
framed in the order of all things, continued in the same dignity to the last
end? Will they confess Eugenius with all his company a schismatike, by whom
they are all sanctifeid? Therefore either let them otherwise define the form of
the Church, or they all as many as are of them shall be of us accounted
schismatikes which wittyngly and willyngly have been ordered of heretics. If
it had never before ben known, that the Chirch is not bound to outward
pompes, they themselves may be to us a large proof, which under that glorious
title of ye Chirch have so long so proudly bosted themselves, whereas yet they
were the deadly pestilences of the Church. I speak not of their manners, and
those tragical doings wherewith their whole life swarmeth full: because they
say that they be the Pharisees which are to be heard, not to be followed. But
if ye will spare some of your leisure to read our writings, you shall plainly
know that the very doctrine, the doctrine it self, for the which they say
that they be the Church, is a deadly butcherie of souls, the firebrande,
ruin, and destruction of the Church.

Finally they do not uprightly enough, when they do spitefully rehearse how
great troubles, vprores, and contentions the preaching of our doctrine has
drawn with it, and what fruits it now bears in many. For the blame of these
euells is unworthily laid upon it, which ought rather to have been imputed to
the malice of Satan. This is as it were a certain natural propretie of the
word of God, that whenever it ryseth up, Satan is never quiet or sleapyng.
This is the most sure and most trusty mark, whereby it is discerned from
lyeng doctrines, which do easyly show forth themselves when they are
received with favorable ears of all men, and are heard of the world reioysyng
at them. So in certain ages past, when all things were drowned in deep
darkness, the Lord of this world made a sport and a play in manner of all
men, and lay idle and took his pleasure like a certain Sardanapalus in sound
peace. For, what should he else do but laugh and play being in quiet and
peasible possession of his kingdom? But when the light shinyng from above
somewhat scattered abroad his darkness, when that strong man troubled and
assailed his kingdom, then he began to shake of his wonted drowsinesse, and
hastily to arm himself. And first he stirred up the force of me^, whereby he
might violently oppress the truth beginning to shine. By which when he
nothing prevailed, he turned to subtle entrappynges. He stirred up dissentions
and disagreementes of doctrines by his Catabaptistes, and other monstrous
lewd men, whereby he might darken it and at length utterly quench it. And
now he continues to assail it with both engines. For he trauaileth both by
the force and power of men to pluck up that sede, and with his darnell (as
much as in him lies) to choke it, that it may not grow and bear fruit. But
all this he does in vain, if we hear the warnyng of God, which both has
long before opened his crafts unto us, that he should not take us unware, and
has armed us with sufficient defenses against al his engines. But how great
maliciousness is it to lay upon the word of God the hatred either of the
seditions, which noughty and rebellious men do stir up, or of the sects
which deceivers do raise against it? Yet it is no new example. Elias was asked
whether it were not he that troubled Israel. Christ was esteemed of the Jews
a seditious man. The Apostles were accused of making a commotion among the
people. What other thing do they which at this day do father upon us all the
troubles, vprores and contentions that boil up against us? But what is to be
answered to such, i. Kings. xviii.
Elias has taught us: namely that it is not we that scatter errors or stir
up vprores: but it is they themselves that wrestle against the power of God.
But as that one thing alone is sufficient to beat back their rashenesse, so
again we ought to mete with the weakness of other, who oftentimes happen to
be moved with such offenses, and in their dismayeng to waver. But let them,
to the end that they may not faint with this dismayeng and be discoraged, know
that the Apostles in their time felt by experience the same things that now
happen unto us. There were unlearned and unsteadfast men, which wrested to their
own destruction, those things yt Paul had written by the inspiration of God,
ii. Pet. iii xvi.
as Peter says. There were despisers of God, which when they herd that sin
abou^ded to the end yt grace might more abound, by and by objected, We will
then abide in sin, that grace may abound. When they heard that ye faithful
are not under the law, Romans vi.i.et.xv. Philip. i.xv.
they by and by, answered, We will then sin, because we are not under the law,
but under grace. There were that accused him as an exhorter to evil. There
entered privily many false Apostles to destroy the Chirches which he had
builded. Some by envy and contention, and not purely, yea and maliciously
preached ye gospel thinking to add more affliction to his bands. Somewhere
the Gospel not much profited. Al sought their own, and not the things of
Jesus Christ. Some went backwarde, dogs to their vomit, and swyne to their
wallowyng in the mire. The most part did draw the liberty of the Spirit to
ye licentiousness of ye flesh. Many brethren crept in, by whom there came
afterward great dangers to the godly. Among the brethren themselves were many
strives raised up. What should the Apostles have done in this case? Should
they not either have dissembled for a time, or rather altogether have given
over and forsaken the Gospel which they saw to be the sedeplott of so many
contentio^s, Luke. ii.xxxiiii. ii. Corin. ii.xvi.
the matter of so many dangers, the occasion of so many offenses? No. But for
help in such distresses this came in their mind that Christ is the stone of
stomblyng and rock of offense, set unto the ruin and risyng again of many,
and for a sign that should be spoken against. With which affiance they being
armed went forward boldly through all dangers of vprores and offenses. With the
same thought we also ought to be vpholden, forasmuch as Paul testifies that
this is the perpetual propretie of the Gospel, to be the favor of death unto
death to them that perish, although it were ordained to this use that it
should be the favor of life unto life, and the power of God unto the salvation
of the faithful: which verily we should also feel, if we did not with our
unthankfulness corrupt this so singular a benefit of God, and turn that to
our own destruction which ought to have been to us the only defense of our
safety.

But now I return to you, my sovereign Lord. Let those false reports
nothing move you, by which our adversaries trauail to cast you in fear of us,
with saying that by this new Gospel (for so they call it) nothing is hunted
for and sought but fit occasion of seditions, and unpunished liberty of
vices. For our God is not the author of division, but of peace: and the son
of God is not the minister of sin, which came to destroy all the works of
the Devil. And we are unworthily accused of such desires, whereof we never gave
any suspicion were it never so small. It is likely that we forsothe do practice
the ouerthrowyng of kingdoms, of who^ there has never ben heard any one
seditious word, whoes life has ever ben known quiet and simple, when we
lived under you, and which now being chaced from home yet resse not to pray for
all things prosperous to you and your kingdom. It is likely forsothe yt we
hunt for lice^tiousnesse of vices, in whoes behauors although many things may
be found faulty, yet there is nothing worthy of so great reprochyng: neither
have we with so ill success (by the grace of God) profited in the Gospel, but
that our life may be to these backbyters an examplar of chastity, liberality,
mercy, temperance, patience, modesty, and what soever other virtue. Verily it
is by the proof it self evident that we do unfeignedly fear and worship
God, for as much as we desire that his name be hallowed both by our life and
our death, and envy it self is compelled to bear of some of us a witness
of innocence and civil uprightness, in who^ this only thing was punished with
death which ought to have been accounted for a singular praise. But if any under
pretense of the Gospel do stir up tumultes (as hitherto it has not ben
found that there have been any such in your Realm) if any pretend the
liberty of the grace of God to defend the licentiousness of their vices (of
which sort I have known many) there be laws and penalties of laws, by which
they may according to their deservings be sharply punished: yet so that in
the mean time the Gospel of God be not euel spoken of for the wickedness of
naughty me^. Thus have you (O King) the venomous injustice of the sclaunderors
largely enough declared, that you may not with an ear of to easy belefe bind to
their reports. I fear me also least it be to largely set out, forasmuch as
this preface is in a manner come to the quantity of a whole book of defense,
whereby I intended not to make a defense in deed, but only to molify your mind
aforehand to give audience to ye disclosing of our cause: which your mind,
though it be now turned away and estranged from us, yea and enflamed against
us, yet we trust that we shall be able to recover the favor thereof, if you
shall ones have without displeasure and troublous affection red over this our
confession, which we will to be instead of a defense for us to pour majesty.
But if the whisperynges of the malicious do so possess your ears, yt there is
no place for accused men to speak for themselves: and if those outrageous
furies do still with your winkyng at them, exercise cruelty with prisonning,
tormenting, cutting, and burning: we shall in deed, as sheep appointed to the
slaughter, be brought to all extremities, yet so that in our patience we shall
possess our souls, and wait for the strong hand of the Lord: which shall
without dout be present in time, and stretche forth it self armed, both to
deliver the poor out of affliction, and to take vengeance on the despisers,
which now triu^ph with so great assuredness.

The Lord the King of Kings stablysh your throne with righteousness, and
your seat with equity, most noble King. At Baule the first day of August,
in the year, 1516.
THE FIRST BOOK OF THE INSTITVTION OF CHRISTIAN RELIGION, which entreats of
the Knowledge of God the Creator.
The.i. Chapter. That the knowledge of God, and of our selves, are things
conjoined: and how they be lyncked the one with the other.
THe whole sum in a manner of all our wisdom, which only ought to be
acompted true and perfect wisdom, consists in two parts, that is to say,
the knowledge of God, and our selves. But where as these two knowledges be with
many ba^des linked together: yet whether goth before or enge^dreth the other,
it is hard to discern. For first no man can look upon him self, but he must
needs by and by turn all his senses to the beholding of God, in whom he lives
and is moved: because it is plain that those gifts wherewith we be endewed
are not of our selves, yea even yt yt we have a being is nothing else but an
essence in the one god. Finally, by these good things that are as by drop
meal powered into us from heaven, we are led as it were by certain streams to
the spring head. And so by our own nedines, better appears that infinite
^le^ty of good things that abides in god. Specially that miserable ruin,
whereinto the fall of the first man has thrown us, compels us to lift up
our eyes, not only being fodelesse and hungry, to crave from thence ye which
we lack, but also being awakened with fear, to learn humility. For as there
is found in man a certain world of all miseries, and since we have been
spoiled of the divine apparel, our shameful nakedness discloseth an infinite
heap of fylthy disgracementes: it must needs be that every man be prycked with
knowledge in conscience of his own unhappiness, to make him come at least unto
some knowledge of god. So by the understanding of our own igno^aunce, vanity,
beggary, weakness, perverseness, and corruption, we learn to reknowledge
that no where else but in the Lord abides the true light of wisdom, sound
virtue, perfect abundance of all good things, and purity of righteousness.
And so by our own euyls we are styrred to consider the good things of God: and
we cannot earnestly aspyre toward him, until we begin to mislyke our selves.
For of all me^ what one is there that would not wyllyngly rest in himself? yea
who does not rest, so long as he knows not him self, that is to say, so
long as he is contented with his own gifts, and ignorant or vnmyndefull of
his own misery? Therefore every man is by the knowledge of him self, not only
prycked forward to seek God, but also led as it were by the hand to find him.

Again it is certain, that man never comes unto the true knowledge the
pride that is naturally planted in us) we always think our selves righteous,
innocente, wise and holy, until that with manifest proves we be convinced of
our unrighteous, filthynes, follye and uncleanness. But we are not convinced
thereof, if we look upon our selves only, and not upon God also, who is the
only rule whereby this judgment ought to be tried. For because we are
naturally inclined to hypocrisy, therefore a certain vain resemblaunce of
ryghteousnes does abundantly content us in stead of righteousness in deed.
And because there appears nothing among us, nor about us, that is not
defiled with much filthiness, therefore that which is somewhat less filthy
pleases us as though it were most pure, so long as we hold our selves
within the bounds of man's uncleanness. Like as the eye that is used to see
nothing but black, thinks that to be pure white, which yet is but darkesh
white, or brown. Yea, we may yet more plainli discern by our bodily sense how
much we are blinded in considering ye powers of the soul. For if at mid day we
either look down upon the ground, or behold those things that round about lie
open before our eyes, then we think our selves to have a very assured and
pearcing force of sight: but when we look up to the son, and behold it with
fixed eyes, then yt same sharpnes that was of great force upon ye ground is with
so great brightness by and by daseled and confounded, yt we are compelled to
confess that the same sharp sight which we had in consyderyng earthly things,
when it comes to the son is but mere dullnes. Even so comes it to pass
in weying our spyrytual good things. For while we look no further than the
earth, so long well contented with our own righteousness, wisdom and strength, we
do swetely flatter our selves and think us in manner half gods. But if we once
begin to raise up our thought unto God, and to weie what a one he is, and how
exact is the perfeccion of his righteousness, wisdom and power, after the
rule whereof we ought to be framed: then that which before did please us in
our selves with false pretense of righteousness, shall become loathsome to us as
greateste wickedness: then that which did maruellously deceive us under color
of wisdom shall stink before us as extreme follye: then that which did
bear the face of strength shall be proved to be most miserable wekenesse. So
sclenderly does that which in us seems even most perfect, answer in
proportion to the pureness of god.

Hereof proceeded that trembling and amasednesse, wherewith the Iud. xiii.xxii.
Esa. vi.v. E^e. ^.i.
But of such dismaying we have often examples both in the Judges and in the
Prophets: so that this was a common saying among the people of god: We shall
die, because ye Lord has appeared unto us. And therefore the history of Job, to
throw men down with knowledge of their own follye, weakness, and uncleanness,
brings always his prinycpal proof from describing Gods wisdom, strength and
cleannes. And that not without cause. For we see how Abraham, the nerer that he
came to behold the glory of God, Genesis xviii xvii. i. K^^. xix.xiii. Esa.
xiiii.xxiii. Esaias. ii.x. and.xix.
the better acknowledged himself to be earth and dust. We see how Elias could
not abide to tarry his coming to him with uncovered face: so terryble is the
beholding of him. And what may man do that is but corrupcion and a worm, when
eue^ the Cherubins for very fear must hyde their faces? Even this is it that
the Prophet Esaias speaks of: The sun shall blushe and the moon shall be
ashamed, when the Lord of hosts shall reign, that is to say, when he
displayeth his bryghtnes and brings it nerer to sight, the^ in comparison
thereof the bryghtest thing of all shall be darkened. But howesoeuer the knowledge
of God and of our selves, ar with mutual knot lynked together, yet ye order of
right teaching requires that first we entreat of the knowledge of God, and
after come down to speak of the knowledge of our selves.

The.ii. Chapter. What it is to know God, and to what end tends the
knowledge of him.
I Mean by the knowledge of God, not only that knowledge whereby we conceive
that there is sum God, but also that, whereby we learn so much as behooves
us to know of him, and is profitable for his glory, finally so much as is
expedient. For, to speak properly, we cannot say that God is known where
there is no relygion nor godliness. But here I do not yet touch that
special kind of knoweledge whereby those men that are in theymselues
reproba^e and accursed do conceive God the redemer in Christ the mediatoure:
but I speak only of that first and simple manner of knowledge, whereunto the
very order of nature would have led us, if Adam had continued in state of
innocencye. For although no man, syth^ mankind is in this ruin, can
perceive God to be either a father, or author of salvation, or in any wise
favorable, unless Christ come as a mean to pacify him toward us: yet it is
one thing to feel that God our maker does by his power sustein us, by his
providence govern us, by his goodness nourish us, and endue us with all kinds
of blessings: and an other thing to embrace the grace of reconciliacio^
offered us in Christ. Whereas therefore the Lord first simply appears as well
by the making of the world, as by ye general doctrine of the Scripture, to be
the Creator, and then in the face of Christ to be the redemer: here upon arise
two sorts of knowing him, of which the former is now to be entreated of, and
then the other shall orderly follow in ye place fit for it. For although our
mind cannot conceive the knowledge of God, but that it must give to him some
kind of worship, yet shall it not be sufficient simply to know that it is he
only that ought to be honored and worshipped of all men, unless we be
also persuaded that he is the fountain of al good things, to the end that we
should seek for nothing else where but in him. I mean hereby, not only for
that as he has once created this world, so by his infinite power he
susteineth it, by his wisdom he governs it, by his goodness he preserves
it, and specially mankind he rules by his righteousness and judgment,
suffers by his mercy, and save gardeth by his defense: but also because there
can no where be found any one drop either of wisdom, or of light, or of
rightousnes, or of power, or of uprightness, or of sincere truth, which
flows not from him or whereof he is not the cause: to this end verily, that
we should learn to look for and crave all these things at his hand, and
with thankesgeuing account them received of him. For this felinge of the powers
of God is to us a me^e scholemaster of godlynes, out of which springs
religion. Godliness I call a reverence of God joined with love of him which is
procured by knowledge of his benefytes. For men will never with willing
obedience submit themselves to God, until they perceive that they owe all
things to him, that they are nourished by his fatherly care, that he is to
them the author of al good things, so yt nothing is to be sought else where
than in him. Yea they will never yield themselves truly and with all their heart
wholly to him, unless they assuredly believe that in him is perfect felicite
reposed for them.

if she want any thing by and by she flies to him for succoure, loking for
help at his hand. Because she is persuaded that he is good and merciful,
therefore with assured confidence she rests on him, and douteth not in all her
evils to find ready remedy in his merciful kindness. Because she knows him
to be her Lord and father, therefore she determines that he is worthy that
she should in all things have regard to his authority, reverence his
majesty, procure the advancement of his glory, and obey his commandementes.
Because she sees yt he is a righteous judge and armed with his severity to
punish sins, therefore she always sets his judgment seat before her eyes,
and with fear of him withdraws and restrains her self from provoking his
wrath. Yet is she not so afraid with the felyng of his judgment, that she
would convey her self from it, although there were a way open to escape it: but
rather she does no less love him, while he extends vengeance upon the
wicked, than while he is beneficial to the godly, for as much as she
understands that it does no less belong to his glory that he has in store
punishment for the wicked and evil doers, tha^ that he has reward of eternal
life for the righteous. Moreover she does not for only fear of punishment
refrain her self from synning: but because she loves and reuerenceth him as
her father, attends on him and honors him as her lord, therefore although
there were no hell at al, yet she dreadeth his only displeasure. Now behold
what is the pure and true religion, eue^ faith joined with an earnest fear of
god: so that fear may contain in it a willing reverence, and draw with it a
right form of worshipping such as is appointed in the law. And this is the
more hedefully to be noted, because al men generally do worship God, but few
do reverence him, while each where is great pompous show in ceremonies, but
the pureness of heart is rare to be found.

Truly, they that judge rightlye, will always hold this for certain, womb,
and such a one as nature suffers none to forgette, although many bend all
their endeavor to shake it out of their mind. Now, if almen be borne and do
live to this end, to know God, and the knowledge of God is but fickle, and
lyghtely vanishes away, unless it proceed thus far: it is evident, that
they all swerve out of kind from the law of their creation that do not direct
to this mark all the whole thoughts and doings of their life. Of which the
Philosophers themselves were not ignorant. In phaedrone and chaeetero
For Plato meant nothing else, when he oftentimes taught, that the soueraign
good of the soul is the likeness of God, when the soul having thoroughly
conceived the knowledge of him is wholly transformed into him. Therefore very
aptly does Grillus reason in Plutarche, where he affirms, that men, if
religion be once taken from their life, are not only nothing better than
brute beasts, but also many ways much more miserable, for that being subject
to so many sorts of evils they continually draw fourth a troublesome and
unquiet life: and that therefore the worshipping of God is the only thing that
makes the^ better than brute beasts, by which alone they aspire to
immortalite.

The.iii. Chapter. That the knowledge of God is naturally planted in the minds
of men.
WE hold it out of controversy, that there is in the mind of man, even by
natural instinction, a certain feling of the godhead. For to the end that no
man should flee to the pretense of ignorance, God himself has planted in all
men a certain understanding of his divine majesty: the remembrance whereof,
with pouring in now and then as it were new drops, he continually renews:
yt when al, not one excepted, do know that there is a God, and that he is their
maker, they may all be condemned by their own testimony, for that they have
not both worshipped him, and dedicate their life to his will. But truly if
the not knowing of God be any where to be found, it is likely that there can
no where else be any example of it more than among the grossest sorts of
peoples and furthest from civil order of humanity, Cicero de not. Deo^ rum.
But (as the heathen man says) there is no nation so barbarous, no kind of
people so savage, in whom rests not this persuasion that there is a God. And
even they that in other parts of their life, seem very little to differ from
brute beasts, yet do continually keep a certain sede of religion. So thoroughly
has this common principle possessed all men's minds, and so fast it sticks
within all men's bowels. Since then from the beginning of ye world there has been
no country, no city, yea no house that could be without religion, in this is
emplied a certain secret confession that a feling of the godhead is written
in the hearts of all men. Yea and ydolatrie it self is a substanciall proof
of this persuasion. For we know how unwillingly man abaseth himself to honor
other creatures above himself. Therefore when he had rather worship a block
and a stone, than he would be thought to have no god: it appears that
imprynted persuasio^ of God is of most great force, which is so impossible to
be raced out of the mind of man, that it is much more easy to have the
affection of nature broken: as in deed it is broken, when man from his own
natural swellyng pride of his own will stoupeth down even to the basest
creatures, to honor God.

Wherefore it is most vain which some do say, that religion was devised

The.iiii. Chapter. That the same knowledge is either choked, or corrupted,
partly by ignorance, and partly by malice.
BUt as experience teaches yt God has sown ye sede of religion in all me^, so
scarcely may be found ye hundredth man yt having it conceived in his heart does
cherish it, but no man in who^ it ripeneth, so far is it of that any fruit
appears in due time. Therefore whether it be that some become vain in their
own superstitions, or that some do of set purpose maliciously reuolte from
God, yet all do^ run out of kind from the true knowledge of him. So comes
it to pass that there remains no true godlynes in the world. But where as I
said that some by error fall into superstition, I mean not thereby as though
their simplicity might excuse them from blame, because the blindenes that
they have, is commonly always myngled both with proud vanity, and with
stubburnes. Uanitie and the same joined with pride appears in this, that they
miserable men both in the seeking of God do not clymbe above them selves as
they ought to have done, but measure him according to the proportion of their
own fleshly dulnes* and also neglecting the perfect manner of searching for
him, do curiously fly to vain speculations. And so they conceive him not
such a one as he offreth him self, but do imagine him such a one as of
their own rash presumption they have forged him. Which gulf being ones
opened, what way soever they stir their fete, they must needs always run
headlonge into destruction. For what soever afterward they go about toward
the worshippyng or service of god, they can not account it done to him,
because they worship not him, but rather the devise of their own heart, To.
i.xxii.
and their own dream instead of him. This perverseness do the Paul
expressly touch, where he says: That they were made fools when they coueted
to be wise. He had before said, that they were made vain in their
imaginations: but least any man should thereby excuse them from blame, he
adds further, that they are worthyly blinded, because not contented with
sobriety, but presumptuously taking upon themselves more than they ought, they
wylfully bring darkness upon them, yea with vain and froward pride do make
them selves fools. Whereupon follows, that their foolishness is not
excusable, whereof the cause is not only vain curiosity, but also a
gredynesse to know more than is me^e for them, joined with a false confidence.

As for this that David says, that the wicked and mad men think Ps. xiii.i.
do of purpose make them selves senseless, as we shall see again a little
hereafter. Even as we see that many after that they have been hardened with
boldness and custom of sinnyng, do furiously put from them all the
remembrance of God, which yet is by very feelyng of nature inwardly ministered
unto their mynds. Now David, to make their madness the more detestable,
brings them in as though they precisely denied, that there is any god:
although they take not from him his being, but because in taking from him his
judgment and providence, they shut him up idle in heaven. For where as
nothing less agrees with the nature of God, than to throw away the
government of the world, and leave it to fortune, to wynke at the sins of
men, so as they may live in lycentious outrage unpunished: whosoever he be
that quenchyng the fear of the heavenly judgment, does carelessely follow
his own affections, he denies that there is a God. And this is the just
vengeance of god, to draw a fatness over their hearts, so that the wicked when
they have ones closed their eyes, Psalm. xxx.vi.ii.
even in seeing may not see. And David in an other place is the best expounder
of his own meaning, where he says: That the fear of God is not before the
eyes of the wicked: Psa. x.xi.
Again: that in their evil doings they proudely rejoice at them selves,
because they persuade them selfs, ye God does not look upon the^. Therefore
although they be compelled to acknowledge some God, yet they do rob him of his
glory, in withdrawyng from him his power. For a^ God (as Paul witnesses) can
not deny him self, ii. Tim. ii.xiii.
because he continually abides like him self: so is it truly said, that these
men in faynyng God to be a dead and vain image, do deny God. Moreover it is to
be noted, yt although they wrestle against their own natural felyng, and do
desire not only to shake out God from thense, but also to destroy him in
heaven, yet their dull hardness can never so far prevail, but that God
sometime draws them back to his judgment seat. But forasmuch as they are
not withholden with any fear from runnyng violently against God: therefore it
is certain that there reigns in them a brutisshe forgetfulness of God, so
long as that blind pang of rage does so forcibly carry them.

So is that vayn defense overthrown which many are wont to pretend for excuse
of their superstition. For they think, that any devotion Gala, iiii, viii,
that that unstayed and wandryng opinion of the majesty of God, is a very
ignorance of God. When (says he) ye knew not God ye served them, that in
nature were no gods. And in an other place he says: Ep, ii, xii,
That the Ephesians were without a God at such time as they strayed from the
right knowledge of the one God. And at least in this case, it differs not
much whether thou believe one god or many, because in both cases thou
departest from and forsakest the true God: whom when thou have ones forsaken,
there is nothing left with thee but a detestable ydoll. It follows therefore,
that we must determyne with Lactantius, that there is no lawfully allowable
religion, but that which is joined with truth.

There is also a second fault, that they neither have at any time any from the
justice of God, do heartily wish to have his throne of judgment overthrown,
which they know to stand for punishment of offenses against his justice: by
which affection they war against God, who can not be without his judgment.
But when they understand that his power impossible to be avoided, hangs
over them: because they can neither by force remove it, nor by flyghte escape
it, therefore they fear it. So least they should in all things seem to despise
him, whose majesty still preasseth upon them, they use a certain outward
form of religion, such as it is: but in the mean time they cease not to
defile them selves wiht all kind of vices, to join outrageous mischeues to
mischeues, until they have in all points violate the holy law of the Lord,
and destroyed his whole righteousness, or at least they are not so holden
back with that fained fear of God, but that they swetely rest in their
sins, and flatter theimselues, and had rather to follow ye intemperance of
their flesh then restrain it with the bridle of the holy ghost. But for as
much as the same is but a void and lying shadow of religion, yea scarcely
worthy to be called a shadow, hereby again is easyly gathered how much the
true godliness, which is powered only into the hearts of the faithful, I mean
that out of which religion spryngeth, doothe differ from this confuse
knowledge of God. And yet the hypocrites would obtain by crooked compasses to
seem nigh unto God, whom they fle from. For where as there ought to have been
one continued unbroken course of obedience in their whole life, they in a manner
in all their doings carelessely rebellyng against him, labor with a few
sacrifices to appease him. Where as they ought to have served him with
holiness of life and syncerenes of heart, they invent triflynges and
obseruances of no value, to procure his favor withal: yea they do the more
licentiousely lie dull in their own dregs, because they trust yt they may be
discharged against him with their own mockeries of propitiatory satisfactions.
Finally where as their affiaunce ought to have been fastened in him, they
neglectyng him do rest in themselves, or in creatures. At length they
entangle them selves with such a heap of erroures, yt the dark myste of
malice doothe choke, and at last utterly quench those sparks, that
glimmeryngly shyned to make them see the glory of god. Yet that sede still
remains, which can by no mean be plucked up by the rote, to believe that
there is a certain godhead, but the same sede is so corrupted that it brings
forth of it none other, but very evil fruits. Yea thereby is that which I
travail to prove more certainly gathered, that there is a felyng of godhead
naturally graven in the hearts of men, forasmuch as the very reprobate them
selves are of necessity enforced to confess it. In quiet prosperity they
pleasauntely mock at god, yea they are full of talk and pratynge to
diminysshe the greatness of his power: but if ones any desperation touch
them, it stirs them up to seek the same God, and mynistreth them sodeyn
short prayers: by which it may appear, that they were not utterly ignorant
of god, but that the same which ought sooner to have been uttered, was by
obstinacy suppressed.

The.v. Chapter. That the knowledge of God does shiningly appear in the
making of the world and in the continual government thereof.
Moreover because the furthest end of blessed life stands in the knowledge
of God: that the way to felicite should be stopped to none, therefore God has
not only planted in the minds of men that sede of religion which we have
spoken of, but also has so disclosed him self in the whole workmanship of ye
world, and daily so manifestly presents himself, that men cannot open their
eyes but they must needs behold him. His substance in deed is
incomprehensible, so that his divine majesty far surmounteth all men's
senses: but he has in all his works graven certain marks of his glory, and
those so plain and notably discernable, that the excuse of ignorance is taken
away from men, be they never so gross and dull witted. ps, cxiiii. ^^
Therefore the Prophet rightfully cries out, that he is clothed with light as
with a garment, as if he should have said, that then he first began to come
forth to be seen in visible apparel, since the time that he first displaied
his ensigns in the creacion of the world, by which eue^ now what way soever we
turn our eyes he appears glorious unto us. In the same place also the same
prophet aptly compares the heavens as they be displaied abroad to his royal
pauilion: he says that he has framed his parloures in the waters, that the
clouds are his chariottes, that he rides upon the wings of the winds, that
the winds and lightninges are his swift messengers. And because the glory of
his power and wisdom does more fully shine above, therefore commonly the
heaven is called his palace. And first of al, what way soever thou turn thy
eyes, there is no piece of the world be it never so small, wherein are not seen
at least some sparkles of his glory to shine. But as for this most large and
beautiful frame, thou can not with one view peruse ye wide compass of it,
but that thou must needs be on every side overwhelmed with the infinite force
of ye brightness thereof. Wherefore the author of the Epistle to the Hebrews does
very well call the ages of the world the spectacles of invisible things, He.
xi.iii.
for that the so orderly framing of ye world serves us for a mirror wherein we
may behold God which otherwise is invisible. For which cause the Prophet
assigns to the heavenly creatures a language that al nations understand,
Psa. xix, ^,
for that in them there is a more evident testificacion of the Godhead, than
that it ought to escape the consideration of any nation be they never so dull.
Which thing the Apostle declaring more plainly says that there is disclosed
unto men so much as was behouefull to be known concerning God, Romans i.xix
because all men without exception, do thoroughly see his invisible things even
to his very power and godhead, which they understand by the creation of the
world.

As for his wonderful wisdom, there are innumerable proves both them selves
in sight of every one, even of the rudest unlearned man, so that men can not
open their eyes but they must needs be witnesses of them. But truly they
that have digested, yea or but tasted the liberal arts, being helped by the
aid thereof, do proceed much further to look into the secrets of Gods
wisdom. Yet is there no man so hindered by lack of knowledge of those arts,
but that he thoroughly sees abundantly enough of conning workmanship in gods
works, to bring him in admiration of the workma^ thereof. As for example: to
the searching out of the mouings of the stars, apointing of their places,
measuring of their distances, and noting of their properties, there needs art
and an exacter diligence: by which being thoroughly perceived, as the providence
of god is the more manifestly disclosed, so it is convenient, that the mind
rise somewhat the hier thereby to behold his glory. But for as much as the
unlearned people yea and the rudest sort of them, such as ar furnished with the
only help of their eyes, can not be ignorant of ye excellency of gods
conning workmanship, which in this innumerable and yet so severally well
ordered and disposed variety does of it self show forth it self: it is
evident that there is no man to whom God does not largely open his wisdom.
Likewise it requires a singular sharpnes of wit, to wey with such cunning as
Galen does, In l^b. de vsu part.
the knitting together, ye proportional agreement, the beauty, and use in the
frame of man's body: but by all men's confession, the body of man does utter in
very show of it self so cunning a co^pacting together, that for it the maker of
it may worthily be judged wonderful.

Act. xvii.xxvii.
And for this reason Paul, after that he had said that the very blind men may
find out god by groping for him, by and by says further, yt he is not to be
sought far of, because al men do feel undoubtedly wt^^ themselves the heavenly
grace wherwt they be quickened. But if we need to go no further than our
selves, to find and take hold of god, what pardon shall his slouthfulnes deserve
that will not vouchsafe to descend in to himself to find god? Ps. viii, v
And the same is the reason why David when he had shortly spoken in
advancement of the wonderful name and honor of God that do every where
gloriously shine, by and by cries out, what is man that thou art mindful of
him? Again, out of the mouth of infantes and suckyng babes thou have stablished
strength: for so he pronounces that not only in the whole kind of man is a
mirror of the works of God, but also that the very infantes while they yet
hang on their mothers breasts have tongues eloquent enough to preach his
glory, so that there needs no other orators. And therefore he douteth not to
set their mouths in the vauwarde, as being strongly armed to subdue their
madness ye would according to their deuilysh pride covet to extinguish ye name
of God. And hereupon rises that which Paul alleges out of Aratus, Act.
xvii.xxviii.
that we are the ofsprynge of God, because he garnishyng us with such
excellency, has testified that he is our father. Like as even by common
reason, and as it were by information of experience the profane Poets called
him the father of men. And truly no man will assentingly and willingly yield
him self to serve God, but he that having tasted his fatherly love, is mutually
allured to love and worship him.

And here is disclosed the foul unthankfulness of men, which while

But I have not now to do with that ^^ye of swyne. I rather speak from an
other, with what swiftnes or slownesse they go their courses, how many degrees
they decline this way or that way? I grant in deed that there is some use of
Astrology: but my meaning is only to show that in this so deep serching out
of heavenly things, it is not an instrumental measuring, but that the soul
has her offices by it self several from the body. I have showed one example,
by which it shall be easy for the readers to gather the rest. Truly the
manyfolde nimblenes of the soul, by which it surueieth both heaven and
earth, joins things past with things to come, keeps in memory things
heard long before, and expresses each thing to it self by imaginacion, also
the ingeniousnesse by which it inuenteth things incredible, and which is the
mother of so many maruelons arts, are sure tokens of divine nature in man.
Beside that, even in slepyng, it does not only roll and turn it self, but
also conceiueth many things profitable, reasons of many things, and also
prophecieth of things to come. What shall we in this case say, but that the
signs of immortality that are emprinted in man, cannot be blotted out? Now
what reason may bear that man shall be of divine nature, and not acknowledge his
Creator? Shall we forsooth by judgment that is put into us discern between
right and wrong, and shall there be no judge in heaven? Shall we even in our
sleep have abiding with us some remnant of understanding, and shall no God be
waking in gouernyng the world? Shall we be so compted the inuenters of so many
arts and profitable things, that God shall be defrauded of his praise, where as
yet experience sufficiently teaches, that from an other and not from our
selves, all that we have, is in diverse wise distributed among us? As for
that, which some do babble of the secret inspiracion that gives lyuelines to
the world, it is not only weak, but also ungodly. They like well that famous
saying of Uergile.

Aene. vi
First heaven, and earth, and flovvyng fields of seas,
The shinyng globe of Moon, and Ti^ans stars,
Sprite fedes within, and throughout all the lymmes
Infused mind the whole huge mass does move,
And with the large big body mix it self.
Thense come the kinds of men and eke of beasts,
And lives of fliyng fowls, and monsters strange,
That water bears within the marble sea.
A fyry lyuelynesse and heavenly race there is
Within those seeds. etc.
Forsothe, that the world which was created for a spectacle of the glory of
God, should be the creator of it self. So in an other place the same author
following the common opinion of the Greeks and Latynes, says: Some say that
bees have part of mind divine,
Geo. iiii.
And heavenly draughtes. For eke they say, that God
Gothe through the coasts of land, and crekes of sea,
And through deep sky. And hense the flocks and heardes:
And men, and all the kinds of savage beasts,
Each at their birth receive their subtle lives,
And thereto are they rendered all at last,
And all resolved are retournde again.
Ne place there is for death: but lively they
Fly into nombre of the Stars above,
And take their place within the lofty sky.


Lo, what that hungry speculacion of the universal mind that gives soul
and liuelines to the world, avails to engender and nourishe godliness in the
hearts of men. Which does also better appear by the blasphemous sayings of
the filthy dog Lucretius, which are derived from the same principle. Even
this is it, to make a shadowishe God, to drive far away the true God whom we
ought to fear and worship. I grant in deed that this may be godlily said, so
that it proceed from a godly mind, that nature is God: but because it is a
hard and an improper manner of speech, forasmuch as nature is rather an order
prebed by God: therefore in things of so great weight and to which is due a
singular religiousnes, it is hurtful to wrapp up God confusely with the
inferior course of his works. Let us therefore remember, so often as any man
considers his own nature, that there is one God which so governs al
natures, that his will is to have us to look unto him, our faith to be directed
to him, and him to be worshypped and called upon of us: because there is
nothing more against conuenience of reason, tha^ for us to enjoy those
excellent gifts that sauoure of divine nature in us, and to despise the
authoure that freely does give them unto us. Now as concerning his power,
with how notable examples does it forceably draw us to consider it: unless
perhaps we may be ignorant, of how great a strength it is with his only
word to uphold this infinite mass of heaven and earth, with his only beck
sometime to shake the heaven with noise of thonders, to burn up each thing with
lightenings, to set the air on fire with lightning flames, sometime to trouble
it with diverse sorts of tempests, and by and by the same God when he list in
one moment to make fair wether: to hold in the sea as if it hanged in the
air, which with his height seems to threaten continual destruction to the
earth, sometime in horrible wise to raise it up with outrageous violence of
winds, and sometime to appease the waves and make it calm again. For proof
hereof do serve all the praises of God gathered of the testimonies of nature,
specially in the book of Job, and in Esaie, which now of purpose I
ouerpasse, because they shall else where have an other place fitter for them,
where I shall entreat of the creacion of the world according to the
Scriptures. Only my meaning was now to touch, that both strangers and they of
the householde of God have this way of seking God common to them both, that is,
to follow these first draughtes which both above and beneth do as in a shadow
set fourth a lively image of him. And now the same power leads us to consider
his eternitye. For it must needs be that he from whom al things have their
beginning, is of eternal continuance, and has his beginning of him self. But
now if any man enquire the cause whereby he both was once lead to create al
these things, and is now moved to preserve them: we shall find that his only
goodness was it that caused him. Yea and although this only be the cause, yet
ought the same aboundauntly to suffice to allure us to the love of him,
forasmuch as there is no creature (as the Prophet says) upon which his mercy
is not poured out. Psa. Cxlv ix.


Also in the second sort of his works, I mean those that come to

Psa. xvii.
does suddenly and wonderfully and beside all hope, succoure men that are in
misery and in a manner lost, whether he defend them wandering in wilderness from
the wild beasts and at length leads them into the way again, or ministers
sode to the nedy and hungry, or delivers prisoners out of horrible dongeons
and iron bands, or brings men in peril of shipewracke safe into the haven,
or heals the half dead of diseases, or scorcheth the earth with heat and
drienesse, or makes it fruitful with secret watering of his grace, or
aduaunceth the hasest of the rascal people, or throws down the noble peers
from ye hie degree of dignity, by such examples showed fourth he gathers
that those things which are judged chances happening by fortune, are so many
testimonies of the heavenly providence, and specially of his fatherly kindness,
and that thereby is given matter of rejoicing to the Godly, and the wicked and
reprobate have their mouths stopped. But because the greater part infected
with their errors are blind in so clear a place of beholding, therefore he
cries out that it is a gift of rare and singular wisdom, wisely to weye
these works of God: by syghte whereof they nothing profit that otherwise seem
most clear sighted. And truly how much soever the glory of God doothe
apparently shine before them, yet scarsly the hundredth manne is a true
beholder of it. Likewise his power and wisdom are no more hid in
darkness, whereof the one, his power, does notably appear, when the fierce
outragiousnesse of the wicked being in all men's opinion unconquerable is
beaten flat in one momente, Psa. cxiii.vii.
their arrogancy tamed, their strongest holds rased, their weapons and armor
broken in pieces, their strengthes subdewed, their devises overthrown, and
theimselues fall with their own weighte, the presumptuous boldness that
auaunced it self above the heavens is thrown down even to the bottom point
of the earth: Again, the lowly are lyfted up out of the duste, and the needy
raised from the donghil, the oppressed and afflicted are drawn out of extreme
distress, men in despayred state are restored to good hope, the unarmed bear
away the victory from the armed, i. Cor. iii.xix.
few from many, the feeble from the strong. As for his wisdom, it self
shows it self manifestly excellent, while it disposes every thing in
fittest opportunity, confou^deth the wisdom of the world be it never so
pearcyng, fyndeth out the subtle in their subtlety, finally governs all
things by most convenient order.

We see that it needs no long or laboursom demonstration, to fetch out
testimonies, to serve for the glorious declaration and proof of gods majesty:
for by these few that we have touched it appears, that which way soever a man
chance to look, they are so common and ready that they may be easily marked
with eye, and pointed out with the finger. And here again is to be noted, that
we are called to the knowledge of god, not such as contented with vain
speculation, does but fly about in the brain, but such as shall be sound
and fruitful, if it be rightly conceived and take root in our hearts. For
the Lord is declared by his powers, the force whereof because we feel within
us, and do enjoy the benefits of them, it must needs be that we be inwardly
moved much more lively with such a knowledge, then if we should imagine God
to be such a one, of whom we should have no feelyng. Whereby we understand,
that this is the rightest way and fittest order to seek God, not to attempt
to enter depely with presumptuous curiosity, throughely to discuss his
substance, which is rather to be reverently woorshipped than scrupulousely
searched, but rather to behold him in his works, by which he makes him self
nere and familiar, and doothe in a manner communicate him self unto us. And
this the apostle mente when he said, Act. xvii.xxvii. Psa. cxlv.
that God is not to be sought afar of, forasmuch as he with his most
present power dwells within every one of us. Wherefore David having before
confessed his unspeakable greatness, when he descends to the particular
rehersall of his works, protests that the same will show forth it self.
Therefore we also ought to give our selves unto such a searchyng out of God, as
may so hold our wit suspended with admiration, that it may therwithall
throughely move us with effectual feelynge. In Psalm. cxliiii.
And, as Augustine teaches in an other place, because we are not able to
conceive him, it behooves us as it were faintyng under the burdeyne of his
greatness, to look unto his works, that we may be refreshed with his
goodness.

Then such a knowledge ought not only to stir us up to the worshyppyng of
God, but also to awake us, and raise us to hope of the life to come. For when
we consider that such exaumples as God shows both of his mercyfulnesse, and
of his severity, are but begun, and not half full, without doubt we must
think, that herein he doothe but make a show aforehande of those things,
whereof the open disclosynge and full delyueraunce, is differred unto an other
life. On the other side, when we see that the godly are by the ungodly grieved
with afflictions, troubled with injuries, oppressed with sclaunders, and vexed
with despitefull dealings and reproaches: contraryewyse that wicked dooers do
flourishe, prosper, and obtain quiet with honor, yea and that unpunished, we
must by and by gather, that there shall be an other life, wherein is laid up
in store both dew revenge for wickedness, and reward for righteousness.
Moreover when we note that the faithful are often chastised with the rods of
the Lord, we may most certainly determyne that much less the ungodly shall
escape his scourges. De clui. dei. cap. viii.
For very well is that spoken of Augustine. If every sin should now be
punished with open pain, it would be thought that nothing were reserved to
the last judgment. Again, if God should now openly punyshe no sin, it
would be believed, that there were no providence of God. Therefore we must
confess, that in every particular work of God, but principally in the
universal generality of them, the powers of God are set forth as it were
in painted tables, by which all mankind is provoked and allured to the
knowledge of him, and from knowledge to full and perfect felicity. But where
as these his powers do in his works most bryghtly appear, yet what they
principally tend unto, of what valor they be, and to what end we ought to
way them: this we then only atteyne to understand when we descend into our
selves, and do consider by what means God does show forth in us his life,
wysedom, and power, and does use toward us his righteousness, goodness, and
merciful kyndenesse. For though David justly complayneth, that the unbelieving
do dote in folly, Psa. xcii.vii.
because they weye not the deep counsels of God in his governance of
mankind: yet that is also most true, which he says in an other place, that
the wonderful wysedom of God in that behalf excedeth the hears of our head.
But because this poincte shall hereafter in place convenient be more largely
entreated, Ps. xl.xiii
therefore I do at this time pass it over.

But with how great bryghtnesse soever God doothe in the myrrour
unadvisedness of fortune, than governed by prouydence of God. But if at any
time we be by the guidyng and direction of these things driven to the
consideration of God (as all men must needs be) yer so soon as we have
without aduisemente conceived a feling of some godheade, we by and by slide
away to the dotages or erroneous inuencions of our flesh, and with our
vanity we corrupt the pure verity of God. So herein in deed we differ one
from an other, that every man privately by him self procures to him self
some peculiar error: but in this point we all are most like together, that
we all, not one excepted, do depart from the one true God to monstrous
trifles. To which disease not only common and gross wits are subject, but
also the most excellent and those that otherwise are endewed with singular
sharpnes of understanding, are entangled with it. How largely has the whole
sect of philosophers bewrayed their own dullness and beastlye ignorance in
this behalf? For, to pass over all the rest, which are much more
unreasonably foolyshe. Plato himself the most religious and most sober of all
the rest, vaynely erreth in his round globe. Now what might not chance to
the other, when the chief of them, whoes part was to give light to the
rest, do themselves so err and stumble? Likewise where Gods governance of
men's matters, does so plainly prove his providence that it can not be
denied, yet this doothe no more prevail with men, than if they believed that
all things are tossed up and down with the rash will of Fortune: so great is
our inclination to vanity and error. I speak now altogether of the most
excellent, and not of the common sort, whoes madness has infinitely
wandered in prophanynge the truth of God.

Hereof proceeds that unmeasurable synke of errors, wherewith look upon, he
shall find them to be but vanishyng false colors. The Stoikes seemed in
their own conceipte to speak very wisely, that out of all the parts of
nature may be gathered diverse names of God, and yet that God being but one is
not thereby torn in sonder. As though we were not already more than enough
inclined to vanity, unless a manifold plenty of gods set before us should
further and more violently draw us into error. Also the Egyptians mystical
science of divinity shows, that they all diligently endeavored to this end,
not to seem to err without a reason. And it is possible, that at the first
sight some thing semyng probable, might deceive the simple and ignorant: but no
mortal man ever invented any thing, whereby religion has not ben fowly
corrupted. And this so confuse diversity emboldned the Epicures and other
gross despisers of godliness, by little and little to cast of al felyng of
god. For when they saw the wisest of all to strive in contrary opinions, they
sticked not out of their disagreementes, and out of the foolish or apparently
erroneous doctrine of each of them, to gather, that men do in vain and
fondly procure torments to them selves while they search for God, which is
none at all. And this they thought that they might freely do without
punishment, because it was better brefely to deny utterly, that there is any
God, than to feign uncertain Gods, and so to raise up contentions that never
should have end. And to much fondly do they reason, or rather cast a mist, to
hide their ungodliness by ignorance of men, whereby it is no reason that any
thing should be taken away from God. But forasmuch as all do confess, that
there is nothing, about which both the learned and unlearned do so much
disagree, thereupon is gathered that the wits of men are more than dull and
blind in heavenly mysteries, that do so err in seeking out of God. Some other
do praise that answer of Symonides, which being demanded of king Hieron what
God was, desired to have a days respite granted to study upon it. And when
the next day following, the king demanded the same question, he required two
days respite, and so oftentimes doubling the number of days at length he
answered: How much the more I consider it, so much the harder ye matter
seems unto me. But grauntyng that he did wisely to suspende his sentence of so
dark a matter, yet hereby appearethe, that if men be only taught by nature,
they can know nothing certainly, soundly, and plainly concerning God, but only
are tied to confused principles to worship an unknown God.

Ep. ii.xii.
For this reason, Paul pronounces that the Ephesians were without a God, till
they had learned by the Gospel, what it was to worship the true God. And we
must not think this to be spoken of one nation only, To. i.xxi.
for as much as he generally affyrmeth in an other place, that all men were
become vayn in their imaginations, syns that in the creation of the world, the
Majesty of of the Creator was disclosed unto them. And therefore the
scripture, to make place for the true and one only God, condemns of falsehod
and lying, whatsoever godhead in old time was celebrate among the Gentiles,
and leaves no God at all, but in the mount Syon, Abacuk: ii.xviii.xx. Ioh.
iiii.xxii.
where flourished the peculiar knowledge of God. Truly among the Gentiles the
Samaritans in Christ's time seemed to approach nighest to true godliness: and
yet we hear it spoken by Christ's own mouth, that they knew not what they
worshipped. Whereupon follows, that they were deceived with vain error.
Finally although they were not all infected with gross fautes, or fell into
open idolatries, yet was there no true and approved religion that was grounded
only upon common reason. For all be it, that there were a few that were not
so mad as the common people were, yet this doctrine of Paul remains
certainly true, i. Cor. ii.viii.
that the princes of this world conceive not the wisdom of God. Now if the
most excellent have wandered in darkness, what is to be said of the very
dregs? Wherefore it is no marvel, if the holy ghost do refuse as bastard
worshippynges all forms fo woorshipping devised by the will of men. Because in
heavenly mysteries opinion conceived by wit of men, although it do not always
breed a heap of erroures, yet is always the mother of error. And though
there come no worse of it, yet is this no small fault, at adventure to worship
an unknown God: John. iiii.xxii.
of which fault all they by Christ's own mouth are pronounced guilty, that
are not taught by the law what God they ought to worship. And truly the best
lawmakers that ever were, proceeded no further, than to say that religion was
grounded upon common consent. Yea and in Xenophon Socrates praised the answer
of Apollo, wherein he willed that every man should worship gods after the manner
of the country, and the custom of his own city. But how came mortal men by
this power, of their own authority to determine that which far surmounteth
the world? or who can so rest in the decrees of the elders, or common
ordinances of peoples, as to receive without doutynge a God delivered by
man's devise? Every man rather will stand to his own judgment, than yield him
self to the will of an other. Since therefore it is to weak and feeble a bond of
godliness, in worshippyng of God to follow either a custom of a city, or the
consent of antiquity, it remains that God him self must testify of him self
from heaven.

In vain therefore so many lamps lightened do shine in the edifice Heb. xi.iii.
but yt we have no eyes to see the same thoroughly, unless they be enlightued by
the revelation of God through faith. And Paul, where he teaches that by the
creation of the world was disclosed that which was to be known concerning god,
does not mean such a disclosyng as may be comprehended by the wit of men:
but rather shows, that the same proceeds no further but to make them
inexcusable. The same Paul also, Act. xvii. and xxvii. Act. xiii. and xvi.
although in one place he says, that God is not to be sought afar of, as one
yt dwells within us: yet in an other place reaches to what end that
nerenesse avails. In the ages past (says he) God suffered the nations to
walk in their own ways: yet he left not him self without testimony, doing
good from heaven, geuyng showers and fruitful seasons, fillyng the hearts of
men with food and gladness. Howsoever therefore the Lord be not without
testimony, while with his great and manyfolde bountyfulnesse he sweetly
allureth men to the knowledge of him: yet for all that, they cesse not to
follow their own ways, that is to say, their damnable errors.



The.vi. Chapter. That, to atteyne to God the Creator, it is needful to have
the scripture to be our guide and maistresse.
THerefore although that same brightness, which both in heaven and earth
shines in the eyes of al men, does sufficiently take away al defense from the
wickedness of me^, even so as God, to wrappe al mankind in one giltinesse,
does show his divine majesty to al without excepcion as it were portraied
out in his creatures: yet is it necessary that we have also an other and a
better help that may rightly direct us to the very creator of the world.
Therefore not in vain he has added the light of his word, that thereby he
might be known to salvation. And this prerogative he has vouchesaued to give
to us, whom it pleased him more nerely and more familiarly to draw together to
himself. For because he saw the minds of al men to be carried about with
wandering and unsteadfast motion, after he had chose^ the Jews to his peculiar
flock, he compassed them in as it were with bars, that they should not
wander out in vanity as other did. And not without cause he holds us with
the same mean in the true knowledge of himself. For otherwise even they
should quickly swerve away that seem to stand steadfast in comparison of other.
For as old men, or poor blind, or they whose eyes ar dim sighted, if you
lay a fair book before them, though they perceive that there is somewhat
written therein, yet can they not read two words together: but being helped
with spectacles set between them and it, they begin to read distinctlye: so the
Scripture gathering up together in our minds the knowledge of God, which
otherwise is but confused, does remove the mist, and plainly show us the true
god. This therefore is a singular gift, that to the instruccion of his church
God uses not only dumme teachers, but also opens his own holy mouth: not
only publishes that there is some God to be worshipped, but also there
withal pronounces that he himself is the same God who^ we ought to worship:
and does not only teach the elect to look upon God, but also presents
himself unto them to be looked upon. This order has he kept from the
beginning toward his church, beside these common instruccions to give them
also his word. Which is the righter and certainer mark to know him by. And
it is not to be douted, yt Adam, Noe, Abraham and the rest of the fathers by
this help attained to that familiar knowledge, which made them as it were
severally differente from the unbelievers. I speak not yet of the proper
doctrine of faith, wherewith they were enlightened into the hope of eternal
life. For, that they might pass from death to life, it was needful for them
to know God not only to be the creatoure, but also the redemer: as doutlesse
they obtained both by the word. For that kind of knowledge whereby was given
to understand who is the God by who^ the world was made and is governed, in
order came before the other: and the^ was that other inward knowledge
adioined, which only quickens dead souls, whereby God is known not only to
be the maker of the world and the only author and judge of all things that
are done, but also to be the redemer in the person of that mediator. But
because I am not yet come to the fall of the world and corrupcion of nature, I
will omit also to entreat of the remedy thereof. Therefore let the readers
remember that I do not yet speak of the covenant whereby God has adopted to
himself the children of Abraham, and of that specyal part of doctrine whereby
the faithful have always been peculiarly severed from the profane nations:
because that doctrine was founded upon Christ: but I speak how we ought to
learn by the Scripture, that god which is the creator of the world, is by
certain marks seuerallye discerned from the counterfeit multitude of false
gods. And the^ the order it self shall conveniently bring us to the redemer.
But although we shall allege may testimonies out of the new testament, and some
also out of ye law and the Prophets, wherein is express mencio^ made of
Christ: yet they shall al tend to this end, to prove that in the Scripture is
disclosed unto us God the creator of the world, and in the scripture is set
forth what we ought to think of him to the end that we should not seek about
ye busy for an uncertain godhead.

But whether God were known to the fathers by oracles and visions, To. x.iiii.
for which cause also Paul calls Christ the end of the law: yet, as I say
once again, beside the proper doctrine of faith and repentance which shows
forth Christ the mediator, the Scripture does by certain marks and tokens
paint out the only and true God, in that that he has created and does
govern the world, to the end he should be severally known and not reckened
in the false number of fained gods. Therefore although it behooves man
earnestlye to bend his eyes to consider the works of God, forasmuch as he is
set as it were in this gorgeous stage to be a beholder of them: yet pryncipally
ought he to bend his ears to the word, that he may better profit thereby. And
therefore it is no marvel that they which are borne in darkness do more and
more wax hard in their amassed dullness, because very few of them do give
themselves pliable to learn of the word of God, whereby to keep them within
their bounds, but they rather rejoice in their own vanity. Thus then ought we
to hold, that to the end true religion may shine among us, we must take our
beginning at the heavenly doctrine. And that no man can have any taste be it
never so little of true and sound doctrine, unless he have been scholar to the
Scripture. And from hense grows the original of true understanding, that we
reverently embrace whatsoever it pleases God therein to testifye of himself.
For not only the perfect and in all points absolute faith, but also al right
knowledge of God springs from obedience. And truly in this behalf God of
his singular providence has provided for men in and for all ages.

For if we consider how slipperye an inclinacion man's mind has to Since
therefore it is manifest that God has always used the help of his word, toward
al those whom it pleased him at any time frutefully to instruct, because he
foresaw that his image emprinted in the most beautiful form of the world was
not sufficiently effectual: Therefore it behooves us to travail this straight
way, if we earnestly covet to attain to the true beholding of God. We must I
say, come to his word, wherein God is well and lively set out by his works,
when his works be weyed not after the peruersuesse of our own judgment, but
according to the rule of the eternal truth. If we swerve from that word, as
I said even now, although we run never so fast, yet we shall never attain
to the mark, because the course of our running is out of the way. For thus we
must think, that the brightness of the face of God, which the Apostle calls
such as cannot be atteined unto, i. Tim. vi.xvi.
is unto us like a maze, out of which we cannot vnwrappe our selves, unless we
be by the line of the word guided into it: so that it is much better for us to
halt in this way, ps ix. and xcvi.xcvii.xcix. etc.
than to run never so fast in an other. And therefore David often times when
he teaches that supersticions are to be taken away out of the world, that pure
religion may floryshe, brings in God reigning: meaning by this word
reigning, not the power that he has, but the doctrine whereby he chalengeth to
himself a lawful government: because errors can never be rooted out of the
hearts of men, till the true knowledge of God be planted.

Therefore the same Prophet, ps. xix.xxi.
after that he has recited that the heavens Ps. xciii.^.
after that he had descrybed the terrible waves of ye Sea, he thus concludes:
thy testimonies ar verified, the beauty of thy temple is holiness for ever.
And out of this meaning also proceeded that which Christ said to the woman of
Samaria, that her nation and the rest did honor that which they knew not, John.
iiii.xxii.
and that only the Jews did worship the true God. For whereas the wit of man
by reason of the feblenesse thereof ca^ by no mean attain unto God, but being
helped and lifted up by his holy word, it followed of necessity, that al men,
except the Jews, did wander in vanite and error, because they sought god
without his word.

The.vii. Chapter. By what testimony the Scripture ought to be established,
that is by the witness of the holy ghost, that the authority thereof may
remain certain. And that it is a wicked invention to say that the er^^yt
thereof does hangs upon the judgment of the church.
BUt before I go any further, it is nedeful to say somewhat of the authority of
the Scripture, not only to prepare men's minds to reverence it, but also to
take away al dout thereof. Now, when it is a matter confessed that it is the
word of God that is there set forth, there is no man of so desperate
boldness, unless he be void of all common sense and natural wit of man,
that dare derogate the credit of him that speaks it. But because there are
not daily oracles given from heaven, and the only Scryptures remain wherein
it has pleased the Lord to preserve his truth to perpetual memory, the same
Scripture by none other means is of full credit among the faithful, but in that
they do believe that it is as verily come from heaven as if they heard the
lively voice of God to speak therein. This matter in deed is right worthy both
to be largely entreated of and diligently weyed. But the readers shall pardon
me if herein I rather regard what the proporcion of the work which I have
begone may bear, tha^ what ye largeness of the matter requires. There is
grown up among the most part of men a most hurteful error, yt the Scripture
has only so much authority as by common consent of the church is given unto
it: as if the eternal and inviolable truth of God did rest upon the pleasure
of men. For so, to the great scorn of the holy ghost, they ask of us who ca^
assure us that these Scriptures came from God: or who can assertaine us that
they have continued unto o^r age safe and uncorrupted: who can persuade us,
that this one book ought to be reverently received, and that other to be
stryken out of the number of Scripture, unless the church did appoint a
certain rule of al these things? It hangs therefore (say they) upon the
determinacio^ of the church, both what reverence is due to the Scripture, and
what books ar to be reckened in the canon thereof. So these robbers of gods
honor, while they seek under color of the church to bring in an unbridled
tyranny, care nothing with what absurdities they snare both themselves and
other, so that they may enforce this one thing to be believed among the simple,
that the church can do al things. But if it be so: what shall become of the
poor consciences that seek steadfast assurance of eternal life, if all the
promyses that remain thereof stand and be stayed only upon the judgment of
men* When they receive such answer, shall they cesse to waver and tremble?
Again to what scorns of the ungodly is our faith made subject? into how great
suspicion with all men is it brought, if this be believed that it has but as it
were a borrowed credit by the favor of men?

^
If the doctrine of the Prophets, and Apostles be the fundacion of the church:
then must it needs be, that the same doctrine stood in steadfast certainty,
before that the church began to be. Nether can they well cauil, that although
the church take her first beginning thereof, yet it remains doutful what is to
be said the writings of the Prophets and Apostles, unless the judgment of
the church did declare it. For if the Chrystian church were at the beginning
builded upon the writings of the Prophets and preaching of the Apostles:
wheresoever that doctrine shall be found, the allowed credyte thereof was surely
before the church, without which the church it self had never ben. Therefore
it is a vain forged devise, that the church has power to judge the
Scripture, so as the certainty of the scripture should be thought to hang
upon the will of the church. Wherefore when the church does receive the
Scripture and seals it with her consenting testimony, she does not of a
thing doutefull, and that otherwise should be in controversy, make it autentike
and of credit: but because she acknowledges it to be the truth of her God,
according to her duty of godliness without delay she does honor it. Whereas
they demand, how shall we be persuaded that it came from god, unless we resort
to the decree of the church? This is al one as if a man should ask, how
shall we learn to know light from darkness, white from black, or sweet
from sower. For the Scripture shows in it self no less apparaunte sense of
her truth, than white and black things do of their color, or sweet and sower
things of their taste.

I know that they commonly allege the saying of Augustine, where Contra epist.
fu^dame^tale^. ca. ^
save that the authority of the church moved him thereto. But how untruly and
cauillouslye it is alleged for such a meaning, by the whole tenor of his
writing it is easy to perceive. He had to do with the Manichees, which
required to be believed without gainesaying, when they vaunted that they had the
truth on their side, but proved it not. And to make their Manicheus to be
believed, they pretended the gospel. Now Augustine asks them what they would
do, if they did light upon a man that would not beeleue the gospel it self,
with what manner of persuasion they would draw him to their opinion. Afterward
he says. I my self would not believe the gospel. etc. save that ye authority
of the church moved me thereto. Meaning that he himself, when he was a
stranger from the faith, could not otherwise be brought to embrace the gospel
for the assured truth of God, but by this that he was overcome with the
authority of ye church. And what marvel is it, if a man not yet knowing
Christ, have regard to men? Augustine therefore does not there teach that
the faith of the godly is grounded upon the authority of the church, nor
means that the certainty of the gospel does hang thereupon: but simplye and
only, that there should be no assuredness of the gospel to the infidels,
whereby they might be won to Christ, unless the consent of the church did
drive them unto it. And the same meaning a little before he does plainly
confirm in this saying. Contra epist. fu^^dame^^ale^. ca. iii.
When I shall praise that which I believe, and scorn that which thou beleuest,
what thi^kest thou mete for us to judge or do? but that we forsake such men as
first call us to come and know certain truethes and after command us to
beeleue things uncertain: and that we follow the^ that require us first to
believe that which we are not yet able to see, that being made strong by
believing we may atteine to understand the thing that we believe: not men
now, but God himself inwardly strengthening and giving light to our mind.
These are the very words of Augustine: whereby every man may easily gather, that
the holy man had not this meaning, to hang the credit that we have to the
Scriptures upon the will and awardemente of the church, but only to show
this, (which we our selves also do confess to be true) that they which are not
yet lightened with the spirit of god, are brought by the reverence of the
church unto a willyngnesse to be taught, so as they can find in their hearts
to learn the faith of Christ by the gospel: and that thus by this mean the
authority of ye church is an introduction, whereby we are prepared to believe ye
gospel. For, as we see, his mind is that the assurance of the godly be stayed
upon a far other foundation. Otherwise I do not deny but that he often
presses ye Manichees with the consent of the whole church, when he seeks to
prove the same Scripture which they refused. Contra Faustum lib. xxxii
And from hence it came, that he so reproched Faustus for that he did not yield
himself to the truth of the gospel so grounded* so stablished, so gloriously
renomed, and from the very time of the Apostles by certain successions
perpetuallye commended. But he never trauaileth to this end, to teach that the
authority which we acknowledge to be in the Scripture, hangs upon the
determinacion or decree of men. But only this, which made much for him in the
matter that he disputed of, he brings forth the universal judgment of the
church, wherein he had the auau^tage of his adversaries. If any desire a fuller
proof hereof, let him read his book concerning the profit of believing. Aug.
de vtilitate cred.
Where he shall find that there is no other readiness of belief commended
unto us by him, but that which only gives us an entry, and is unto us a
convenient beginning to enquire, as he terms it: and yet not that we ought to
rest upon bare opinion, but to lean to the certain and sound truth.

be not so hardened as to become desperately shameless, they would be
compelled to confess, that there are seen in the Scripture manifest tokens
that it is God that speaks therein: whereby it may appear that the doctrine
thereof is from heaven. And shortly hereafter we shall se, that all the books of
the holy Scripture do far excel al other writings what soever they be. Yea
if we bring thither pure eyes and uncorrupted senses, we shall forthwith find
there the majesty of God, which shall subdue al hardness of gainesaying and
enforce us to obey him. But yet they do disorderly, that by disputacion
travail to establishe the perfect credit of the Scripture. And truly
although I am not furnished with great dexterity, nor eloquence: yet if I were
to contend with ye most luttle despisers of God, that have a desire to show
themselves wytty and plesaunt in febling the authority of Scripture, I trust
it should not be hard for me to put to silence their bablinges. And if it
(...) profitable to spend labor in confuting their cauillations, I would with
no great business shake in sunder the bragges that they mutter in corners. But
though a man do deliver the sound word of God from the reproaches of men, yet
that suffices not fourthwith to fasten in their hearts that assuredness that
godliness requires. Profane men because they think religion stands only
in opinion, to the end they would believe nothing fondly or lightly, do covet
and require to have it proved to them by reason, that Moises and the Prophets
spoke from God. But I answer that the testimony of the holy ghost is better
tha^ all reason. For as only God is a conueniente witness of himself in his
own word, so shall the same word never find credit in the hearts of men,
until it be sealed up with the inward witness of ye holy ghost. It behooves
therefore of necessity that the same holy ghost which spoke by the mouth of
the Prophets, do enter into our hearts to persuade us that they faithfully
uttered that which was by God commanded them. And this order is very aptly set
fourth by Esaias in these words. Esa. li.xvi
My spirit which is in thee and the words that I have to put in thy mouth and
in the mouth of thy sede shall not fail for ever. It greueth some good men,
that they have not ready at hand some clear proof to allege, when the wicked
do without punishment murmr against the word of God: As though the holy
ghost were not for this cause called both a seal and a pledge, because until
he do lighten men's minds they do always waver among many doutinges.

Let this therefore stand for a certainly persuaded truth, that they rest our
judgment upon: but as to a thing without al compass of consideracion, we
submit our judgment and wit unto it. And that not in such sort as some are
wont sometime hastily to take hold of a thing unknown, which after being
thoroughly perceived displeases them: but because we are in our consciences well
assured that we hold an invincible truth. Neither in such sort, as silly men ar
wont to yield their mind in thraldom to superstitions: but because we
undoubtedly perceive therein the strength and breathing of the divine majesty,
wherewith we are drawn and stirred to obey, both wittingly and willingly, and
yet more lively and effectually than man's will or wit can attain. And therefore
for good cause does God cry out by Esaias, that the Prophets with the whole
people do bear him witness, Esa. xliii.x
because being taught by the prophecies they did undoubtedly believe without
guile or uncertainty that God himself had spoken. Such therefore is our
persuasion, as requires no reasons: such is our knowledge, as has a right
good reason to maintain it, even such a one, wherein the mind more assuredly
and steadfastly rests than upon any reasons: such is our feling, as cannot
proceed but by reuelacion from heaven. I speak now of none other thing but
that which every one of the faithful does by experience find in himself,
saving that my words do much want of a full declaration of it. I leave here
many things unspoken, because there will be else where again a convenient place
to entreat of this matter. Only now let us know, that only that is the true
faith which the spirit of God does seal in our hearts. Yea with this only
reason will the sobre reder and willing to learn, be contented. Esaias promeseth,
that all the children of the renewed church shall be ye scholars of God. Esa.
liiii.xiii.
A singular privilege therein does God vouchsaue to grant to his elect only,
whom he seuereth from all the rest of mankind. For what is the beginning of
true doctrine, but a ready cherefulnesse to hear the voice of God? But God
requires to be heard by the mouth of Moises, as it is written: say not in thy
heart, who shall ascend into heaven, or who shall descend into the deep? the
word is even in thine own mouth. If it be the pleasure of God that this
treasure of understanding be laid up in store for his children, it is no
marueil nor unlikely, that in the common multitude of me^ is seen such
ignorance and dullness. Deu. xxx.xii. Romans x.vi Esai. iiii.i
The common multitude I call even the most excellent of them, until such time
as they be graffed into the body of the church. Moreover Esaias giving warning
that the Prophets doctrine should seem incredible not only to strangers but
also to the Jews that would be accounted of the householde of God, adds
this reason: because the arm of God shall not be reveled to al men. So often
therefore as the smallness of number of the beleuers does trouble us, on the
other side let us call to mind, that none can comprehend the mysteries of God
but they to whom it is given.

The.viii. Chapter. That so far as man's reason may bear, there are
sufficient proves to stablyshe the credit of Scripture.
Unless we have this assurance, which is both more excellent and of more
force than any judgment of man. in vain shall the authorytie of Scripture
either be strengthened with arguments, or stablished with consent of the
church, or confyrmed with any other means of defense. For unless this
fundation be laid, it still remains hanging in doubt. As on the other
side when exemptynge it from the common state of things, we have embraced it
deuoutely and according to the worthynesse of it: then these things become
very fit helps, which before were but of small force to graffe and fasten
the assurance thereof in our minds. For it is meruaylous, how great
establishemente grows hereof, when with earnest study we consider how
orderly and well framed a disposition of the divine wisdom appears therein,
how heavenly a doctrine in every place of it, and nothing sauoryng of
earthlynesse, how beautyful an agreement of all the parts among them
selves, and such other things as avail to procure a majesty to writings.
But more perfectly are our hearts confirmed when we consider, how we are even
violently carried to an admiration of it rather with dignity of matter, than
with grace of words. For this also was not done without the singular
providence of God, that the hye mysteries of the heavenly kingdom should for
the most part be uttered under a contemptible baseness of words, least if it
had been beautified with more glorious speech the wicked should cavil that
the only force of eloquence does reign therein. But when that roughe and in
a manner rude simplicity does raise up a greater reverence of it self than
any rhetoricians eloquence, what may we judge, but that there is a more mighty
strength of truth in the holy Scripture, than that it needs any art of
words? Not without cause therefore the Apostle makes his argument, to prove
that the faith of the Corinthians was grounded upon the power of God, i. Cor.
ii.iiii.
and not upon man's wysedom, bycau^e his preaching among them was set forth not
with enticyng speech of man's wisdom, but in plain evidence of the spirit and
of power. For the truth is then set free from all doubtyng, when not
vpholden by forayne aides it self alone suffiseth to sustain it self. But how
this power is proprely alone belongyng to the scripture, hereby appears, that
of all the writings of men, be they never so connyngly garnyshed, no one is
so far able to pearce our affections. Read Demosthenes or Cicero, read
Plato, Aristotle, or any other of all that sort: I grant they shall
meruailously allure, delight, move, and rauishe thee. But if from them thou come
to this holy readyng of Scriptures, will thou or not, it shall so lively move
thy affections, it shall so pearce thy heart, it shall so settle within thy
bones, that in comparison of the efficacy of this feelyng, all that force of
Rhetoricians and Philosophers shall in manner vanysshe away: so that it is easy
to perceive that the scriptures, which do far excel all gifts and graces
of man's industry, do in deed breathe out a certain divinity.

Scholemen and Canoni^^es.
that under such visour he might hyde his deceites. But how vayn and
uncleanly is that curious counterfaityng, all men that have but mean
understanding do plainly see. As for the holy scripture, although froward
men labor to byte at many things, yet is it full of such sentences as could
not be conceived by man. Let all the prophets be looked upon, there shall not
one be found among them, but he has far excelled all man's capacity, in
such sort that those are to be thought to have no judgment of taste to whom
their doctrine is unsavory.



testimonies worthy to be remembered out of ancient writers, whereby may be
gathered, that by consent of all nations the doctrine that is in the law has been famous even from the first ages, although it were neither read nor truly
known. Now, that neither there should remain to the malicious any cause of
suspicion, nor to the wicked any occasion to cavil, God has for both these
dangers provided good remedies. When Moses reherseth what Jacob almost three
hundred years before had by heavenly inspiration pronounced upon his own
posterity, Genesis xl^x v.
how does he set forth his own tribe? yea in the person of Leui he
spotteth it with eternal infamy. Symeon (faith he) and Leui the vessels of
wickedness. My soul come not into their counsel, nor my tongue into their
secret. Truly he might have passed over that blot with silence, in so doing
not only to please his father, but also not to stain him self and his whole
family with part of the same shame. How can that writer be suspected, which
vnconstrainedly publishing by the oracle of the holy ghost, that the principal
auncester of the family whereof himself descended was an abominable doer,
neither privately provided for his own honor, nor refused to enter in
displeasure of all his own kynsemen, whom undoubtedly this matter grened? When
also he reherseth the wicked murmuryng of Aaron his own brother, Number. xii i.
and Mary his sister: shall we say that he spoke after the meaning of the
flesh, or rather that he wrote it obeyng the commandment of the holy ghost?
Moreover sith himself was highest in authority, why did he not leave at least
the office of the hye priesthode to his own sons, but appoints them to
the basest place? I touch here only a few things of many. But in the law
it self a man shall each where mete with many arguments that are able to bring
full proof to make men believe that Moses without all question comes from
heaven as an Angel of God.

Now these so many and so notable miracles that he recompteth, ar Ex. xxiiii
xviii.
For, this that he was carried in a cloud up into the mountain: that there
even to the fortyeth day he continued without company of men: that in the
very publishing of the law his face did shine as it were besette with
sonnebeames: Ex. xxxiiii xxix. Exo. xix.xvi. Exo. xl.xxxiiii.
that lightenynges flashed round about: that thunders and noyses were heard
each where in the air: that a trompette sounded being not blown with any
mouth of man: that the entry of the tabernacle by a cloud set between was
kept from the sight of ye people: that his authority was so miraculously
revenged with the horrible destruction of Chore, Dathan and Abiron, Nu.
xvi.xxiiii. Nu. xx.x. Nu. xi.ix.
and all that wicked faction: that the rock stryken with a rod did by and by
power forth a river: that at his prayer it rayned Manna from heaven: did not
God herein commend him from heaven as an undoubted prophet? If any man object
against me, that I take these things as confessed, which are not out of
controversy, it is easy to answer this cauillacion. For seeing that Moses in
open assembly published all these things, what place was there to feign before
those witnesses that had themselves seen the things done? It is likely forsooth
that he would com among them, and rebuking the people of infidelity,
stubbornness, unthankfulness, and other sins, would have bosted yt his
doctrine was established in their own sight with such miracles, which in deed
they never saw.

Exodus vii xi
the father of lyeng has mynistred them an other cauillation, saying that they
were done by Magical arts and sorcerie. But what likely proof have they to
accuse him for a sorcerer, which so far abhorred from such superstition,
that he commands to stone him to death, Leuit. xx. Exodus xvi
that does but ask council of sorcerers and soothsaiers? Truly no such
deceiuer uses his iugglynge castes, but that he studieth to amase the minds
of the people to get himself a fame. But what does Moses? by this that he
cries out, that himself and his brother Aaron are nothing, but does only
execute those things that God has appointed, he does sufficiently wipe away
all blottes of thinkyng evil of him. Now if the things themselves be
considered, what enchantment could bring to pass that Manna daily raynynge
from heaven, should suffice to feed the people? and if any man kept in store
more tha^ his just measure, by the very rottyng thereof he should be taugh: yt
God did punish his want of belief? Beside that, with many great proves God
suffered his servant so to be tried, that now the wicked can nothing prevail
with pratyng against him. For how often did sometime the people prowdely and
impudently make insurrections, sometime diverse of them conspiryng among them
selves went about to overthrow the holy servant of God: how could he have
begyled their furour with illusions? And the end that followed plainly shows,
that by this mean his doctrine was stablished to continue to the end of all
ages.

Moreover where he assigns the chief government to the tribe Genesis xlix
specially if we wey in consideration the thing it self, how in coming to
pass it proved true? Imagine Moses to have been the first author of this
prophecy: yet from the time that he did first put it in writynge, there
passed four hundred years wherein there was no mention of the scepter in the
tribe of Judah. After Saul was consecrate king, it seemed that the kingdom
should rest in the tribe of Beniamyn. Sam. xi.xv. Sam. xvi
When David was anointed by Samuel, what reason appeared there why the course
of inheritance of the kingdom should be changed? who would have looked that
there should have come a king out of the base house of a herdman? And when there
were in the same house seven brethren, who would have said that that honor
should light upon the youngest? By what mean came he to hope to be a king? who
can say that this annointment was governed by any art, travail or policy of
man, and not rather that it was a fulfillyng of the heavenly prophecy?
Likewise those things that Moses before speaks, albeit darkely, concerning
the Gentiles to be adopted into the covenant of God, seeing they came to pass
almost two thousand years after, do they not make it plain that he spoke by the
inspiration of God. I ouerskippe his other tellynges aforehande of things,
which do so evidently sauoure of the revelation of God, that all men that
have their sound wit may plainly perceive that it is God that speaks.
Deuter xxxii.
To be short, that same one song of his, is a clear lookyng glass, wherein God
evidently appears.

But in the other prophets the same is yet also much more plainly seen. I
will choose out only a few examples, because to gather them all together were
to great a labor. When in the time of Esaie the kingdom of Judah was in
peace, yea when they thought that the Chaldees were to them some stay and
defense, then did Esaie prophecy of the destruction of the city and exile of
the people. But admit that, yet this was no token plain enough of the
instinct of God, to tell long before of such things as at that time seemed
false, and afterward proved true: Esa. xlv.i.
yet those prophecies that he utters concerning their delyueraunce, whense
shall we say that they proceeded but from God? He names Cyrus by whom the
Chaldees should be subdued, and the people restored to liberty. There passed
more than a hundred years from the time that Esaie so prophesied before that
Cyrus was borne: for Cyrus was borne in the hundredth year or theraboutes after
the death of Esaie. No man could then guess that there should be any such
Cyrus, that should have war with the Babylonians, that should bring
subject so myghtie a monarchy under his dominion, and make an end of the
exile of the people of Israel. Does not this bare telling without any
garnishement of words evidently show, that the things that Esaie speaks,
Ier^. xxv xi.
are the undoubted oracles of God, and not the conjectures of men? Again, when
Jeremy a little before that the people was carried away, did determine the
end of the captivity within threscore and ten years, and promised return
and liberty, must it not needs be that his tongue was governed by the
spirit of God? What shamelessness shall it be to deny, that the credit of
the prophets was stablished by such proves, Esa. xlii.
and that the same thing was fulfilled in deed, which they them selves do
report to make their sayenges to be believed? Behold, the former things are
come to pass, and new things do I declare: before they comme forth, I
tell you of them. I leave to speak how Hieremie and Ezechiell being so
far asonder, yet prophecyenge both at one time, they so agreed in all their
sayenges as if either one of them had endyted the words for the other to
write. What did Daniell? Doothe he not write continuynge prophecies of things
to come for the space of six hundred years after, in such sort as if he
had compyled an hystory of things already done and commonly known? These
things if godly men have well considered, they shall be sufficiently well
furnished, to appease the barkynges of the wicked. For the plain proof hereof
is to clear to be subject to any cauillations at all.

I know what some learned men do prate in corners, to show the any such
Moses or (...). But if a man should call in doubt whether ever there were
any Plato, or Aristotle, or Cicero, who would not say, that such madness
were woorthye to be corrected with strokes and strypes? The law of Moses
has been meruaylousely preserved rather by heavenly providence then by
diligence of men. And thowgh by the negligence of the Priests it lay buried
a little while: yet syns the time that: the godly king Josias found it, it
has still by continual succession from age to age ben used in the hands of
men. Neither did Josias bring it forth as an unknown or new thing, but
such a thing as had been ever commonly published, and whereof the remembrance
was at that time famous. The original book it self was appointed to be
sarredly kept in the temple, and a copy written out thereof, to remain with
the kepers of the kings Records. Only this had happened, that the priests
had ceased to publyshe the law according to the old accustomed manner, and
the people them selves had neglected their wonted readyng of it. Yea there in
manner passed no age wherein the establishement thereof was not confirmed and
renewed? They that had David in their hands, knew they not of Moses? But to
speak of the^ al at ones, it is most certain yt their writings came to
posterity none otherwise but from hand to hand (as I may term it) by
continual orderly course of years delivered from their fathers, which had
partly heard them speak, and partly while the remembrance was fresh of it,
did learn of them which herd them that they had so spoken.

i. Mac. i.
it is such a thing as nothing can be devised more fit to stablishe the
same. But first let us wipe away the color that they lay upon it, and then
let us turn upon them selves the engine that they raise up against us. ^i* Ma
i* iix.
Then Antiochus (say they) commanded all the books to be bourned, whense are
come these copies that we now have? On the other side I ask them, in what
shop they could so sone be made? It is evident, that after the cruelty
appeased they were immediately abroad again., and were without controversy
known to be the same of all godly men, that having ben brought up in the
doctrine of them did familiarly know them. Yea when all the wicked men being
as it were conspired together, did insolently triumph with reproaches upon the
Jews, yet never was there any yt durst lay to their charge false changyng of
their books. For what soever they think the Jews religion to be, yet still
they think Moses to be the author of it. What then do these praters else, but
bewraie their own more then doggysshe frowardenesse, while they falsely say
that these books are changed, and new put in their places, whose sacred
antiquity is approved by consent of all histories? But to spend no more
labor vainly in confutynge such foolish cauillations: let us rather hereby
consider how great a care God had for preservation of his word, (...) beyond
the hope of all men, he saved it from the outrage of the most cruel tyrant,
as out of a present fire: that he endewed the godly priests and other with so
great constancy, that they stick not to redeem this book even with loss
of their life if need were, and so to convey it over to posterity: that he
disappoynted the narowe search of so many governors and soldiers. Who can
but acknowledge the the notable and myraculous work of God, that these scared
monumentes which the wicked verily thought to have been utterly destroyed, by
and by came abroad again as fully restored, and that with a great deal more
honor. For by and by followed the translatynge of them into Greek, to publyshe
them throughout the world. And not in this only appeared the myraculous
woorkynge, that God preserved the tables of his covenant from the bloody
proclamations of Antiochus: but also that among so manyfold miserable
afflictions of the Jews, wherewith the whole nation was sometime worn to a
few and wasted, and last of all, brought in manner to utter destruction, yet
they remained still safe and ex^ant. The Hebrew tongue lay not only
vnestemed, but almost unknown. And surely had not been Gods pleasure to
have his religion provided for, it had peryshed altogether. For how much
the Jews that were since their return from exile, were swarued from the
natural use of their mother tongue, appears by the Prophets, that lived in
that age, which is therefore worthy to be noted, because by this comparyson
the antiquity of the law and the prophets is the more plainly perceived.
And by whom has God preserved for us the doctrine of salvation contained in
the law and the prophets, to the end that Christ might in his appointed
time be openly showed? even by the most cruelly bente enemies of Christ, the
Jews, whom Saint Augustine doothe therefore woorthylye call the keepers of
the Library of Christian Church, because they have mynystred unto us that
thing, to read whereof, theimselues have no use.

Now if we comme to the new Testamente, with how sound pyllers is the
truth thereof vpholden? The three Evangelists write but also from a cruel
and blouddy ennemy converted to a new man, with sudden and unhoped change
does show, that being compelled by heavenly authority he now maynteyneth
that doctrine, which before he had fought against. Now let these dogs
deny, that the holy ghost came down upon the Apostles, or let them
discredit the history: yet still the truth it self openly cries out, that
they were taught by the holy ghost, which being before time despised men
among the rascal people, suddenly began so gloriousely to entreat of
heavenly mysteries.

There be yet also furthermore many very good reasons, why the

not only ascertayned unto godly hearts, but also honorably defended against
the subtilties of cauillers, yet be they such as be not of them selves
sufficiently auaylable to bring steadfast credit unto it, until the heavenly
father disclosyng therein his majesty, doothe bring the reverence thereof out of
all controversy. Wherefore then only the scripture shall suffice to that
knowledge of God that brings salvation, when the certayntie thereof shall be
grounded upon the inward persuasion of the holy ghost. So those testimonies
of men that serve to confirm it shall not be vain, if as second healpes of
our weakness they follow that chief and highest testimony. But they do fondly
that will have it persuaded by proof to the unfaithful, that the scripture is
the word of God, which can not be known but by faith. For good reason
therefore does Augustine give warnyng, De vtill^ rate cre^ dendi.
that godliness and peace of mind ought to go before, to make a man
understand somewhat of so great matters.

The.ix. Chapter. That those fanaticall men, which forsakyng scripture, resort
unto revelation, do overthrow all the principles of godliness.
Now they that forsaking the Scripture do imagine I wot not what way to
attain unto God, are to be thought not so much to be holden with error, as
to be carried with rage. For there have arisen of late certain giddy brained
men, which most presumptuously pretending a school of the spirit, both
them selves do forsake all readyng, and also do scorn their simplicity
which still follow the dead and slaying letter, as they call it. But I would
feign know of these men, what spirit that is, by whose inspiration they are
carried up so hye, that they dare despise the doctrine of the scripture as
chyldishe and base. For if they answer that it is the spirit of Christ, then
such carelessness is woorthye to be laughed at. For I think they will
grant, that the Apostles of Christ and other faithful in the primitive
church were lightened with none other spirit. But none of them did learn of
that spirit to despise the word of God: but rather every one was moved more
to reverence it, as their writings do most plainly witness. Esa. iix.xxi.
And surely so was it foretold by the mouth of Esaie. For where he says, My
spirit that is upon thee, and my words which I have put in thy mouth,
shall not depart out of thy mouth, nor out of the mouth of thy seed for
ever: he does not bind the old people to the outward doctrine as though
they were set to learn to spelle, but rather he teaches, that this shall be
the true and perfect felicity of the new church under the reign of
Christ, that it shall no less be led by the voice of God, than by the
spirit of god. Whereby we gather, that these lewd men with wicked sacrilege
do sever asunder those things that the Prophet has joined with an
inviolable knotte. Moreover, Paul being rauysshed up into the third heaven,
yet ceased not to go forward in the doctrine of the law and the Prophets,
even so as he exhorts Timothe, a doctor of singular excellence to apply
readyng. i. tim. iiii.xiii.
And worthy is that commendation to be remembered, wherewith he sets forth
the scripture, saying, ii. tim. iii.xvi.
that it is profitable to teach, to admonysshe and to reprove, that the
servants of God may be made perfect. How dyuelyshe a madness is it to
feign, that the use of scripture is but transitorye, and lasts but for a
while, which in deed guydeth the children of God even to the last end?
Again, I would have them answer me this: whether they have tasted of an
other spirit than that, which the Lord promised to his disciples* Although
they be vexed with extreme madness, yet I think they are not carried with
such gyddinesse, that they dare so boast. But what manner of spirit did he
speak of in his promise? even that spirit which should not speak of it
self, but should mynister and inspire into their minds those things which
he the Lord himself had taught by his word. John. xvi.xiii.
It is not therefore the office of the spirit which is promised us, to feign
new and unheard of revelations, or to coin a new kind of doctrine, whereby
we should be led from the received doctrine of the gospel, but to seal in our
minds the self same doctrine that is commended unto us by the gospel.

^i. pete. i.x.
As also Peter praises their diligence that are hedefull to the doctrine of
the Prophets, which yet might seem to have given place after the risyng of the
light of the gospel. On the other side if any spirit leaving the wisdom of
the word of God does thrust unto us an other doctrine, that the same spirit
ought rightfully to be suspected of vanity and lyenge. For what? when Satan
transformeth himself into ^n angel of light, what credit shall the holy
ghost have among us, if it be not severally known by some assured mark? And
truly it has been plainly poynted out unto us by the word of the Lord,
but that these miserable men do wyllyngly couete to err to their own
destruction, while they seek a spirit rather from them selves than from him.
But (say they) it is dishonorable, that the spirit of God, whom all things
ought to obey, should be subject to the scripture. As if this were a dishonor
to the holy ghost to be every where egall and like to it self, to agree with
it self in all things, and no where to varye. In deed if it were to be tried
by the rule either of men, or of angels, or any others rule whatsoever, then it
might well be thought, that it were brought into obedience, or if ye list so to
term it, into bondage. But when it is compared with it self, when it is
considered in it self, who can therefore say, that there is any wrong done
unto it? But thus it is brought to trial. I grant, but such a trial
wherewith it was his own pleasure to have his majesty established. It ought
to content us so soon as he enters into us. But lest under his name the
spirit of Satan should creep in, he will have us to know him by that
image of him self, which he has printed in the scriptures. He is the
author of the scriptures: he can not be diverse and unlike him self. Therefore
it must needs be, that he contynually remain such as he has showed him
self therein. This is no dishonor unto him, unless perhappe we count it
honorable to swerve and go out of kind from himself.

Whereas they cauil yt we rest upon ye letter yt sleieth, herein they suffer ii.
Cor. iii.vi.
For it is plain enough that Paul there contendeth against the false Apostles,
which commending the law without Christ did call away the people from the
benefit of the new testament, wherein the Lord does covenant that he will grave
his law within the bowels of the faithful, and write it in their hearts. The
letter therefore is dead, and the law of the Lord kills the readers of it,
when it is severed from the grace of Christ, and, not touching ye heart, only
sounds in the ears. But if it be effectually printed in our hearts by the
holy ghost, if it present Christ unto us: then is it the word of life,
converting souls, ii. cor. iii* viii.
giving wisdom to little ones. etc. Also in the same place the Apostle
calls his preaching the ministry of the holy ghost: meaning that ye holy
ghost does so stick fast in his truth which he has expressed in the
scriptures, that then only he puts forth and displaieth his force, when the
Scripture has her due reverence and dignity. And it disagreeth not here with
which I before said, that the word it self is not much assured unto us,
unless it be confirmed by the witness of the holy ghost. For with a certain
mutual knot the Lord has coupled together the assurance of his word and of
his spirit, so that perfect reverence to the word does then settle in our
minds when the holy ghost shines upon us to make us therein behold the face
of God: and on the other side without al fear of being deceived we do embrace
the holy ghost when we reknowledge him in his own image, that is in his word.
Thus it is undoubtedly: God brought not abroad his word among men for a sodeine
show, meaning at the coming of his spirit by and by to take it away again,
but he after sent the same spirit with whose power he had distributed his
word, to make an end of his work with effectual confirmacion of his word. Lu.
xxiiii xxvii.
In this sort Christ opened the minds of the two disciples. not that they
should cast away ye Scriptures and wax wise of themselves, but that they should
understand the Scriptures. Likewise Paul when he exhorts the Thessalonia^s
not to extinguishe the spirit, i. the. v.xix
does not carry them up on hie to vain speculations without the word, but by
and by says further, that prophecies are not to be despised: whereby without
dout is meant, that the light of the spirit is choked up so sone as
prophecies come to be despised. What say these proudely swelling me^, ravished
with the spirit, to these things, which reckon this only to be an excellent
illumination, when carelessly forsaking and saying farewell to the word of God,
they both boldly and rashly do take hold of all that they have conceived in
their sleep. Truly a far other sobriety becomes the children of God:
which as they see that without the spirit of God they are void of al light
of truth, so do they know that the word is the instrumente wherewith the
Lord distributeth to the faithful the light of his spirit. For they know
none other spirit but that which dwelte and spoke in the Apostles, by whose
oracles they are continually called to the hearing of the word.

The.x. Chapter. That the Scripture, to correct all supersticion, does in
comparison set the true God against all the Gods of the gentiles, reckening him
for none of them.
BUt because we have showed, that the knowledge of God which in the frame of
the world and all the creatures is somewhat plainly set forth, is yet more
familiarly and plainly declared in the word: now is it good to consider,
whether the Lord show himself such in the Scripture as it pleased him first
to be represented in his works. But I shall at this time be contented only to
point unto it, whereby the godly minds being admonished may know what is
chefely to be searched in the Scriptures concerning God* and be directed to one
certain mark in their seking. I do not yet touch the peculiar couenaunte,
whereby God severed the stock of Abraham from other nations. For even then he
appeared the redemer in receiving to his children by free adopcion those that
before were ennemies. But we are yet about that knowledge that rests in the
creation of the world and ascends not to Christ the mediator. And although
by and by it shall be good to allege certain places out of the new testament,
forasmuch as even out of it both the power of God the creator and his
providence in preserving of the first nature is approved, yet I warn the
readers before, what is now my purpose to do, to the end that they pass not
the appointed bounds. So for this present, let it suffice us to learn, how
God the maker of heaven and earth does govern ye world by him created. Every
where is renomed both his fatherly bounty and inclined will to do good, and
there are also examples rehearsed of his severity, which show him to be a
righteous punisher of wicked doings, specially where his sufferaunce nothing
prevails with the obstinate.

Er. xixiiii vi.
The lord (says he) the Lord, a merciful God, and gracious, paciente and of
much mercy, and true, which kepest mercy, unto thousands which take away
iniquity and wicked doings, before whom the innocente shall not be innocent,
which rendrest the wickedness of the fathers to the children and childrens
children. Where let us mark, that his eternity and being of himself is
expressed in the twice repeting of that honorable name: and that then his
virtues are rehearsed, in which is described unto us, not what he is in respect
to himself, but what a one he is toward us: that this knowledge of him may
rather stand in a lively feling, than in an empty and supernatural
speculation. And here we do hear recited those virtues of his which we noted
to shine in the heaven and earth, that is to say, ^leme^cie, bounty, mercy,
justice, judgment and truth. For might and power are contained under this name
Elohim God. With the same names of addition do the Prophets set him forth
when they mean fully to paint out his holy name. But, because I would not
heap up to many examples together, at this present let one Psalm suffice us,
Psa. cxlv iii.
wherein the sum of al his virtues is so exactly reckened up, that nothing can
seem to be omitted. And yet is nothing there rehearsed, but that which we may
behold in his creatures. So plainly do we perceive God by informacion of
experye^ce, to be such as he declares himself in his word. In Jeremy where
he pronounces, what a one he would have us know him to be, he sets forth a
description not altogether so full, Iere. vi.xxiiii.
but yet coming all to one effect. He that gloryeth, says he, let him glory
in this that he knows me to be the Lord that do mercy, justice, and
judgment on the earth. Surely these three things are very necessary for us
to know: mercy, in which alone consists al our salvation: Judgment, which
is daily executed upon evil doers, and more grievous is prepared for them to
eternal destruction: Justice, whereby the faithful are preserved and most
tenderlye cherished. Which things when thou have conceived, the prophecy says
thou have sufficiently enough whereof thou may glory in God. And yet here are
not omitted either his truth or his power, or his holiness or goodness. For
how should the knowledge stand sure which is here required of his justice,
mercy and judgment, unless it did rest upon his immovable truth? And how
should we believe that he does govern the earth with justice and judgment,
but understanding his power? And whense comes his mercy but of his goodness?
If then all his ways be mercy, judgment and justice, in them must holiness
also needs be seen. And to none other end is directed that knowledge of God
that is set forth unto us in the Scriptures, than is that knowledge also which
appears emprinted in his creatures, that is to say: it first moves us to the
fear of God, and then to put confidence in him, to the end we may learn
first to honor him with perfect innocence of life and unfeigned obedience, and
then to hang altogether upon his goodness.

But here I mean to gather a sum of general doctrine. And although they
thought somewhat less absurdely than the rude people did of Iupeter, Mercury,
Uenus, Minerua and other: yet were they not free from the deceites of Satan,
and as we have already said else where, whatsoever ways of escape the
Philosophers have suttelly invented, they cannot purge themselves of rebellion
but that they all have corrupted the truth of god. Haba. ii.
For this reason, Habacuc after he had condemned all idols bids to seek God
in his own temple, that the faithful should not admyt him to be any other than
such as he had disclosed him self by his word.

The.xi. Chapter. That it is unlawful to attribute unto God a visible form,
and that generally they forsake God, so many as do erect to them selves any
images.
Ex. xx.iiii
nor any similitude, in which words he restrains our liberty, that we
attempt not to represent him with any visible image. And there he shortly
reckneth up all the forms wherewith of long time before, supersticion had begone
to turn his truth into lyinge. For we know that the Persians worshipped the
son, yea and so many stars as the folish nations saw in the sky, so many
gods they fained them. And scarce was there any living creature which was
not among the Egiptians a figure of God. Maximus Tiri us platonicus sermon. xx
^viii.
But the Grecians were thought to be wyser than the rest, because they
worshipped God in the shape of a man. But God compares not images one with
an other, as though one were more and an other less mete to be used, but
without any exception he rejects all images, pictures and other signs,
whereby ye superstitious

Deu. ^iii.x xii.xv.
This is easy to be gathered by the reasons which he joins to the
prohibition. First with moses. Remember that the Lord has spoken to thee in
the vale of Horeb. Thou heardest a voice, but thou saweste no body. Therefore
take heed to thy self, least paraduenture thou be deceived and make to thy
self any likeness. etc. We see how openly God sets his voice against all
counterfaite shapes, that we may know that they forsake God whosoever do covet
to have visible forms of him. Of the Prophets only Esaias shall be enough which
speaks often and much hereof, Esa. x^.xviii. et. xli.vii. and xlv.ix. et.
xlvi.v. Act. xvii.xxix.
to teach that the majesty of god is defiled with vncomlye and folishe
counterfaiting, when he being without body is likened to bodily matter: being
invisible, to a visible image: being a spirit, to a thing without life: being
incomprehensible, to a small lompe of timber, stone or gold. In like manner
reasons Paul: For as much as we are the generation of god, we ought not to
think that the godhead is like unto gold, or silver or stone graven by art
and the invention of man. Whereby it certainly appears, whatsoever images are
erected or pictures painted to express the shape of god, they simply displease
him as certain dishonors of his majesty. And what marvel is it if the holy
ghost do thonder out these oracles from heaven, since he compels the very
wretched and blind idolaters themselves to confess this in earth? It is
known how Seneca complained as it is to read in Augustine. Li. vi. de ^^ui.
dei. cap, x
They dedicate (says he) the holy immortal and inviolable gods in most vile
and base stuff, and put upon them the shapes of men and beasts, and some of
them with kind of man and woman mingled together, and with sondryshapen
bodies, and such they call gods which if they should receive breath and mete
them would be reckened monsters. Whereby again plainly appears, that it is a
fond cauillacion wherewith the defenders of images seek to escape, which say
that the Jews were forbidden images, because they were inclinable to
superstition. As though that thing perteyned to one nation only which god
brings forth of his eternal being and the contynuall order of nature. And
Paul spoke not to the Jews but to the Athenienses when he confuted their
error in counterfaytyng a shape of god.

God in deed, I grant, sometime in certain signs has given a Deu. iiii.xi.
yet did they as it were bridle and restrain the minds of me^ that they
should not attempt to pass any further. Wherefore not Moses himself, Exodus xxx
iii.xiii.
to whom God disclosed himself most familiarly in comparison of other,
obtained by prayer to see that face, but received this answer that man is not
able to sustain so great brightness. The holy ghost appeared under the
likeness of a dove, Mat. iii.xvi,
but since he immediately vanished away, who does not see that by that toke^ of
so short a continuance of a moment the faithful are put in mind that they
ought to believe him to be an invisible spirit, that holding them contented
with his virtue and grace, they should make him no outward shape. This, that
God appeared sometimes in form of a man, was a foreshewing of the reueling that
was to be made of him in Christ. And therefore it was not lawful for the Jews
to abuse this pretense to erect to themselves a representacion of the godhead
in the shape of man. Also the mercy seat wherein God showed forth the presence
of his power in the time of the law, was so made as it might teach that the
best beholding of the godhead is this, when men's minds are carried beyond them
selves with administracion of it. For the Cherubins with their wings stretched
abrod did cover it, Exo. xxv.xvii.
the veil did hide it, and the place it self being set fair inward did of
it self sufficiently keep it secret. Therefore it is very plain that they be
very mad that go about to defend the images of God and of Saints with ye
example of these Cherubins. For, I pray you, what meant these little images, but
to show that images are not mete to represent the mysteries of God? forasmuch
as they were made for this purpose, that hiding the mercy seat with their
wings they should not only keep back the eyes of man, but also all his
senses from the beholding of God, and so to correct his rash hardiness. For
this purpose makes it that the Prophets described the Seraphins showed them
in vision, Esa. vi.ii.
with their face uncovered: whereby they signify, that so great is the
brightness of the glory of God that the Angels themselves are kept from
direct beholding it, and the small sparks thereof that shine in the Angels are
withdrawn from our eyes. Although yet so many as rightly judge, do
acknowledge that the Cherubins of whom we now speak, perteined only to the
old manner of introduction as it were of children used in the law. So to draw
them now for an example to our age* is an absurdity. For that childish age, as
I may so term it, is passed, for the which such rudimentes were appointed. And
it is much shame, that the painime writers are better expounders of the law of
God than the Papists are. Iuuenale reprocheth the Jews as it were in scorn
that they honor the white clouds and the deity of the heaven. I grant he
speaks peruersly and wickedly: and yet he speaks more truly in saying that
they have among them no image of God, than ye papists do which prate yt they
had a visible image of god. And whereas that people with a certain hot
hastiness, brake out oftentim^s to seek them idols, even as waters out of a
great fresh spring boil out with violent force: herby rather let us learn
how great is the inclination of our nature to idolatry, least throwing upon
the Jews the blame of that fault which is common to al, we sleep a deadly
sleep under vain allurementes to sin.

psa. cxv.b. and xiii.v.xv
that they are no gods yt have a golden or silver image: and he takes it for
confessed truth, yt it is a folish fained inuencion whatsoever we conceive of
our own sense concerning God. He names rather gold and silver than clay or
stone, yt the beauty or the price should not serve to bring a reverence to
idols. But he concludes generally that nothing is less allowable, than gods
to be made of ded stuff. And in the mean while he stands as much upon this
point, that men are carried away with to mad a rashenesse, which themselves
bearyng about with them but a borrowed breath, ready to vanish away at every
moment, yet dare give the honor of God to idols. Man must needs confess that
himself is but a creature of a days continuance, and yet he will have a piece
of metal to be compted God to which himself gave the beginning to be a God.
For whense came the beginning of idols but from the will of me^? Uery justly
does the heathen poet give them this taunt: I was sometime a fig tree log,
Hora^ ser^. i. sat. viii
a block that served for naught:
The workman douted what of me were fittest to be wrought:
A form to sit upon, or else a Priap God to be.
At length he thought the better was a God to make of me.


Forsooth an earthly silly man that breaths out his ^wn life in manner every
moment, by his workmanship shall convey the name and honor of God to a dead
stock. But forasmuch as Epicure in scoffingly jesting has cared for no
religion, let us leave the tauntes of him and such as he is, and let the
rebuking of the Prophet prick us or rather thruste us through where he
says, Esa. xliiii.xv.
that they are to much beastly witted that with one self piece of wood do make
a fire and warm themselves, do heat the oven to bake bread, do roast or sethe
flesh, and do make them a God before which they fall down humbly to pray.
Therefore in an other place he does not only accuse them by the law, but also
does repreche them that they have not learned of the fundacio^s of the earth:
for that there is nothing less convenient than to bring God to the m^a^ure of
five foot which is above all measure and incomprehensyble. Esa. ^.xxi.
And yet this same monstrous thing which manifestly repugneth against the
order of nature, Es. ii.viii. et. xxxi.v^i et. lvii.x. Os^. xiiii.ii i. mic.
v.xiii. ps. ^xv.viii
custom shows to be natural to men. We must moreover hold in mind, that
superstitions are in Scripture commonly rebuked in this phrase of speech, that
they are ye works of men's hand which want the authority of God: that this
may be certain, that all these manners of worshipping that men do ^euise of
them selves are detestable. The Prophet in the Psalm does amplife the
madness of them that therefore are endued with understanding, that they should
know that al things are moved with the only power of God, and yet they pray
for help to things dead and senseless. But because the corruption of nature
carries as well al nations, as each man priuatlye to so great madness, at last
the holy ghost thondreth with terryble curse against them saying: let them that
make them become like to them and so many as trust in them. And it is to be
noted that a similitude is no less forbidden than a graven image, whereby the
fond sutteltie of the Greeks is confuted. For they think they are well
discharged if they grave not a God, while in payntinges they do more
licentiously outrage than any other nations. But the Lord forbyddeth an image
not only to be made by the grauer, but also to be counterfaited by any other
workma^, because such counterfaiting is evil and to the dishonor of his
majesty.

I know that it is a saying more than common among the people, ye images are
lay men's books. Gregory so said, but the spirit of god pronounces far
otherwise, in whose schole if Gregory had been taught, he would never so have
spoken. For whereas Hieremy painly says that the stock is a doctrine of
vanity: Hie. x.viii ha. ii.i viii
and whereas Habacu^ teaches yt the molten image is a teacher of lies: surely
hereof is a general doctrine to be gathered, that it is vain and lieng
whatsoever men learn by images concerning God. If any man take excepcion, and
say that ye Prophets reprove them only which abused images to wicked
superstition: I grant that to be true. But I add further that which is easy
for all men to se, that they condemn that thing wholly which ye Papists take
for an assured principle, that images are in s^ede of books. For they do in
comparison set images against God as things directly contrary and such as
never can agree together. This comparison I say is made in those places which
I have alleged. Since there is but one true god who^ the Jews did worship, it
is a^^sse and falsely done to forge visible shapes to represent God* and men are
miserably deceived, that thereby seek for knowledge of God. Finally if it were
not true that it is a deceitful and corrupt knowledge of God that is learned
by images, the Prophets would not so generally condemn it. At least thus much
I win of them when we show that it is vanity and lieng that men do attempt to
represent God with images, we do nothing but rehearse word for word that which
the Prophets have taught.

Council. ^^bert. ca. vi. ca. xxxvi.
whereof this is the.xxxvi. Chapter. It is ordained that no pictures be had in
the church, that the thing which is honored and worshipped be not painted on
the walls. But most notable is that which in another place Augustine allegeth
out of Uarro, Lib. iiii. de Ciuirate dei cap. ix. and. xxxi.
and confirms it with his own assent, that they which first brought in the
images of gods, both took away the fear of God, and brought in error. If
Uarro alone should say this, paraduenture it should be but of small authority.
Yet ought it of right to make us ashamed that a heathen man groping in
darkness came to this light, to se that bodily images are therefore unmeet for
the majesty of God, because they diminish the fear of God and increase error
in men. The proof it self witnesses that this was no less truly than wisely
spoken. But Augustine having borrowed it of Uarro, brings it forth as of his
own mind. And first he admonishes, that the first errors wherewith men were
entangled concerning God, began not of images, but as with new matter added
increased by them. Secondly he expounds that the fear of god is therefore
minished or rather taken away thereby, because his majesty may easily in the
folishnesse and in the fond and absurd forging of images grow to contempt.
Which second thing I would to god we did not by proof find to be so true.
Whosoever therefore will covet to be rightly taught, let him else where learn
than of images, what is mete to be known concerning God.

can show harlots more chastely and soberly attyred, than their temples show
images of these whom they would have called virgins. Even as uncomely array give
they to the martirs. Let them therefore fashion their idols at least to some
honest show of shamefastness, that they may somewhat more colorably lie in
saying, that they are the books of some holiness. But if it were so, yet then
would we answer, that this is not the right way to teach the faithful people
in holy places, whom God would have there instructed with far other doctrine
than with these trifles. God commanded in the churches a common doctrine to be
set forth to al men in preaching of his word and in his holy misteryes:
whereunto they show themselves to have a mind not very hedeful, that cast
their eyes about to behold images. But whom do the Papists call lay and
unlearned men whose unskillfulness may bear to be taught only by images*
forsooth even those who^ the Lord knowledgeth for his disciples, to whom he
vouche saves to reuele the heavenly wisdom, whom he wills to be instructed
with ye wholesome mysteries of his kingdom. I grant in deed as the matter
stands that there are at this day many which cannot be without such books. But
whe^se I pray you grows that dullness but that they are defrauded of ye
doctrine which only was mete to instruct them with? For it is for no other
cause that they which had the cure of churches gave over their office of
teaching to idols, but because themselves were dumme. Paul testifies that
Christ is in the true preaching of the gospel, Gal. iii.i.
painted out and in amaner crucified before our eyes. To what purpose then were
it to have commonly set up in churches so many crosses of wood, stone, silver
and gold, if this were well and faithfully beaten into the peoples heads, that
Christ dyed to bear our curse upon the cross, to cleanse our sins with the
Sacrifice of his body, and to wash them away with his blood, and finally to
reconcile us to God the father? Of which one thing they might learn more than
of a thousand crosses of wood or stone. For parhaps the covetous do set their
minds and eyes faster upon the golden and silver crosses than upon any words
of God.

As concerning the beginning of idols, that is by common consent thought to be
true which is written in the book of wisdom, that they were the first
authoures of them, Sap. xiiii xv.
which gave this honor to the ded, supersticiously to worship their memory.
And truly I grant that this evil custom was very ancient, and I deny not
that it was ye fierbrand wherewith the rage of men being kindled to idolatry did
more and more burn therein. Yet do I not grant that this was the first
orygynall of this mischief. For it appears by moses that images were used
before that this curiosity in dedicati^g the images of dead me^, whereof the
profane writers make otfen mention, were come in ure. When he tells that
Rachel had stolen her fathers idols, he speaks it as of a common fault. Ge.
xxxi, xix.
Whereby we may gather that the wit of man is, as I may so call it, a continual
worship of idols. After the general flood, there was as it were a new
regeneracion of the world, and yet there passed not many years but that men
according to their own lust fained them gods. And it is likely that, the holy
patriarch yet living, his childrens children were given to idolatry, so that to
his bitter grief he saw the earth defiled with idols, whose corruptions the Lord
had but late purged with so horribe judgment. Ios. xxiiii.ii.
For Their and Nath^r even before the birth of Abraham were worshippers of
false Gods, as Iosue testifies. Seeing the generation of Sem so sone swarued,
what shall we judge of the posterity of Cham, who were already cursed in their
father? The mind of men, as it is full of pride and rash boldness,
presumes to imagine God according to her own conceit: and as it is possessed
with dullness, yea overwhelmed with gross ignorance, so it conceiueth
vanity and a fend fa^tasie instead of God. And to these evils is added a new
mischief, that man attempteth to express in workemanshippe such a God as he
inwardly conceiueth. Thus the mind begets the idol, and the hand brings
it forth. The example of the Israelites proves that this was the beginning of
idolatry, that men do not believe that God is among them, unless he show
himself carnally present. We know not (said they) what is become of this
Moses: make us gods that may go before us. Ex. xxxi.i
They knew that there was a God whose power they had had experience of in so
many miracles: but they did not believe that he was nie unto them, unless they
did see with their eyes a corporal representacio^ of his face, to be a
witness unto them of the God that governed them. Their mind was therefore to
know by the image going before them, that God was the guide of their journey.
This thing daily experience teaches, that the flesh is always unquiet till it
has gotten some counterfaite devise like it self, wherein it may vainly delight
as in an image of god. In a manner in all ages since the creation of the world,
men to obey this blind desire have erected signs wherein they imagined God to
be present before their carnal eyes.

After such inuencion forged, by and by follows worshipping. For when men
thought that they beheld God in images, they did also worship him in them. At
length being both with minds and eyes altogether fastened thereon, they began
to wax more and more brutishe, and to wonder at them and have them in
admiracion, as if there were some nature of godhed in them. So appears that
men brake not out into the worshipping of images, till they were persuaded in
some gross opinion: not to think the images to be gods, but to imagine that
there did a certain force of Godhead abide in them. Therefore whether thou
represent to thy self either God or a creature in the image, when thou fallest
down to worship, thou art already bewitched which some superstition. For this
reason the Lord has forbidden not only images to be erected that are made to
express a likeness of him, but also any titles or stones to be dedicated,
that should stand to be worshipped. And for the same reason also in the
commandment of the law, this other point is added concerning worshipping.
For so sone as they have forged a visible form for God, they also tie the
power of God unto it. So beastly folish are men, that there they fasten God
where they counterfaite him, and therefore must they needs worship it. Neither
is there any difference whether they simply worship the idol, or God in the
idol. This is always idolatry when honors due to God are given to an idol,
under what color soever it be. And because God will not be worshipped
superstitiously, therefore what soever is given to idols is taken from him.
Let them take heed hereunto that seek for pretenses to defend the
abominable idolatry, wherewith, these many ages past, true religion has been
drowned and overthrown. But (say they) the images are not taken for gods.
Neither were the Jews themselves so unadvised to Forgett that it was God by
whole hand they had been brought out of Egipte before they made they
calfe. Yea when Aaron said, that those were the Gods by whom they were
delivered out of the land of Egipte, they boldly assented, showing a plain
toke^ of their meaning, that they would still keep that God that was their
deliverer, so that they might see him go before them in the calfe. Neither is
it to be believed that the heathen were so gross as to believe, that God was no
other thing but stocks and stones. For they changed their images at their
pleasure, but still they kept the same Gods in their mind: and there were
many images of one God, and yet they did not according to the multitude of
images feign them many Gods. Beside that they did daily consecrate new images,
yet did they not think that they made new gods. in ps. cxiii
Let the excuses be read which Augustine says were pretended by the
Idolaters of his age. When they were rebuked, the common forte answered, that
they did not worship that visible thing, but the deity that did in it
inuisibly dwell. And they that were of somewhat better religion, as he calls
it, did say that they did neither worship the image nor the spirit in it,
but by the corporal image they did behold the sign of that thing which they
ought to worship. Now then? All idolaters, whether they were of the Jews, or
of the gentiles, were none otherwise minded than as I have said: being not
contented with a spiritual understanding of God, they thought by the images he
should be more sure and nerer imprinted in them. After once that such
disordered counterfaiting of God well liked them, they never ended, till daily
more and more deluded with new deceites they imagined that God did show
forth his power in images. And nevertheless, both the Jews were persuaded
that under such images they did worship the one true Lord of heaven and
earth: and likewise the gentiles, their false gods, whom yet they feigned to
dwell in heaven.

Whosoever deny that it has thus ben done in time past, yea within in ps. cxi.
For it is true that Augustine says, that no man prays or worshippeth when
he so beholds an image but he is so affected in mind that he thinks
himself to be heard of it, or that it will do for him what he desires. Why is
there such difference between the images of one God. yt passing by one image
with little reverence or none done to it they honor an other solemnly? Why do
they werry themselves with vowed pilgremages to visit those images whereof they
have like at home? Why do they at this day in defense of them as it were for
their religion and country, fight to slaughter and destruction, in such sort
as they would better suffer to have the one only God than their idols to be
taken from them? And yet I do not reckon up the gross errors of the common
people, which are almost infinite, and do in manner possess the hearts of all
men. I do only show what themselves do confess when they mean most of al to
excuse themselves of idolatry. We do not call them (say they) our Gods. No
more did the Jews nor the gentiles call them theirs in time paste: and yet the
Prophets each where cesse not to cast in their teeth their fornicacion with
stocks and stones, for doing no more but such things as are daily done by them
that would be compted Christians, that is to say, that they carnally worshipped
God in stocks and stones.

Idolodulia which is service of images, and not Idololatria which is worship of
images. For so they term it when they teach that they may lawfully without
any wrong done to God give unto images and pictures that worship which they call
Doulia or service. And so they think themselves without blame if they be but
the servants and not also the worshippers of idols: as though it were not a
little lighter matter to worship tha^ to serve. And yet while they seek a hole
to hide the^ in the Greek word, they childishly disagre with themselves. For
seeing Latreuein in Greek signifies nothing but to worship, their saying
comes but to this effect, as if they would say yt they worship in deed their
images, but without any worshippinge. And there is no cause why they should say
yt I seek to catch the^ in words: but they themselves while they seek to cast a
mist before the eyes of ye simple, do bewray their own ignorance. And yet
though they be never so eloquent, they shall not atteine by their eloquence to
prove unto us that one self same thing is two sundry things. Let the^ (say I)
show me a difference in yt thing it self whereby they may be thought to differ
from the old idolaters. For as an adulterer or a murderer cannot escape
giltinesse of his fault, by giving his sin a new devised name: so is it a
very absurdity to think that these men be quitte by new devise of a name,
if in ye matter it self they nothing differ from those idolaters whom they
themselves are compelled to condemn. But so far are they from proving that
their case differs from the case of those idolaters, yt rather the fountain
of all this whole mischief is an unorderly counterfaiting, wherein they have
striued with them while both with their own wit they devise, and with their
own hands they frame them signifieng forms to express them a fashion of God.

fashions of bodies, without expressing of any things done by them. The first
of these have some use in teaching or admonishing a man: but what profit the
second can bring save only delectacion, I see not. And yet it is evident, that
even such were almost all the images that heretofore have stand up in churches.
Whereby we may judge that they were there set up not by discrete judgment or
choice, but by folishe and unadvised desire. I speak not how much amiss and
uncomely they were for the most part fashione, nor how licentiously paynters
and caruers have in this point showed their wantonness, which thing I have
already touched. Only I speak to this end, that though there were no fault in
them, yet do they nothing avail to teach.

But leaving also that difference, let us by the way consider, whether Epi.
xlix.
than ^y ignorance or negligence omytte it. Which thing Augustine does also
in express words testify. When they be set in such places (says he)
honorably on hye, to be seen of them that pray and do Sacrifice, although they
want both sense and life, yet with the very likeness that they have of liuelye
members and senses, they so move the weak minds, that they seem to live and
breath. in ps. cxiii
etc. And in an other place. For that shape of members does work and in
manner enforce thus much, that the mind living within a body does think
that body to have sense, which he sees like unto his own. And a litel after,
Images do more avail to bow down an unhappy soul, but this that they have
mouth, eyes, ears, and fete, than to amend it by this that they neither speak
nor see nor hear nor go. This truly seems to be the cause why John willed
us to beware not only of worshipping of images, 1. John. v.xxi.
but also of images themselves. And we have found it to much in experience,
that through the horrible madness which has heretofore possessed the
world, to the destruccyon in manner of all godliness, so sone as images be
set up in churches, there is as it were a sign set up of idolatry, because
the folly of men cannot refrain it self, but it must forthwith run on to
supersticious worshippinges. But if there were not so much danger hanging
thereby: yet when I consider for what use temples are ordained, me thinks it
is very ill beseming the holiness thereof to receive any other images than
these lively and natural images. which the LORD by his word has
consecrate, I mean Baptism and the Lords supper, and other ceremonies
wherewyth our eyes ought both more earnestly to be occupied and more lively to
be moved, than that they should need any other images framed by ye wit of men.
Lo this is the incomparable commodity of images, which can by no value be
recompensed, if we believe the papists.



shall worship thy countenance. If a man would in scorn put the
personage of a riding fool upon the patrones of Images, could he gather
together greater and grosser follies? But to put all our of doubt,
Theodosius Bishop of Mira, does so earnestlye confyrme by the dreams of his
Archedeacon, that images ought to be worshipped, as if he had an oracle from
heaven to show for it. Now let the favorers of images gooe and press us
with the decree of that Sinode. As though those reverend fathers do not
altogether discredit them selves, in either so childishly handelyng, or so
ungodly and fowlie tearing the Scriptures.

Now come I to those monstrous impieties, which it is marvel Latria and
Dulia, wherewith they are wont to seek to blind the eyes both of God and me^?
For the counsel without any excepcion does give even as much unto images as
unto the lyuinge God himself.

The.xii. Chapter. That God is severally discerned from idols, that he may be
only and wholly worshipped.
WE said in the beginning that the knowledge of God stands not in bare
speculacion, but draws with it the worshipping of him, and by the way we
touched how he is rightly worshipped, which point shall be in other places more
largely to be set forth. Now I do but shortly repete, that so often as the
Scripture affirms that there is but one God, it strives not for the bare
name of God, but withal commands this, that whatsoever belongs to the
godhead be not given to any other. Whereby also appears what pure religion
does differ from supersticion. Eusebeia, in Greek signifies as much as true
worship, because always even the blind themselves groping in darkness have
found that this rule ought to be holden, that God be not unorderly
worshipped. ^i. de na^u. deorum,
The name of religion although Cicero truly and well deriueth from relegere,
to record, or gather up together: yet is the reason that he assigns enforced
and far fet, that good worshippers did often record and diligently wey what
was the truth. I rather think that that name is set as a contrary to wandering
liberte, because the greater part of the world unadvisedly takes hold of that
which they first mete withal, and flies about hither and thither: but true
godliness, to the end it may stand in steadfast state, Religit, that is to
say does gather up it self together within her bonds. Like as I think
supersticion to have her name hereof, that not being contented with the manner
and order prescribed she heapeth up together a supersluous number of vain
things. But to leave the words it has always ben agreed by consent of all
ages, that religion is with false errors corrupted and perverted. Whereupon we
gather that it is a very fond color which the supersticious do pretend, when
with indiscreet zele we give our selves leave to do al things. And although
this confession sound in the mouths of al me^: yet herein a shameful
ignorance bewraieth it self, that neither they cleave to the one God, nor
have any regard of order in ye worshipping of him, as we have already showed.
But god, to claim his own right unto himself, cries out that he is ielous,
and that he will be a severe revenger if he be mingled with any fained god. And
then he sets forth the lawful manner of worshipping, to hold mankind in
obedience. He contains both these points in his law, when first he binds
the faithful unto himself that he only may be their lawemaker: and then he
prescribes a rule whereby to be worshipped after his own mind. Of the law,
because the uses and ends thereof are many, I will entreat in place fit for it.
Now I only touch this point, that thereby me^ are bridled that they run not out
of the way to wrong worshippynges. Now as I first said, we must hold in mind,
that if all that ever properly belongs to godhead do not rest in God alone, he
is spoiled of his honor, and his worship broken. And heremust we somewhat he
defully mark with what suttelties superstition deceives. For it doothe not so
reuolte unto strange gods that it seems to forsake the highest God, or to bring
him down into the number of other Gods: but while she grants unto him the
highest place, she sets round about him a number of lesser gods, among whom
she divides his offices? And so (albeit clokedly and craftily) the glory of
the godhead is cut in parts, that it remains not whole with him. So in ye
old time, as well they of the Jews as of ye Gentiles did set beneth the father
and judge of gods a great rout of gods which should every one according to his
degree have in common with the highest God the government of the heaven and
earth. So the saints that in a few ages past departed this life, are advanced
to the fellowship of God, to be worshipped, called upon, and honored instead
of him. And yet with such abomination we think that the majesty of God is
not so much as divided, when in deed it is a great part suppressed and
extinguished, saving that we retain s^yll a poor opinion of his supreme
power: and in the mean time deceived with entangled suttelties we are sonderly
carried to diverse gods.

For this purpose also was invented the distinction of latria and Dulia,
latria. But since the question stands upon the matter, and not the word, who
would permit them so carelessly to mock in a matter of all matters most
weyghtie? But to let that also pass, yet win they nothing by this
distinction, but to prove, that they give worship to one God and service to an
other. For Latria in greek signifies as much as in latin Cultus, and English
worship. Dulia, proprely signifies service. And yet sometime in scripture this
difference is confounded together without diversity. But grant it be a
perpetual difference, then must we search what both the words may mean.
Dulia is service, Latria, is worship. Now no man douteth that to serve, is more
then to whorshippe. For many times a man could hardely bear to serve him
whom he would not stick to worship. So is it an unequal dealyng to give to
the saints that which is the greatter, and to leave to God that which is
the lesser. But many of the ancient authors have used this distinction. What
makes that matter, if all men do perceive it to be not only unfit, but
all together very fond?

Now leauyng nice suttleties, let us wey the matter it self. When Gal.
iiii.viii.
he says that they gave Duliam service to those that of nature were no gods.
Although he name not Latriam or worship, is therefore their superstitton
excusable? He does nevertheless condemn their perverse superstition, which
he terms by the name of Dulia service, than if he had expressed the name of
Latria, worship. And when Christ repulseth the assault of Satan with his
buckler, that it is written, thou shall woorshyp the Lord thy God, Mat.
iiii.x. Reave. xix x.
the name of Latria was not brought in question. Satan required but an
adoration. Likewise when the angel ^eproued John, because he fell down on his
knees before him, we ought not to think that John was so mad that he would
give unto the angel the honor that was due only to God. But because it was
not possible, but that all worship that is joined with religion sauoureth
somewhat as perteinyng to God, therefore he could not adore the angel, but
that he must take away sommewhat from the glory of God. We read in deed
often, that men have been honored: but that was a civil honor, as I may so
call it. But religion has an other rule, which so soon as it is joined with
worship, brings with it a profane abuse of the honor of God. The same
may we see in Cornelius. He had not so sclenderly profyted in godliness,
Act. x.xxv
but that he had learned to give the sovereign worship to God alone.
Therefore when he fell down before Peter, he did it not of this meaning to
worship him in the steed of God. And yet did Peter earnestly forbid him to
do that which he did. And why so? but because men do never so narrowly put
difference between the worship of God, and of his creatures: by that without
diversity they give away that unto the creature, which belongs unto God.
Wherefore if we have one God, we must remember that nothing be it never so
little must be taken away from his glory, but that he keep still that
which is proprely his. Therefore zachary when he preaches of the repayryng of
the Church, in plain words expresses: zac. xxiiii.ix.
That there shall not only be one God, but also yt there shall be one name of ye
god, to the end ye he have nothing in common with Idols. What manner of worship
God requires, we shall see in an other place when it falls in order. For it
pleased him in his law to prescribe unto men what is lawful and right, and so
to bynd the^ to a certain rule, that every man should not give himself leave
to devise what form of worship he list. But because it is not expedient to
load the readers with heapyng many matters together, I will not touch that
point yet. Only let it sus^ise for this time to keep in mind, that every
cariyng away of the dutyefull behauiours of godliness to any other than to God
alone, is not without robbery of God. And first superstition devised to give
divine honors to the Son, or other stars or idols: then followed ambitious
pride, which garnyshyng mortal men with spoils taken from God, presumed to
profane all that ever was holy. And although this principle remained among
them, to honor the sovereign deity, yet grew it in use indifferently to
offer sacrifices to spirits, lesser gods, or dead me^ of honor. So slippery is
the way to slide into this fault, to make common to a number that which God
severely chalengeth to him self alone.

The.xiii. Chapter. That there is taught in the scriptures one offense of God
from the very creation, which essence contains in it three persons:
THat which is taught in the scriptures concerning the incomprehensible

But he also sets out himself by an other special mark, whereby Hypostasis
of his father, Heb. i.iii
he undoubtedly means, that the Father has some being, wherein he differs
from the son. For to take it for Essence (as some expositours have done, as
if Christ like a piece of wax printed with a seal did represent the
substance of the Father) were not only hard but also an absurdity. For
sith the Essence of God is single or one and vndiuisible, he that in him self
contains it all and not by pecemeale, or by deriuation, but in whole
perfection, should very vnproprely yea fondly be called the engraued form of
him. But because ye father although he be in his own propretie distinct, has
expressed himself wholly in his son, it is for good cause said, that he
has given his Hypostasis, to be seen in him. Wherewith aptely agrees that
which by and by follows, that he is the brightness of his glory. Surely by
the Apostles words we gather* that there is a certain propre hypostasis in the
father, that shines in the son: whereby also again is easily perceived the
Hypostasis of the son that distinguishes him from the Father. Like order is
in the holy ghost. for we shall by and by prove him to be God, and yet he must
needs be other than the father. Yet this distinction is not of the essence,
which it is unlawful to make manyfolde. Therefore if the Apostles testimony
be credited, it follows that there be in God three hypostases. This term seeing
the Latins have expressed with the name of Person, it were to much pride and
waywardness to brawle about so clear a matter. But if we list word for word
to translate, we may call it Subsistence. Many in the same sense have called it
substance. And the name of Person has not ben in use among the Latins only:
but also the Grecians, perhaps to declare a consent, have taught that there
are three prosopa, that is to say Persons in God. But they, whether they be
Greeks or Latins that differ one from an other in the word, do very well
agree in the sum of the matter.

Now howesoeuer the heretics bark at the name of person, or learn out of
the scriptures a rule both to think and speak, whereby to examine all the
thoughts of our mind and words of our mouth. But what withstandeth us, but
that such as in scripture are to our capacity doutfull and entangled, we may
in plainer words express them, being yet such words as do reverently
and faithfully serve the truth of the scripture, and be used sparely,
modestly, and not without occasion. Of which sort there are examples enowe.
And where as it shall by proof appear that the Church of great necessity was
enforced to use the names of Trinity, and Persons, if any shall then find
fault with the newenesse of words, shall he not be justly thought to be
grieved at the light of the truth, as he that blames only this that the
truth is made so plain and clear to discern?

Such newness of words, if it be so to be called, comes then Omoousion,
consubstanciall. But if in the beginning they had sincerely and with plain
meaning confessed Christ to be God, they would not now have denied him to be
consubstantiall with the father. Who dare now blame these good men as brawlers
and contentious, because for one little words sake, they were so whote in
disputation, and troubled the quiet of the church? But that little word
showed the difference between the true beleuyng Christians, and the Arrians
that were robbers of God. Afterward rose up Sabellius which accounted in a
manner for nothing the names of the Father, the Son, and the Holy ghost,
saying in disputation that they were not made to show any manner of
distinction, but only were several additions of God, of which sort there
are many. If he came to disputation, he confessed, that he believed the father
God, the son God, the Holy ghost God. But afterward he would redely slip
away with saying that he had in no otherwise spoken than as if he had named
God, a strong God, just God, and wise God: and so he song another song, that
the Father is the Son, and the Holy ghost is the father, without any order,
without any distinction. The good doctors which then had care of godliness,
to subdewe his wickedness, cried out on the other side that there ought to be
acknowleged in one God three propreties. And to the end to fense themselves
against the crooked writhen suttleties with plain and simple truth, they
affirmed, that there did truly subsist in one God, or (which came all to one
effect) that there did subsist in the unity of God a Trinity of persons.

Omoousion, they called it Consubstancial, declaring the substance of the
Father and the Son to be one, so vsyng the word substance for essence.
Whereupon Hierom to Damasus says, it is sacrilege to say, that there are three
substances in God: and yet above a hundred times you shall find in Hilarie,
that there are three substances in God. In the word Hypostasis, how is
Hierome accombred? For he suspecteth that there lurketh poison in namyng three
Hypostases in God. And if a man do use this word in a godly sense, yet he
plainly says that is an impropre speech, if he spoke unfeignedly, and did not
rather wittyngly and willyngly seek to charge the bishops of the Eastlandes*
whom he sought to charge with an unjust sclaunder. Sure this one thing he
speaks not very truly, that in all profane schools. ousia, De trini. li.
v. cap. viii. and. ix.
essence is nothing else but hypostasis, which is proved false by the common
and accustomed use. Augustine is more modeste and gentle, which although he
say, that the word hypostasis in that sense is strange to latin ears, yet so
far is it of that he takes from the Greeks their usual manner of speaking,
that he also gently bears with the Latins that had followed the greek phrase.
And that which Socrates writes in the syxte book of the Tripartite history,
tends to this end, as though he meant that it had by unskillful men been
wrongfullye applied unto this matter. De trini. lib. ii.
Yea and the same Hilarie himself layethe it for a great fault to the
heretics charge, that by their waywardness he is compelled, to put those
things in peril of the speech of men, which ought to have been kept in
the relygiousnesse of minds, plainly confessing that this is to do things
unlawful, to speak that ought not to be spoken, to attempt things not
licenced. A little after, he excuses himself with many words, for that he was so
bold to utter new names. For after he had used the natural names Father,
Son, and Holy ghost, he adds that what soever is sought further, is beyond
the compass of speech, beyond the reach of sense, and beyond the capacity
of understanding. And in an other place he says, ye happy ar ye bishops of
Gallia, which neither had nor received nor knew any other confession, but that
old and simple one, which from the time of the Apostles was received in all
churches. And much like is the excuse of Augustine, that this word was
wroung out of necessity by reason of the imperfection of men's language in so
great a matter: not to express that which is, but that it should not be
unspoken how the Father, the Son, and the Holy ghost are three. This
modesty of the holy men ought to warn us, that we do not forthwith so
severely like Censors, note them with infamy that refuse to subscribe and
swear to such words as we propounde them: so that they do it not of pride,
of frowardness, or of malicious craft. But let them again consider, by how
great necessity we are driven to speak so, that by littell and little they
may be enured with that profitable manner of speech. Let them also learn to
beware, least sith we must mete on the one side with the Arrians, on the other
side with Sabellians, while they be offended that we cut of occasion from
them both to cavil, they bring themselves in suspicion, that they be ye
disciples either of Arrius or of Sabellius. Arrius says that Christ is God,
but he muttereth that he was create, and had a beginning. He says Christ is
one with the father, but secretly he whispereth in the ears of his disciples,
that he was made one as the other faithful be, although by singular
prerogative. Say ones that Christ is Consubstanciall with his father, then
pluck you of his visour from the dissembler, and yet you add nothing to the
scripture, Sabellius says, that the several names, Father, Son, and Holy ghost
signify nothing in God severally distinct: say that they are three: and he
will cry out that you name three gods. Say that there is in one essence a
Trinity of persons, then shall you in one word both say, what the scripture
speaks, and stop their vain babblyng. Now if any be holden with so curious
superstition, that they can not abide these names: yet is there no man, though
he would never so fayn, that can deny but that when we hear of one, we must
understand an unity of substance: when we here of three in one essence, that
it is meant of the persons in the trinity. Which thing being without fraud
confessed, we stay no longer upon words. But I have long ago found, and that
often, that who soever do obstinately quarrel about words, do keep within
them a secret poison: so that it is better willyngly to provoke them, than
for their pleasure to speak darkly.

But leauyng disputation of words I will now begin to speak John. i. ^
that God himself was the same word, he calls us back again to the one
single essence. But because it could not be with God, but that it must rest in
the father: hereof arises that subsistence, which though it be joined to the
essence with an inseperable knot, yet has it a special mark, whereby it does
differ from it. So of the three subsistences* I say that each having relation
to other is in propretie distinguished. Relation is here expressly mentioned.
For when there is simple and indefinite mention made of God, this name
belongs no less to the Son and the Holy ghost, than to the Father. But
when the Father is compared with the Son, the several propretie of either
does discern him from the other. Thirdely, what soever is propre unto every of
them is uncommunicable. For that which is given to the Father for a mark of
difference, Lib. contra Traccam
can not agree with, nor be given to the Son. And I mislyke not the definition
of Tertullian, so that it be rightly taken, That there is in God a certain
disposition or distribution, which yet changes nothing of the unity of the
essence.

But before that I go any further, it is good that I prove the Godhead i. Pet.
^.i^.
than did the Apostles and all they that after them did distribute the heavenly
doctrine. But because Christ was not yet openly showed, we must understand
that the Word was before all worlds begotten of the Father. And if the
Spirit was of the Word, whose instruments were the prophets, we do
undoubtedly gather that he was true god. And this does Moses teach plainly
enough in the creation of the world, when he sets the word as the mean.
For why does he expressly tell, that God in creatyng of all his works said,
Be this done, or that done: but that the unsearchable glory of god may
shiningly appear in his images? The suttlenosed and babblyng men do easily mock
out this, with saying that the name Word, is there taken for his bidding or
commandment. But better expositors are the Apostles, Heb. i.ii.
which teach that the worlds were made by the same, and that he susteineth
them all with his mighty Word. For here we see yt the Word is taken for the
bidding or commandment of the Son, which is himself the eternal and
essential Word to the Father. And to the wise and sobre it is not dark that
Solomon says, Ecclesi. xxiiii.xiiii
where he brings in Wisdom begotten of God before all worlds, and bearyng
rule in the creation of things, and in all the works of God. For to say that
it was a certain commandment of God, seruyng but for a time, were very
foolish and vain: where as in deed it was Gods pleasure at that time to
show forth his steadfast and eternal purpose, yea and some thing more
secret. To which entente also makes that saying of Christ: My Father and I
do work even to this day. John. v.xvii.
For in saying, That from the beginning of the world he was contynually
woorkynge with his Father, he doothe more openly declare that which Moses
had more shortly touched. We gather then that the meaning of Gods
speaking was this, that the Word had his office in the doing of things,
and so they both had a common woorkynge together. But most plainly of all
doothe John speak, when he shewethe that the same Word, which from the
beginning was God with God, was together God the Father the cause of all
things. For he both gives to the Word a perfect and abydyng essence, Ioh.
i.iii.
and also assygneth unto it some thing peculiar to it self, and plainlye
shows how God in speaking was the creator of the world. Therefore as all
reuelacions proceeding from God do well bear the name of the word of God, so
ought we yet to set in the hyeste place that substancyall Word, the well
spryng of all Oracles, which being subject to no alteracion, abides always
one and the self same with God, and is God himself.

Here many dogs do bark against us, which when they Ge. i.iii,
let light be made, the power of the word appeared and showed it self: the
same Word was long before. But if a man ask how long before, he shall find
no beginning. For he appointed no certain space of time when him self said:
Ioh, xvii.v,
Father glorify me with the glory which I had with thee before the world was.
And this thing John also left not untouched, because he first shows that in
the beginning the word was with God, before that he comes to the creation of
the world. We say therefore again, that the Word which was conceived of
God before any beginning of time, was contynuallye remayninge with him. Whereby
both his eternity, true essence, and Godhead is proved.

Although I do not yet touch the person of the Mediator, but ps, xlv, vi,
When it is said in the.xlv. Psalm, thy throne O God is for ever and ever:
the Jews do cavil and say, that the name Elohim is also applied to the
Angels and sovereign powers. But in all the Scripture there is not a like
place, that raises an eternal throne to any creature. For he is here not
simplye called God, but also the eternal Lord. Again, this tittle is given
to none but with an addicion, E^o. vii.i
as it is said: that Moses shall be for a God to Pharao. Some read it in the
Genitive case which is very foolish. I grant in deed that oftentimes a
thing is called Divine or of God, that is notable by any singular excellence:
but here by the tenoure of the text it appears, that such a meaning were
hard and forced, and will not agree. But if their scubbornesse will not so
yield: In Esaie is very plainly brought in for all one both Christ and God,
and he that is adorned with the sovereign power, which is properly belonging
to God alone. This (says he) is the name whereby they shall call him, Esa.
i^.vi
the strong God, the Father of the world to come etc. Here the Jews barcke
again, and turn the text thus: this is the name whereby the strong God the
father of the world to come shall call him: so that they leave this only to
the Son to be called the Prince of peace. But to what purpose should so
many names of addicion in this place be heaped upon God the Father, seeing it
is the purpose of the Prophet to adorn Christ with such special notes as
may build our Faith upon him? Wherefore it is out of doubt that he is here
in like sort called the strong God, as he is a little before called
Immanuell. Ier. xxiii.^ii.
But nothing can be found plainer than that place of Hieremie where he says,
that this shall be the name whereby the sede of David shall be called Jehovah
our righteousness. For where the Jews themselves do teach, that all other
names of God are but adjective names of addicion, and that this only name
Jehovah which they call unspeakable is a substantive name to express his
essence: we gather that the Son is the only and eternal God, Esa. xlii.viii.
which says in an other place that he will not give his glory to an other. But
here also they seek to escape away because that Moses gave that name to the
Altar that he bilded, and Ezechiel gave it to the new city Jerusalem. But
who does not see that the Altar was builded for a monumente that God was the
auauncement of Moses. And that Jerusalem is not adorned with the name of God,
but only to testify the presence of God? For thus says the Prophet. The
name of the city from that day shall be Jehovah there. Ez. xlviii xxxv. Ero.
xvii xv. ^^r. xxxvi xvi.
And Moses says thus. He bilded an altar and called the name of it, Jehovah
my exaltacion. But more business arises by an other place of Hieremie, where
the same tittle is applied to Jerusalem in these words: this is the name
whereby they shall call her Jehovah our righteousness. But this testimonye is
so far from making against the truth which we defend, that it rather
confirms it. For whereas he had before testified that Christ is the true
Jehovah from whom flows righteousness, now he pronounces that the church
shall so verily feel the same, that she may gloriouslye use the very name it
self. And so in the first place is set the fountain and cause of
righteousness, in the other the effect.

what cauillations they can mock it out. It is said that the Angel
appeared to the holy fathers: and the same Angel chalengeth to himself the
name of the eternal God. Iu. vi.vii
If any take excepcion and say, that this is spoken in respect of the Person
that he represents: this knotte is not thus losed. Iu. xiii.xvi.
For being a servant he would not suffer Sacrifice to be offered to him and
take from God his due honor. But the Angel refusing to eat bread,
commands Sacrifice to be offered to Jehovah. And then he proves that
himself in deed was the same Jehovah, and therefore Manoah and his wife by
this token did gather, that they had seen not an only Angel but God. And thence
came it that he said: we shall dye because we have seen God. And when his wife
answers, if Jehovah would have slayen us, he would not have received
Sacrifice at our hands: in this she does confess that he was God which
before was called the Angel. Beside this, the answer of the Angel himself
takes away all doubt of it, saying: why do thou ask me of my name, which
is marvelous? So much the more detestable was the wickedness of Seruetto,
when he affirmed that God never appeared to Abraham and the other fathers, but
that an Angel was worshipped in place of him. But truly and wisely have the
true teaching doctors of the Church expounded, that the same principal Angel
was the word of God, which then as aforehande began to execute the office of
Mediatoure. For though he was not yet clothed with flesh, yet he came down as
a mean between God and men, to come more familiarly to the faithful.
Therefore his nigh communicating himself made him to be called an Angel: yet
still in the mean time he retained that which was his own, to be ye God of
unspeakable glory. Ose. xii.v
The Same thing means Oseas, which after he had recited the wraftlyng of Jacob
with the Angel, says: Jehovah the God of hosts, Jehovah, worthy of memory
is his name. Here again Seruetto carpeth, yt God did bear the person of an
Angel. As though the Prophet did not confirm that which Moses had said:
why do thou ask me of my name? And the confession of the holy Patriarche
does sufficiently declare that he was not a created Angel, but one in whom
the full godhead was residente, Ge. xxxii.xxix. i. Cor. x.iiii. zach. ii.iii
when he said: I have seen God face to face. And for this cause Paul says,
that Christ was guide of the people in the wilderness. For though the time
was not yet come of his abacemente: yet that eternal word showed a figure of
that office to which he was appointed. Now if the second Chapter of zachary
be weyed without contencion, the Angel that sent an other Angel was by and
by pronounced to be the God of hosts, and to him is sovereign power ascribed.
I omit innumerable testimonies on the which our Faith safelye rests,
although they do not much move the Jews. For when it is said in Esaie.
Behold this is our God, Es xxv.ix
this is Jehovah, we shall wait upon him, and he shall save us, they that have
eyes may see, that herein is meant God which ryseth up for the salvation of his
people. And these vehement demonstracions twice repeted suffer it to be drawn
no otherwhere but to Christ. And yet plainer and fuller is the place of
Malachie where he promyseth that he shall come the Lord that was the desired,
Mal. iii.i.
to his own temple. But to none but to the only sovereign God was the temple
dedicate, which temple yet the Prophet does claim for Christ. Where upon
follows that Christ is the same God that was ever honored among the Jews.

Esa, viii, xiiii, Rom, ix, xxiii. To. xiiii.x. Esa. iv. xxiii.
Paul affirms that the same is fulfilled in Christ. Therefore he declares
him to be the Lord of hosts. Likewise in an other place. We must al (says
he) ones be brought to appear before the judgment throne of Christ. For it
is written, to me shall all knees bow, and to me shall al tongues swear. Seeing
God in Esai speaks this thing of himself, and Christ in deed performs it
in himself, it follows that he is the self same God whoes glory may not be
withdrawn to an other. And that thing which writing to the Ephesians he
allegeth out of the Psalms, is evident that it can be applied to none but to
God alone. Ephe. iiii v^ii. Psa. lvii.xix.
Ascending on hie he has carried captivity captive, meaning that such
ascending was in shadow showed, when God in notable victory against foreign
nations did show forth his power, but he declares that in Christ it was more
fully performed. So Ihon testifies that it was the glory of the Son that was
reveled to Esaie by a vision, John. i.xiiii. Esa. vi.i.
whereas in deed the Prophet himself writes that the majesty of God appeared
unto him. And it is euidente that those things which the Apostle writing to
the Hebrews applies to the Son, are the plain titles of God. as: Thou Lord
in the beginning did lay the foundacions of heaven and earth. Heb. i.x.
and.vi.
etc. Again worship him all ye his Angels. And yet he abuses not those
tittles when he draws them to Christ. For all those things that are spoken of
in those Psalms, he himself alone has fulfilled. For it was he that rose up
and had mercy on Sio^. It was he that claimed to himself the kingdom of all
the nations and islands. John. i.i.
And why should Ihon stick to apply the majesty of God to Christ which in
his preface had said that the word was always God? Why should Paul fear to
set Christ in the judgment throne of God, ii. Cor. x. To. ix.v.
having before with so open proclamacion declared his Godhead, where he said
that he was God blessed to the end of Worlds? And to make appear, how well
he agrees in this point with himself, in an other place he wryleth that
Christ is God openly showed in the flesh. If he be God to be praised to the
end of worlds, i. Tim. iii xvi.
then he is the same he to whom in an other place he affirms all glory and
honor to be due. And thus he hydeth not, but plainly cries out, that he
would have counted it no robbery if he had showed himself egall with God, i.
Timo. ixvii. Phi. ii.vi
but that he wyllyngly abaced himself. And that the wicked should not carpe
that he is some made GOD, Ihon goes further and says. He is the true God and
the eternal life. Although it ought abundantly to satisfy us, Ioh. v.xx
that he is called God, specially of that witness which expressly affirms
unto us yt there are no more gods but one. 1. Cor. viii.v.i. Tim. iii xvi. Act.
xx.xxviii. Ioh. xx.xxviii.
That same witness is Paul, which says thus. How many soever be called
gods either in heaven or in earth, to us there is but one God from whom are
all things. When we hear of the same mouth, that God was openly showed in the
flesh, that God with his own blood purchased the church to himself: why
should we imagine a second God which he himself acknowledges not? And it
is no dout that all the godly were of the same meaning. Likewise Thomas in
protesting him to be his Lord and his God, does profess that he is that
only one God whom he had always worshipped.

Now if we esteem his Godhead by the works that in the Scripture Ioh. v.xvii,
the Jews which were most dull in understanding of all his other sayings,
yet then perceived that he took upon him the power of God. And theretore, as
John tells, they sought the more to kill him, because he did not only
break the Sabbat, but also did call God his father, making himself egall with
God. How dull shall we be then, if we do not perceive that his godhead is
herein plainly affirmed? And truly to order the world with providence and
power, and to govern all things with the authority of his own might,
which the Apostle ascribes unto him, Hie. i.iii.
belongs to none but only the creatoure. And he not only enterparteneth the
gouernemente of the world with his Father, but also all other offices which can
not be made common to God with his creatures. The Lord cries out by the
Prophet: I am he, I am he, that do away thine offenses for mine own sake.
Esa. xliii.xxv. Ma. ix, vi
According to the meaning of this sentence when the Jews thought that wrong
was done to god for that Christ did forgive sins, Christ not only affirmed
in words but also proved by miracle that this power belonged unto himself. We
see therefore that he has, not the ministracion, but the power of forgiveness
of sins, which the Lord says he will not suffer to pass away from
himself to any. What shall we say of searching and pearcing the secret
thoughts of hearts? Math. ix.iiii.
is it not the propretie of god alone? But the same had Christ: whereby is
gathered that he is God.

Now, in his miracles how plainlye and clearly does he appear? Mat. x.viii.
Mar, iii.xv. and vi.vii.
to heal the leprous, to cast out devils. etc. And the so used the
ministracio^ thereof that they sufficientlye showed that this power came not
from else where but from Christ. ^et. iii.vi. John. v.xxxvi. and x.xxxvii.
and.xiiii.xi.
In the name of Jesus Christ (says Peter) Rise and walk. If is therefore no
marvel if Christ alleged his miracles to confound the vnbeleuingnesse of the
Jews: forasmuch as they were such as being done by his own power did give a
most plain testymonie of his godhead. If else where then in God there is no
salvation, no righteousness, no life: and Christ conteyneth al these things
in him, surely he is thereby declared to be God. And no man can object against
me and say, that life and salvation is poured into him by God: for it is not
said that he received salvation but that he is salvation himself. And if none
be good but only God: how can he be only man, being I will not say good and
just, but self goodness and justice? Yea from the first beginning of the
creacion as the Euangeliste witnesses in him was life: and he even then being
life was the light of men. Mat. xix.xvii. Ioh. i.iiii. Ioh xii.i.i. Esa.
xxvi.xvi. Es. xi.x. Romans x xi ^.xv.xii.
Wherefore being supported with such proves we are bold to repose our faith
and hope in him: when yet we know that it is an ungodliness yt robs God
for any man to fasten his confydence in creatures. Believe ye in God? says he.
Believe then also in me. And so does Paul expound those two places of Esaias.
Whosoever trusts in him shall not be put to shame. Again. Out of the
root of Isai shall he come that shall rise to rule peoples, in him the nations
shall trust. And why should we seek out more testimonies of Scripture for
this matter, when we so often mete with this sentence? He that believes in me
has everlasting life. Moreover the inuoracion which hangs upon Faith
belongs also to him, which yet is proper to the majesty of God if he have
any thing at all proper to himself. Io. ii.xxxii ^r. xviii, x.
For one Prophet says: whosoever calls upon the name of Iehoua shall be
saved: and an other says a most strong toure is the name of Jehovah: to it
the ryghteous shall flee and he shall be saved, but the name of Christ is called
upon for salvation: Ac^. vii lix. Act. ix.xiii
it follows therefore that he is Jehovah. As for inuocacion, we have an example
of it in Stephen, when he says, Lord Jesus receive my spirit. Again in the
whole church, as Ananias testifyeth in the same book. Lord (says he) thou
know how great euylles this man has done to thy Saints that call upon
thy name. And that it may be more plainly understood that the whole
fullness of the Godhead does corporally dwell in Christ, ^. Cor^. ii.
the Apostle does confess that he brought no other doctrine among the
Corinthians but the knowledge of him, and that he preached no other thing but
that knowledge. What, I pray you, and how great a thing is this, that the
name of the Son only is preached unto us whom he wills to glory in the
knowledge of himself alone? Hie. ix.xxiiii.
Who dare say that he is but a creature, of whom the only knowledge is our
whole glory? Beside that, the salutacyons set before the Epystles of Paul,
wyshe the same benefits from the Son which they do from the Father, whereby
we are taught not only that those things which the Father gives us do come
unto us by his intercession, but also by community of power, he is the author
of them. Which knowledge by practice is without doubt more certain and
perfect than any idle speculacion. For there the godly mind does behold God
most present, and in manner handle him where it feleth it self to be quickened,
lightened, saved, justified and sanctif^^d.

Wherefore out of the same fountains we must fetch our mean of proving to
confirm the Godhead of the Holy ghost. Genesis i.ii.
Uery plain is ye testimony of Moses in the history of the creacion, that the
spirit of God was upon the depthes, or upon the unfashioned heap: because
he shows that not only the beauty of the world that is now to be seen is
preserved by the power of the Spirit, but ere this beauty was added, the
Spirit was then busied in preserving that confused lump of things. Es.
xlviii xvi.
And that saying of Esaie cannot be cauilled against. And now Jehovah and his
Spirit has sent me. For he communicates with the Holy ghost his chief power
in sending of Prophets. Whereby appears the divine majesty of the Holy
ghost. But our best proof, as I have said, shall be by familiar use. For that
which the Scriptures impute unto it, is far from the property of creatures,
and such a thing as we our selves do learn by assured experience of
godliness. For he it is that being each where poured abroad, does sustain
and gives growing and life to all things in heaven and in earth. And by this
point he is proved to be none of the number of creatures, for that he is not
comprehended within any bounds: but by pouring his lively force into all
things to breath into them life and mocion, this is the very work of God.
Moreover if regeneracion into an incorruptible life be better and more
excellent than any present quickening: what shall we judge of him from whose
power the same proceeds? And that he is the author of regeneracio^, not by a
borrowed, but by his own force, the Scripture in many places teaches: and not
of that only, but also of the immortality to come. Finally, as unto the
Son, so unto him also are applied al those offices that are most of all
properly belonging to the Godhead. i. Cor. ii.x i, cor, xii, x Ex, iiii, xi
For he searches the deep secrets of God, wherewith none of all the creatures
is of counsel. He gives wisdom and skill to speak, whereas yet the Lord
pronounces to Moses that it is only his work to do it. So by him we come to a
partaking of God, so that we may feel his power as it were working life in us.
Our iustificacion is his work. From him is power, sanctification, truethe,
grace, and what good thing soever may be thought of, because it is the Holy
ghost only from whom proceeds all kind of gifts. For that sentence of
Paul is right worthy to be noted. Although there be diverse gifts, and
manifold and sundry is the distribucion of them, yet is there but one holy
Spirit: because he makes him not only the original or beginning, but also
the author. Which a little after is more plainly expressed in these words.
i, cor, xii, xi,
One and the same Spirit distrybuteth all things as he will. For if he were
not some thing subsisting in God, he would not attribute unto him choice of
mind and will. Therefore most euidentlye does Paul give to the Holy ghost
divine power, and shows that he is substantially resident in God.

And the Scripture it self, when it speaks of him, forbeareth not i, cor,
iii, xvii. and vi, xix, ii, Cor, vi xvi.
because his spirit dwells in us: which thing is not lightly to be passed
over. For whereas God so often promises that he will chose us for a temple to
himself, that promise is no other way fulfilled, but by his spirit dwelling
in us. Surely, as Augustine very well says: if we were commanded to make unto
the Holy ghost a temple of timber and stone, August ad. Max iminum. Ep. lxvi
because such worship is due to God only, it were a clear argument that he is
God: now therefore how much clearer is this, that we ought, not to make a
temple, but our selves to be a temple for him? And the Apostle himself calls
us sometime the temple of God, sometime the temple of the Holy ghost, both in
one meaning. And Peter reprehe^ding Ananias for that he had lied to the Holy
ghost, Act. v.iii. Esa. vi.ix Act. xxviii xxv.
said that he lied not unto men but unto God. And where Esaias brings in the
Lord of hosts speaking, Paul teaches that it is the Holy ghost that speaks.
Yea where commonly the Prophets say, that the words which they utter are the
words of the Lord of hosts, Christ and the Apostles do refer them to the
Holy ghost. Whereby it follows that he is the true Jehovah that is the chief
author of prophecies. Again where God complains that he was provoked to wrath
by the stubbornness of his people, in stead of that Esaias says that his holy
Spirit was grieved. Esa. xliii.x. Mat. xii.xxx. Mark. iii.^^^. Luke x^^^
Last of al, if blasphemy against the Holy ghost be not forgiven in this world
nor in the world to come, whereas he may obtain pardon that has blasphemed
against the son: his divine maiesti is here plainly proved, the offense or
diminishment whereof is an unpardonable crime. I do wittingly and of purpose
omit many testimonies that the ancient writers have used. (...). x^xiii.v^.
They have thought it a marvelous mete place to allege out of David: with the
word of the Lord the heavens were stablished, and all the power of them with the
spirit of his mouth, to prove that ye world was no less the work of the Holy
ghost than of the Son. But forasmuch as it is commonly used in the Psalms to
repete one thing twice: Es. xi.iiii.
and in Esaias the spirit of his mouth is as much to say as his word, that
reason is very weak. Therefore I thought good to touch a few such things as
godly minds might soundly rest upon.

Ep. iiii.v.
God, Faith, and Baptism, that he reasons from the one to the other in this
manner. Because there is but one Faith, he thereby shows that there is but one
God. And because there is but one god, he thereby proves yt there is but one
Faith. Therefore if we be entered into the Faith and religion of one God by
Baptysme: we must needs think him the true God in whose name we are baptized.
And it is not to be douted, but that in this solemn protestacion, Christ meant
to testify that the perfect light of Faith was already delivered, when he
said: Mat. xx (...).
Baptize them in the name of the Father and of the Son and of the Holy ghost.
For it is as much in effect as to be baptized in the name of the one god, which
with perfect bryghtnesse has appeared in ye Father, the Son and the Holy
ghost. Whereby is euidente that in the essence of God abide three Persons in
which the one God is known. And surely, forasmuch as our Faith ought not to
look hither and thither, nor diversely to wa^der about, but to have regard to ye
one God, to be applied to him, and to stick fast in him: it is hereby easily
proved, that if there be diverse kinds of faith, there must also be many
Gods. Now whereas baptism is a Sacrament of faith: it proves unto us the
unity of God, because it is but one. And hereof also follows, that it is not
lawful to be baptized but into one God, because we embrace ye Faith of him,
into whose name we are baptized. What meant Christ then, when he commanded to
be baptized, in the name of the Father, the Son, and the Holy ghost, but that
we ought with one Faith to believe in the Father, Son, and the Holy ghost?
Therefore sith this remains certain, that there is but one God, and not many,
we determine that the Word and the Spirit are nothing else but the very self
essence of God. And very foolishly did the Arrians prate, which confessyng the
godhed of the Son did take from him the substance of God. And such a like
rage vexed the Macedonians, which would have to be understood by the
Spirit, only the gifts of grace that are poured forth into men. For as
wisdom, understanding, prudence, fortititude, fear of God do proceed from
him: so he only is the spirit of wisdom, prudence, fortitude, and
godliness. Yet is not he divided according to the distribution of his graces:
but how ^oeuer they be dyuersely dealt abroad, i. Cor. xii.xi.
yet he remains one and the same, as the Apostle says.

Again, there is showed in the Scriptures a certain distinction of the In sermo
ne ^e sacro bap^ismo.
I can not think upon the one, but by and by I am compassed about with the
brightness of the three: And I can not severally discern the three, but I am
sodeinly driven back to one. Wherefore let it not come in our minds ones to
imagine such a Trinity of Persons as may hold our thought withdrawn into
seueralties, and doothe not foorthewith bring us again to that unity. The
names of Father, Son, and Holy ghost, do prove a true distinction, that no
man should think them to be bare names of addition, whereby God according to
his works is diversely entitled: but yet it is a distinction, not a division.
The places that we have already cited, do show that the Son has a
propretie distinct from the Father, because the Word had not ben with God, if
he had not ben an other thing than the Father: neither had he had his glory
with the Father, but being distinct from him. Likewise he doothe distinguisshe
him self from the Father, when he says, that there is an other which
bears him witness. John. v.iii ^. viii.xvi.
And for this purpose makes that which in an other place is said, that the
Father created all things by the Word, which he could not, but being after
a certain manner distinct from him. Moreover the Father came not down into the
earth, but he that came out from the Father. The Father died not, nor roase
again, but he that was sent by him. Neither yet did this distinction begin
at the taking of flesh: John. i.xviii.
but it is manifest that he was also before, the only begotten in the bosom of
the Father. For who can abide to say, that then the Son entered into the
bosom of the father, when he descended from heaven to take manhood upon him?
He was therefore before in the bosom of the Father, and enjoyed his glory
with the Father. Ioh. xiiii.vi.xv.xxvi.
As for the distinction of the Holy ghost from the Father, Christ speaks
of it when he says, that it proceeds from the Father. And how often doothe he
show it to be an other beside himself? as when he promyseth that he will send
an other confortoure, Ioh. xiiii.xvi.
and often in other places.



Now this distinction does so not stand against ye single unity of God,
Hypostasis is understood the whole substance, with this that every one has
his own propretie. The Father is whole in the Son, Ioh. xiiii.x.
and the Son is whole in the Father, as himself affirms. I am in the
Father, and the Father is in me. And the Ecclesiastical writers do not grant
the one to be severed from the other by any difference of essence. Avgust.
home, de tempori. xxxviii.
By these names that betoken distinction (says Augustine) that is meant whereby
they have relation one to an other, and not the very substance whereby they are
all one. By which meaning are the sayings of the old writers to be made
agree, which otherwise would seem not a little to disagree. For sometime they
say that the Father is the beginning of the Son, and sometime that the Son
has both godhead and essence of himself, De trinit^re and coll. ad
pasce^ciu^ epistol. clxxvii.
and is all one beginning with the Father. The cause of this diversity
Augustine doothe in an other place well and planelye declare, when he says:
CHRIST having respect to him self, is called God, and to his Father is called
the Son. And again* the Father as to himself is called God, Cyrillus de
trinit. li.vii. ide^ li.iii. ^ialog. Augusti. in ps. cir. and tract. in Ioha^.
xxxix. et psalm lxviii
as to his Son is called the Father, where having respect to the Son he
is called the Father, he is not the Son: and where as to the Father he is
called the Son, he is not the Father: and where he is called as to him self the
Father, and as to himself the Son: it is all one God. Therefore when we
simply speak of the Son: without having respect to the Father, we do well
and proprely say, that he is of him self: and therefore we call him but one
beginning: but when we make mention of the relation between him and his
Father, then we rightly make the Father the beginning of the Son. All the
whole fifth book of Augustine concerning the Trinity does nothing but set
forth this matter. And much safer it is to rest in that relation that he
speaks of, than into suttletle pearcyng unto the hye mystery to wander
abroad by many vain speculations.

Let them therefore yt are pleased with sobrenesse, and contented with measure
hypostases. And therefore so often as we do indefinitely speak of the name of
God, we mean no less the Son and the Holy ghost than the Father. But when
the Son is joined to the Father, then comes in a relation, and so we make
distinction between y^ Persons. And because the propreties in the Persons bring
an order with them, so as the beginning and orginall is in the Father: so often
as mention is made of the Father and the Son, or the Holy ghost together, the
name of God is peculiarly given to the Father. By this mean is retained the
unity of the essence, and regard is had to the order, which yet does
minishe nothing of the godhead of the Son and of the Holy ghost. And where
as we have already seen that the Apostles do affirm, that the Son of God
is he, whom Moses and the prophets do testify to be Jehovah the Lord, we
must of necessity always come to the unity of the essences. Wherefore it is a
detestable sacrilege for us to call the Son a several God from the Father,
because the simple name of God, doothe admytte no relation, and God in respect
of him self can not be said to be this or that. Now, i. Cor. xii.ix.
that the name of Jehovah the Lord indefinitely taken is applied to Christ,
appears by the words of Paul, where he says: Therefore I have thryse prayed
the Lord, because that after he had received the answer of Christ. My
grace is sufficient for the: he says by and by, that the power of Christ may
dwell in me. It is certain that the name Lord is there set for Jehovah, and
therefore to restrain it to the person of the Mediator were very fond and
childyshe, for so much as it is an absolute sentence that compares not the
Father with the Son. And we know that after the accustomed manner of the
Greeks, the Apostles, do commonly set the word Kyrios, Lord, instead of
Jehovah. And, not to fetch an example far of, Paul did in no other sense
pray to the Lord, (...) ii.xvi Joel. ii.xxviii.
than in the same sense that Peter citethe the place of Ioell: who soever
calls upon the name of the Lord shall be saved. But where this name is
peculiarly given to the Son, we shall se that there is an other reason
thereof, when we com to a place fit for it. Now it is enough to have in
mind, when Paul had absolutely prayed to God, he by and by brings in the
name of Christ. Even so is the whole God called by Christ himself the Spirit.
For there is no cause against it, but that the whole essence of God may be
spiritual, wherein the Father, the Son, and the Holy ghost be comprehended.
Which is very plain by the Scripture. For even as there we hear God to be
made a Spirit: so we do here the Holy ghost, for so much as it is an
Hypostasis of the whole essence, to be called both God, and procedyng from
God.

Hila. li. pri. de Trinitate.
For he only, as Hylarie says, is a conueniente witness to him self,
which is not known but by himself. We shall give it over unto him, if we
shall both conceive him to be such as he has opened himself unto us, and shall
not else where search to know of him, than by his own word. There are to
this end written five homelies of Chrysostom against the Anomei. Yet the
boldness of Sophisters could not be restrained by them from bablyng
vnbridledly. For they have behaved them selves in this behalf no whit more
modestely than they are wonted in all other. By the unhappy success of which
vndiscretion, we ought to be warned to take care that we bend our selves to
travail in this question rather with tractable willyngnesse to learn, than
with sharpness of wit, and never have in our mind either to search for God
any where else than in his holy Word, or to think any thing of him, but
having his Word going before to guide us, or to speak any thing but that
which is taken out of the same Word: The distinction that is in the one
godhead of the Father, the Son, and the Holy ghost, as it is very hard to
know, so does it bring more business and comberance to some wits than is
expedient. Let them remember that the minds of men do enter into a mase when
they follow their own curiosity, and so let them suffer them selves to be
ruled with the heavenly oracles, how soever they can not atteyne the heighte
of the mystery.

To make a register of the errors, wherewith the pureness of Faith Ioh. i.^
For where as John pronounces, that the Word was GOD before the World was
yet create, he makes it much differynge from a conception of Form. But if
then also, yea and from farthest Eternity of time, that Word which was God
was with the Father, and had his own propre glory with the Father, he could
not be an outward or figurative shining: but it necessarily follows that he
was an hypostasis that did inwardely abide in God. And although there be no
mention made of the Spyrite, but in the Hystorye of the creation of the world:
yet he is not there brought in as a shadow, but an essential power of God,
when Moses shows that the very unfashioned lump was sustained in him. Genesis
i.ii.
Therefore it then appeared, that the eternal Spirit was always in God, when
he preserved and sustained the confused matter of heaven and earth, until
beauty and order were added unto it. Surely he could not yet be an image or
representation of God as Seruetto dreameth. But in other points he is
compelled more openly to disclose his wickedness, in saying that God by his
eternal purpose appointyng to himself a visible Son, did by this mean
show himself visible. For if that be true, there is no other godhed left unto
Christ, but so far as he is by the eternal decree of God ordained his
Son. Moreover he so transformeth those imagined shapes that he sticks not
to feign new accidents in God. But this of all other is most abominable,
that he confusely myngleth as well the Son of God, as the Holy ghost, with
all creatures. For he plainly affirms, that there be parts and partitions
in the Essence of God, of which every portion is God. And namelye he says,
that the Spirits of the Faithefull are coeternall and consubstanciall with
God: allbeit in an other place he assigns the substanciall Deity, not only
to the soul of man, but also to other creatures.

Out of this sink came forth an other like monster. For certain Esa. vi.i.
Ioh. xii.xii. Esa. viii.x.iii. Romans ix.xxxiii. Esa. xlv.xxiii.
Therefore so often as mention is made of the godhed, we must not admit a
comparison between the Son and the Father, as though the name of God did
belong only to the Father. For trewely the God that appeared to Esaie was the
true and only God, and yet John affirms that the same was Christ. And he
that by the mouth of Esaias testified, that he should be a stumbling stone to the
Jews, was the only God: and yet Paul pronounces that the same was Christ.
He that tries out by Esaie, I live, and to me all knees shall bow, is the
only God: Esa. xlv xiiii. To. xiiii.xi. Heb. i.x. Psalm. cu: xxvi: Ps.
x^vii.vii.
and yet Paul expounds that the same was Christ. For this purpose serve the
testimonies that the Apostle recites: Thou O God haste laid the foundations
of heaven and earth. Again, let all the angels of God worship him, which
things belong to none, but to the only God. And yet he says, that they are
the propre titles of Christ. And this cauillation is nothing worth, that that
is given to Christ, which is propre to God: because Christ is the shinyng
brightness of his glory. For because in each of these places is fet the name
of Jehovah, it follows, that it is so said in respect that he is God of
himself. For if he be Jehovah, it can not be denied that he is ye same God
that in an other place cries out by Esaie: Esa. xliiii vi. Iere. x.xi
I, I am, and beside me there is no God. It is good also to consider that
saying of Hieremie: The gods that have not made the heaven and earth, let them
perish out of the earth that is under the heaven. Where as on the other side
we must needs confess, that the Son of God is he, whose godhead is often
proved in Esaie by the creation of the world. And how can it be that the
Creator, which gives being to all things, shall not be of himself, but
borowe his being of an other. For who soever says that the Son was
essentiate or made to be of his Father, denies that he is of him self. But
the Holy ghost says the contrary, namyng him Jehovah. Now if we grant that
the whole essence is in the Father only, either it must be made partable, or
be taken from the Son, and so shall the Son be spoiled of his essence, and
be a God only in name and title. The essence of God, if we believe these
triflers: belongs only to the Father, for as much as he is only God, and
is the essencemaker of the Son. And so shall the godhed of the Son be an
abstracte from the essence of God, or a deriuation of a part out of the
whole. Now must they needs grant by their own principle, that the holy ghost
is the Spirit of the Father only. For if he be a deriuation from the first
essence, which is only propre to the Father, of right he can not be accounted
the Spirit of the Son: which is confuted by the testimony of Paul, where
he makes the Spirit common to Christ and the Father. Moreover if the Person of
the Father be wiped out of the Trinity, wherein shall he differ from the Son
and the Holy ghost, but in this, that he only is God? They confess Christ to
be God, and yet they say he differs from the Father. Again, there must be
some mark of difference to make that the Father be not the Son. They which
say that mark of difference to be in the essence, do manifestly bring the
true godhead of Christ to nothing, which can not be without essence, yea and
that the whole essence. The Father differs not from the Son, unless he
have somethyng propre to himself that is not common to the Son. What now
will they find wherein to make him different? If the difference be in the
essence, let them answer if he have not communicated the same to the Son.
But that could not be in part, for to say that he made half a God were wicked.
Beside that by this mean they do fowly tear in sunder the essence of God. It
remains therefore that the essence is whole, and perfectly common to the
Father and the Son. And if that be true, then as touching the essence there
is no difference of the one of them from the other. If they say yt the Father
in geuyng his essence, remains nevertheless the only God, with whom the
essence abides: then Christ shall be a figurative God, and a God only in show
and in name but not in deed: because nothing is more propre to God than to
be, Exodus v.xiii.
according to this saying: He that is, has sent me unto you.

Mat. xix.xvii.
do take goodness from himself? I do not speak of his human nature,
least perhaps they should take exception, and say, that what soever goodness
was in it, it came of free gift. I ask whether the eternal Word of God be
good or no? If they say nay, then we hold their ungodliness sufficiently
co^uinced: in saying yea, they confound themselves. But where as at the first
sight, Christ seems to put from himself the name of Good, that doothe the
more confirm our meaning. For sith it is the singular title of God alone,
forasmuch as he was after the common manner saluted by the name of Good, in
refusing false honor, he did admonish them that the goodness wherein he
excelled, was the goodness that God has. I ask also, where Paul affirms
that only God is immortal, i. Tim. i.xvii.
wise, and true, whether by these words Christ be brought into the number of
men mortal, foolish, and false? Shall not he then be immortal, that from the
beginning was life to give immortality to angels? Shall not he be wise that
is the eternal wisdom of God? Shall not the truth it self be true? I ask
furthermore, Philip. ^^.x.
whether they think that Christ ought to be worshipped or no? For he claims
this unto himself, to have all knees bow before him: it follows that he is
the God which did in the law forbid any other to be worshipped but himself.
If they will have that meant of the Father only which is spoken in Esaie: I
am, and none but I: this testimony I turn against them selves, for as much
as we see, that whatsoever pertains to God is given to Christ. Esa. xliiii
vi.
And their cauillation has no place, that Christ was exalted in the flesh,
wherein he had been abased, and that in respect of the flesh, all authority
is given him in heaven and in earth: because although the majesty of King
and Judge extend to the whole Person of the Mediator, yet if he had not been
God openly showed in flesh, he could not have been auaunced to such height,
but that God should have disagreed with himself. But this controuersye Paul
does well take away, teaching that he was egall with God before that he did
abase himself under the shape of a servant. Ph. ii.vii
Now how could this equality have stand together, unless he had been
the same God whoes name is Iah and Jehovah: that rydeth upon the Cherubin,
that is king of all the earth and Lord of the worlds? Now howesoeuer they
babble against it, it can not be taken from Christ which Esaie says in
an other place: Esa. xxv.ix.
He, he, is our GOD, for him we have waited, whereas in these words he
describes the coming of GOD the redemer, not only that should bring home
the people from the exyle of Babylon, but also fullye in all points restore
the church. And with their other cauillation they nothing prevail, in
saying, that Christ was God in his Father. For though we confess that in
respect of order and degree the beginning of the Godheade is in the Father,
yet we say that it is a detestable inuentyon to say that the essence is
only proper to the Father, as though he were the only Godmaker of the
Son. For by this means either he should have more essence than one, or else
they call Christ God only in tittle and imaginacion. If they grant that
Christ is God, but next after the Father, then shall the essence be in him
begotten and fashioned, which in the Father is unbegotten and vnfashyoned. I
know that many quick nosed men do laughe at this that we gather the
distinction of Persons out of the words of Moses, where he brings in God
speaking thus: Let us make manne after our image. But yet the Godly readers
do see how vaynly and fondely Moses should bring in this as a talk of
diverse together, Gene. i.xxvi.
if there were not in God more Persons than one. Now certain is it, that they
whom the Father spoke unto, were uncreate: but nothing is uncreate but God
himself yea the one only God. Now therefore unless they grant that the
power of creating was common, and the authority of commanding common, to the
Father, the Son, and the Holy ghost: it shall follow that God did not
inwardly thus speak to himself, but directed his speech to other foreign
work men. Finally one place shall easily answer two of their objections.
John. iiii.xxiiii.
For where as Christ himself pronounces that GOD is a Spirit, this were not
conueniente to be restrained to the Father only, as if the Word himself
were not of spiritual nature. If then the name of Spirit does as well agree
with the Son as with the Father, I gather that the Son is also comprehended
under the indefynite name of GOD. But he adds by and by after that, none are
allowed for good worshippers of the Father, but they that worship him in
Spirit and truth, where upon follows an other thing, because Christ does
under a head execute the office of a teacher, he does give the name of GOD to
the Father, not to the entente to destroy his own Godhead, but by degrees to
lift us up unto it.



Where as they obiecte, that if Christ be properly God, he is order. In this
meaning is co^strued that saying of Christ to the Father: this is the eternal
life, that men believe in the the one true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou have
sent. Ioh. xvii, iii.
For speaking in the Person of the Mediator, he keeps the degree that is mean
between God and men: and yet is not his majesty thereby diminished. For
though he abaced himself, yet he left not with the Father his glory that was
hidden before the world. So the Apostle in the second Chapter to the Hebrews,
though he confesses that Christ for a short time was abaced beneth the Angels,
yet he stycketh not to affirm withal, that he is the same eternal God that
founded the earth. We must therefore hold, that so often as Christ in the Person
of the Mediator speaks to the Father, under this name of God is comprehended
the Godhead which is his also. So when he said to the Apostles: Ioh. xvi.vii.
it is profitable that I go up to the Father, because the Father is greater. He
gives not unto himself only the second degree of Godhead to be as touching
his eternal essence inferior to the Father, but because having obtained the
heavenly glory, he gathers together the faithful to the partakyng of it. He
sets his Father in the hier degree, in so much as the glorious perfection
of brightness that appears in heaven, differs from that measure of glory
that was seen in him being clothed with flesh. After like manner in an other
place, Paul says: that Christ shall yield up the kingdom to God and his
Father, i. Cor. xv, xxiiii.
that God may be all in all. There is nothing more absurd than to take away
eternal contynuaunce from the Godhead of Christ. If he shall never cesse to
be the Son of God, but shall always remain the same that he was from the
beginning, it follows that under the name of the Father is comprehended the
one essence that is common to them both. And surely therefore did Christ
descend unto us, that lifting us up unto his Father, he might also lift us up
unto himself, inasmuch as he is all one with his father. It is therefore
neither lawful nor right so exclusiuely to restrain the name of God to the
Father, John. i.i.
as to take it from ye Son. For, Ihon does for this cause affirm that he is
true God, that no man should think that he rests in a second degree of
Godhead beneth his Father. And I marvel what these framers of new Gods do
mean, that while they confess Christ to be true God, yet they forth with
exclude him from the Godhead of his Father. As though there could any be a
true God but he that is the one God, or as though the Godhead poured from one
to an other, be not a certain new forged imaginacion.

Whereas they heap up many places out of Ireneus, where he affirms but the
father of Christ, and that it is amiss to devise any other, and therefore it
is no marvel if he so often conclude that there was no other God of Israel, but
he that was spoken of by Christ and the Apostles. And in like manner now,
whereas we are to stand against an other sort of error, we may truly say
that the God which in old time appeared to the Fathers, was none other but
Christ. But if any manne obiecte that it was the Father, our answer is in
readiness, that when we strive to defend the Godhead of the Son, we exclude
not the Father. If the readers take heed to this purpose of Ireneus, all that
contention shall cesse. And also by the syxte Chapter of the third book, this
whole strife is ended, where the good manne stands all upon this point, to
prove that he which is in Scripture absolutely and indefinitely called God: is
verelye the one only God, and that Christ is absolutely called God. Let us
remember that this was the principal point whereupon stood all his
disputacion, as by the whole process thereof does appear: and specially
the.xlvi. Chapter of the second book, that he is not called the Father by
dark similitude or parable, which is not very God in deed. Moreover in an
other place he says, that as well the Son as the Father were jointly called
God by the Prophets and Apostles. Lib. iii. cap. ix.
Afterward he defines how Christ which is Lord of all, and king, and God,
and judge, received power from him which is the God of all, Cap. xii eius.
lib, Cap. xvi. eius. lib.
that is to say in respect of his subjection, because he was humbled even to
the death of the cross. And a little after he affirms, that the Son is the
maker of heaven and earth, which gave the law by the hand of Moses and
appeared to the Fathers. Now if any manne do prate that with Ireneus only
the Father is the God of Israel, I will turn again upon him that which the
same writer plainly teaches, that Christ is all one and the same: as also he
applies unto him the prophecy of Habacuc. Ibid. ca. xviii: and, xxiii,
God shall come out of the South. To the same purpose serves that which is
red in the. ix. Chapter of the fourth book. Christ himself therefore with the
Father is the God of the lyuinge. And in the. xii. Chapter of the same book he
expounds that Abraham believed God, because Christ is the maker of heaven and
earth and the only God.



Finally where he affirms that the Father is determined in his own person,
he proves himself far from that error which we confute. And though he does
acknowledge none other God but the Father, yet in the next piece of his writing
expou^ding himself, he says, that he speaks not exclusiuely in respect of
the Son, because he denies that the Son is any other God beside the
Father, and that therefore their sole government is not broken by distincion of
Person. And by the perpetual course of his purpose it is easy to gather the
meaning of his words. For he disputes against Praxeas, yt though God be
distinguished into three persons, yet are there not made many gods nor the
unity torn in sonder. And because by the imaginacion of Praxeas Christ
could not be God, but he must also be the Father, therefore he somuche
labors about the distincion. Whereas he calls the Word and the Spirit a
portion of the whole: although it be a hard kind of speech, yet is it
excusable, because it is not referred to the substance, but only shows the
disposicion and order that belongs only to the Persons, as Tertullian
himself witnesses. And hereof hangs that. Now many Persons think thou
there are, O most froward Praxeas, but even so many as there be names? And so
a little after that, they may believe the Father and the Son each in their
names and persons. Hereby I think may be sufficiently confuted their impudency
that seek to begyle the simple with color of Tertullians authority.

And surely whosoever shall diligently compare together ye writings he was not
ignorant what other had taught before him, where he says that in the Father
is unity, in the first book of Christian doctrine, will they say that he then
forgate himself? But in an other place he purges himself from such reproach,
where he calls the Father the beginning of the whole Godhead, because he is
of none: considering in deed wisely that the name of God is specially ascrybed
to the Father, because if the beginning should not be reckened at him, the
single unity of God cannot be conceived. By this I trust the godly reder will
perceive that all the cauillacions are confuted wherwyth Satan has hitherto
attempted to pervert or darken the pure truth of doctrine. Finallye I trust
that the whole sum of doctrine in this point is fully declared, if the
readers will temper them of curiosity, and not more gredely than mete is seek
for combersome and entangled disputacions. For I take not in hand to please
them, that do delight in an intemperate desire of speculacion. Truly I have
omitted nothing of subtle purpose that I thought to make against me. But while
I study to edify the church, I thought it best, to leave many things
untouched which both smallye profited, and would grieve the readers with
superfluous rediousnesse. For to what purpose were it to dispute, whether the
father do always beget? Forasmuch as it is folly to feign a continual act of
begetting, since it is euidente that from eternity there have been three Persons
in God.

The.xiiii. Chapter. That the Scripture even in the creacion of the world and
of al things: both by certain marks put difference between the true God,
and ^ayned* Gods.
^sa. xl.xxi.
Although Esaye does worthyly reproach the worshippers of false gods with
slothfulness, for that they have not learned by the very fundacions of the
earth, and round compass of the heavens, which is the true God: yet such is
the dullness and grossness of our wit, that least the faithful should fall
away to the inuencions of the ge^tils, it was necessary to have god more
expressly painted out unto the^. For whereas yt saying yt God is ye mind of ye
world, which is co^pted ye most tolerable descripcion that is found among ye
Philosophers, is but vain, it behooves us more familiarly to know him, least
we always waver in doutfulnesse. Therefore it was his pleasure to have an history
of the creacio^ remaining, whereupon the Faith of ye church might rest, and seek
for no other God but him, who^ Moses has declared to be ye maker and bilder of
the world. There is first set forth ye time, yt by continual proceeding of years
the faithful might come to the first original of mankind, and of al things.
Which knowledge is very necessary, not only to confute those monstrous fables
that sometime were spread in Egipte and other parts of the world, but also,
that the beginning of the world ones being known, the eternity of God may
more clearly shine forth and rauishe us in admiracion of it. Neither ought we
to be any thing moved with that ungodly mock, that it is marvel why it came no
sooner in ye mind of God to make ye heaven and the earth, and why he sytti^g
idle did suffer so immesurable a space to pass away, since he might have made
it many thousand ages before: whereas ye whole continuance of ye world yt now
draws to an end, is not yet come to six thousand years. For why God so long
differred it, is nether lawful nor expedient for us to enquire. Because if man's
mind will travail to attain thereunto, it shall fail a hundred times by the
way, nether were it profitable for us to know yt thing which God himself to
prove ye modesty of our Faith, has of purpose wylled to be hydden. And well
did that godly old man speak, which when a wanton fellow did in scorn
demand of him, what God had done before the creacion of the world, answered
that he builded hell for curious fools, let this grave and severe warning
repress the wantonness that tickleth many yea and dryueth them to evil and
hurtful speculacions. Finally let us remember that the same invisible God
whoes wisdom power and justice is incomprehensyble, does set before us the
historye of Moses as a lokyng glass, wherein his lively image appears. For
as the eyes that either are grown dim with age, or dulled with any disease,
do not discern any thing plainly unless they be helped with spectacles: so,
such is our weakness, that unless the Scripture direct us in sekyng of
God, we do forthwith run out into vanity. And they that follow their own
wantonness, because they be now warned in vain, shall all to late feel with
horrible destruction, how much it had been better for them reverently to
receive the secret counsels of God, than to vomit out blasphemies, to
obscure the heaven with all. Lib. de. gene. co^tra. Ma Deciui. dei. li. xl
And ryghtly does Augustyne complain that wrong is done to God when further
cause of things is sought for, than his only will. The same man in an other
place does wisely warn us, that it is no less euel to move question of
immeasurable spaces of times than of places. For how broad soever the circuit
of the heaven is, yet is there some measure of it. Now if one should quarrel
with God for that the emptynesse wherein nothing is contained, is a hundred
times more, shall not all the godly abhore such wantonness?

Into like madness run they that busy them selves about Gods sitting still,
because at their apointment he made not the world innumerable ages sooner. To
satisfy their own gredinesse of mind, they cover to pass without the compass
of the world, as though in so large a circuit of heaven and earth, they could
not find things enough yt with their inestimable brightness may ouerwhelme al
our senses: as though in six thousand years God has not showed examples in
continual co^sideracion, whereof our minds may be exercised. Let us therefore
willingly abide enclosed within those bounds wherwt it pleased God to enuiro^
us, and as it were to pen up our minds yt they should not stray abrod with
liberty of wa^dri^g. For like reso^ is it yt Moses declares, y^ the work of
God was not ended how sone they pass away. Here again man's reason murmureth
as though such procedinges were disagreing from the power of God, until such
time as being made subject to the obedience of Faith, she learn to keep that
rest whereunto the hollowing of the.vii. day calls us. But in the very order
of things, is diligently to be considered the Fatherly love of God toward
mankind, in this: that he did not create Adam until he had stored the world
with all plenty of good things. For if he had placed him in the earth while it
was yet barren and empty, if he had given him life before that there was any
light, he should have seemed not so well to provide for his commodity. But now
where he first disposed the motions of the Sun and the Planets for the use of
man, and furnished the earth, the waters and the air with living creatures,
and brought forth abundance of fruits to suffyce for fode, taking upon him
the care of a diligent and prouide^t householder, he showed his marvelous
bounty toward us. If a man do more hedefully weye with himself those things
that I do but shortly touch, it shall appear that Moses was the sure
witness and publisher of the one God the creator. I omit here that which I
have already declared, that he speaks not there only of the bare essence of
God, but also sets forth unto us his eternal Wisdom and Spirit, to the
end we should not dream that God is any other, than such as he will be known
by the image that he has there expressed.

As for the only fundation that the Manichees have, that it is unlawful to
ascribe unto God that is good, the creation of any thing that is evil: that
nothing hurts the true Faith, which admits not that there is any thing
naturally evil in the whole universality of the world, because neither the
frowardness and malice both of man and the deuell, nor the sins that
proceed thereof, ar of nature, but of the corruption of nature. Neither was
there any thing from the beginning, wherein God has not showed an example both
of his wisdom and justice. Therefore to answer these perverse devises: it
behooves us to lift up our minds hyer than our eyes can atteyne to see. For
which cause it is likely, that where in the Nicene creed God is called the
creator of all things, things invisible are expressed. Yet will we be
careful to keep the measure that the rule of godliness appoints, least the
readers with searchyng to understand further than is expedient, should wander
abroad, being led away from the simplicity of Faith. And surely for as
much as the Holy ghost teaches us always for our profit, and such things
as are finally auaylable to edify, he doothe either leave wholly unspoken, or
but lightly, and as it were ouerrunningly touch them: it shall be also our
duty to be content not to know those things that do not profit us.

That the Angels, for as much as they are the ministers of God ordained Genesis
i.ii.
Moses declares that the earth was made, and the heavens were made, with all
their armies, to what purpose than is it, curiously to search, what day the
other more secret armies of heaven beside the stars and planettes first
began to be? But, because I will not be long: let us, as in the whole doctrine
of religion, so here also remember that we ought to keep one rule of modesty
and sobriety, that of obscure things we neither speak, nor think, nor yet
desire to know any other things than that has been taught us by the word of
God: and an other point, that in readyng of Scripture we continually rest upon
the searchyng and studying of such things as pertain to edification, and not
give our selves to curiosity or study of things unprofitable. And because it
was Gods pleasure to instruct us, not in ^riflyng questions, but in sound
godliness, fear of his name, true confidence, and duties of holiness: let us
rest upon such knowledge. Wherefore, if we will be rightly wise, we must leave
those vanities yt idle men have taught without warrant of the word of God,
concerning the nature, degrees, and multitude of Angels. I know that such
matters as this, are by many more gredily taken hold of, and are more pleasant
unto them than such things as lie in daily use. But if it grieve us not to be
the scholars of Christ, let it not grieve us to follow that order of learning
that he has appointed. So shall it so come to pass, that being contented with
his scholyng, we shall not only forbear but also abhor superfluous
speculations, from which he calls us away. No man can deny, that the same
Denyse, what soever man he was, has disputed many things both subtly and
wittyly in his Hierarchy of heaven: but if a man examine it more nearly, he
shall find that for the most part it is but mere babblyng. But the dutiful
purpose of a divine is, not to delight ears with pratyng, but to stablishe
consciences with teaching things true, certain, and profitable. If one should
read that book, he would think that the man were slypped down from heaven,
and did tell of things not that he had learned by heresay, but that he had seen
with his eyes. i. Cor. xii.ii.
But Paul which was ravished above the third heaven, has uttered no such
thing, but also protests, that it is not lawful for man to speak ye
secrets that he had seen. Therefore bidding farewell to that triflyng wisdom,
let us consider by the simple doctrine of the Scripture, what the Lord would
have us know concerning his angels.

It is commonly red in the Scripture, that the Angels are heavenly Da. vii.x.
but principally Daniel where he says, that when God sat him down in his
throne of judgment, there stood by a thousand thousand, and ten thousand
companies of ten thousands of angels. And because God does by the^ meruailously
show forth and declare the might and strength of his hand, therefore they are
named strengths, because he exercises and uses his authorite in the world by
them, therefore they are sometime called Principalities, Coloss. i.xv^. Ep. i.xxi.
sometime powers, sometime Dominions. Finally because in them as it were sits
the glory of God. For this cause also they are called Thrones: though of this
last name I will not certainly say, because an other exposition does either as
well or better agree with it. But (speaking nothing of that name) the Holy ghost
often uses those other former names to auaunce the dignity of the ministry
of angels. For it were not reason that those instruments should be let pass
without honor, by whom God does specially show the presence of his majesty.
Yea for that reason they are many times called Gods, because in their ministry
as in a loking glass, they partly represent unto us the godhead. Ge.
xviii.^.xx^^. Ios. v.xiiii Iu^i^. ^i.xi^ii. and xiii.xii. Ps. lxxxii.vi.
Although in deed I myslike not this that the old writers do expound, that
Christ was the Angel, where the Scripture says, that the angel of God appeared
to Abraham, Jacob, Moses, and other, yet oftentimes where mention is made of al
ye Angels in deed this name is given unto them. And ye ought to seem no
marvel. For if this honor be given to princes and governors, yt in their
office they stand in the stead of God that is sovereign king and judge, much
greater cause there is why it should be given to ye Angels, in whom the
brightness of the glory of God much more abunda^tly shines.

But the Scripture stands most upon reachyng us that, which might most
make to our comfort and confirmacion of Faith: that is to wete, that the
Angels are the distributers and administratours of Gods bounty toward us.
And therefore the Scripture recites, that they watch for our safety: they
take upon them the defense of us, they direct our ways, Ps. xci.xi.
they take care that no hurtful thing be^ide unto us. The sentences are
universal, which principally pertayne to Christ the head of the church, and
then to all the faithful. Ps. xxxiiii viii. Genesis xvi.ix. Ge. xxiiii vii. Ge
xlvii xvi. Exo. xiiii xix. and xxiii xx. Iud. ii.i. and vi.xi. et xiii.x. Mat.
iiii.xi. Luc. xxii.xliii. Math. xxviii.v. Lu. xxiiii.v. Act. i.x. ii. King.
xix.xxxv. Es. xxxvii xxxvi.
He has given his angels charge of thee, to keep thee in all thy ways. They
shall bear thee up in their hands, least thou chance to hitte thy feet
against a stone. Again, The angel of the Lord stands round about them
that fear him, and he doothe deliver them. Whereby God shows that he
apoynteth to his angels the defense of them, whom he has taken in hand to
keep. After this order, the angel of the Lord does comfort Agar when she fled
away, and commands her to be reconciled to her maistresse. God promises to
Abraham his servant an Angel to be the guide of his iourneye. Jacob in
blessing of Ephraim and Manasses prays, that the Angel of the Lord by whom
he himself had been delivered from all evil, may make them prosper. So the
Angel was set to defend the tents of the people of Israel. And so often as
it pleased God to reskue Israel out of the hands of their enemies, he raised
up reuengers by the ministry of Angels. So finally (to the end I need not to
rehearse many mo) the Angels mynistred to Christ, and were ready assistent to
him in all necessities. They brought tidings to the women of his resurrection,
and to the disciples of his glorious coming. And so to fulfill their office of
defendyng us, they fight against the devil and all enemies, and do execute
the vengeance of God upon them, that are bent against us. As we read that the
angel of God to deliver Jerusalem from siege, slew in one night a hundred
fowerscore and five thousand in the camp of the king of Assyria.

But whether to every of the faithful be a several Angel assigned Dani.
x.xiii. and xii.i Mathei. xviii.x.
I dare not certainly affirm. Surely when Daniell brings in the angel of
the Persians, and the Angel of the Grecians, he shows that he mente, that
there are to kingdoms and provinces certain angels appointed as governors.
And when Christ says that the angels of children do always behold the face of
the Father, he seems to mean, that there are certain angels to whom the
preservation of them is given in charge. But I can not tell whether we ought
thereby to gather, yt every one has his Angel set over him. But this is to be
holden for certainty, that not one angel only has care of every one of us,
but that they all by one consent do watch for our safety. For it is spoken
of all the angels together, Luc. xv.vii. Luc. xvi.xxiii. ii. Kings. xvi.xvii.
Act. xii.xv.
that they more rejoice of one sinner converted to repentance, than of nyntie
and nine just that have stand still in their ryghtuousnesse. And it is said of
mo angels than one, that they conveyed the soul of Lazarus into the bosom of
Abraham. And not without cause did Elizeus show to his servant so many fyery
chariots that were peculiarly appointed for him. But one place there is that
seems more plain than the rest to prove this point. For when Peter being
brought out of prison knocked at the doors of the house, where the brethren
were assembled, when they could not imagine that it was he, they said it was
Angel. It should seem that this came in their mind by the common opinion, that
to every of the faithful are assigned their angels for governors. Albeit yet
here it may be answered that it may well be, not withstandyng any thing that
there appears, that we may think it was any one Angel, to whom God had
given charge of Peter for that time, and yet not to be his continual keeper:
as the common people do imagine that there are appointed to every one two
Angels, as it were diverse ghostes, a good Angel and a badde. But it is not
worth travail, curiously to search for that which does not much importe us
to know. For if this do not content a man, that all degrees of the army of
heaven do watch for his safety* I do not see what he can be the better, if
he understand that there is one Angel peculiarly appointed to keep him. And
they which restrain unto one Angel the care that God has to every one of us,
do great wrong to them selves, and to all the members of the church: as if
that power to succor us had been vainly promised us, wherewith being environed
and defended, we should fight the more boldly.

Da. xii.i. Iudi. i.ix. i. Thessa. iiii.xvi.
the Great prince, and with Jude, the Archangell. And Paul says, it shall be
an Archangell that shall with sound of trumpet call men to the Judgment. But
who can thereby appoint the degrees of honors between Angels, or discern one
from an other by special marks, and appoint every one his place and standing?
For the two names that are in Scripture, Michaell, and Gabriell: and if you
list to add the third out of the history of Thobie, may by their
signification seem to be given to the Angels, according to the capacity of our
weakness, although I had rather leave that exposition at large. As for the
number of them, we hear by Christ's mouth of many Legions, Mat. xxvi lv.
Dan. vii.x. Psalm. xxxiiii.viii.
by Daniell many companies of ten thousands, the servant of Elizeus saw many
chariottes full: and this declares that they are a great multitude, that it is
said, they do camp round about them that fear God. As for shape, it is
certain, that Spirits have none, and yet the Scripture for the capacity of
our wit does not in vain under Cherubin and Seraphin paint us out Angels with
wings, to the intent we should not doubt that they will be ever with
incredible swiftness, ready to succoure us, so soon as need shall require,
as if the lightnyng sent from heaven should fly unto us with such swiftness
as it is wonted. What soever more than this may be sought of both these
points, let us believe it to be of that sort of mysteries, whereof the full
revelation is differred to the last day. Wherefore let us remember to take heed
both of to much curiosity in searchyng and to much boldness in speaking.

those places that I have before alleged, where are recited thousands and
Legions of Angels: where joy is given unto them: where it is said that they
uphold the Faithful with their hands, and carry their souls into rest: that
they see the face of the Father, and such like: there are other places whereby
is clearly proved, that they are in deed Spirits of a nature that has
substance. Act. vii.liii. et Ga. iii xix. Mat. xxii.xxx. et xxiiii.xxxvii.xxxi.
and. xxv. Luc. ix.xxvi. i. Tim. v.xxi. Heb. i.iiii and. ii.xvi.
For where as Stephen and Paul do say, that the law was given by the hand
of Angels, and Christ says, that the elect after the resurrection shall be
like unto Angels: that the day of judgment is not known to the very Angels:
that he shall then come with his holy Angels: how soever they be writhed, yet
must they so be understood. Likewise when Paul charge Timothe before
Christ and his chosen Angels, to keep his commandments, he means not
qualities or inspirations without substance but very spirits. And otherwise it
stands not together that is written in the Epistle to the Hebrews, that Christ
is become more excellent than Angels, that ye world is not made subject to
them: that Christ took upon him not their nature, but ye nature of man. If we
mean not ye blessed spirits, to whom may these comparisons agree? And the
author of that Epistle expounded him self where he places in ye kingdom of
heaven ye souls of ye faithful and ye holy angels together. Also the same that
we have already alleged, that the Angels of children do always behold the face
of god, that they do rejoice at our safety, that they marvel at the manifold
grace of God in the church, Heb. xii.xxii
that they are subject to Christ, the hedde. To ye same purpose serves this,
that they so often appeared to the holy Fathers in the form of men, that they
talked with them, that they were lodged with them. And Christ him self for the
principal preminence that he has in the person of the mediator is called an
Angel. Mala. iii.i.
This I thought good to touch by the way, to furnish the simple with defense
against those foolish and reasonlesse opinions, that many ages ago raised by
Satan do now and then spring up again.

Now it rests, that we seek to mete with that superstition which is Coloss.
^.xvi.
For it appears, that Paul himself had much to do with some which so
auaunced Angels, that they in manner would have brought Christ under subjection.
And therefore he does so carefully press this point in his epistle to the
Colossians, that Christ is not only to be preferred before al angels, but yt he
is also the author of all the good things yt they have: to the end we should not
forsake him and turn unto them, which can not sufficiently help them selves,
but are feign to draw out of ye same fountain yt we do. Surely forasmuch as
there shyneth in them a certain brightness of ye majesty of God, there is
nothing whereunto we are more easily inclined, than with a certain admiration to
fall down in worshipping of them, and to give unto them all things yt ar due
only to God. Which thing John in the Revelation confesses to have chanced to
himself, but he adds withal, that he received this answer.

But this danger we shall well beware of, if we do consider why God uses
rather by them than by himself without their service to declare his power, to
provide for the safety of the faithful, and to co^mumunicate the gifts of
his liberality among them. Surely he does not this of necessity, as though he
could not be without them: for so often as pleases him, he lets them alone,
and brings his work to pass with an only beck: so far is it of, that
they be any aid to him, to ease him of the hardness thereof. This therefore
makes for the comfort of our weakness, so that we want nothing that may
avail our minds, either in raisyng them up in good hope, or confirmyng them
in assurance. This one thing ought to be enough and enough again for us, that
the Lord affirms that he is our protector. But while we se our selves
besieged with so many dangers, so many hurtful things, so many kinds of
enemies: it may be (such is our weakness and frailty) that we be sometime
filled with tremblyng fear, or fall for despair, unless the Lord after the
proporcion of our capacity do make us to conceive his presence. By this mean
he not only promises that he will have care of us, but also that he has an
innumerable guard to whom he has given in charge to travail for our safety,
and that so long as we be compassed with the garrison and supporte of them,
whatsoever danger betideth, we be without all reach of hurt. I grant we do
amiss that after this simple promise of the protection of God alone, we still
look about from whense other help may come unto us. But for as much as it
pleases the Lord of his infinite clemency and gentilnesse to help this our
fault, ii. Kin. vi.xvii.
there is no reason why we should neglect his so great benefit. An example
thereof we have in the servant of Elizeus, which when he saw the hill besieged
with the army of the Syrians, and that there was no way open to escape, was
stricken down with fear, as if his master and he were then utterly destroyed.
Then Elizeus prayed God to open his servants eyes, and by and by he saw the
hill furnished with horses and fiery chariots, that is with a multitude of
angels to keep him and the prophet safe. Encouraged with this vision he
gathered up his heart again, and was able with a dredelesse mind to look down
upon his enemies, with sight of whom he was before in a manner driven out of his
wit.

that move them selves unto work but by his direction: if they do not hold us
fast in the one Mediatoure Christ, so that we may hang wholly of him, lean
all upon him, be carried to him, and rest in him. For that which is described
in the vision of Jacob ought to stick and be fastened in our minds, Genes.
xxviii.xii.
how Angels descend down to the earth unto men, and from men do go up to
heaven by a ladder, whervppon stands the Lord of hosts. Whereby is meant,
that by the only intercession of Christ it comes to pass, that the
ministeries of the Angels do come unto us, Ge. xxiiii vii.
as he him self affirms, saying: Hereafter ye shall see the heavens open and
the Angels descendynge to the Son of man Ioh. i.li. Therefore the servant of
Abraham being committed to the custody of the Angel, does not therefore call
upon the Angel to help him, but helped with that commendation, he prays to
the Lord, and besecheth him to show his mercy to Abraham. For as God does not
therefore make them ministers of his power and goodness, to the intent to part
his glory with them: so does he not therefore promise us his help in their
ministration, plato in ^p^nonide and Crahlo.
that we should divide our confidence between him and them. Let us therefore
forsake that Platonical^ philosophy, to seek the way to God by Angels, and to
honor them for this purpose that they may make God more gentill unto us:
which superstitious and curious men have from the beginning gone about, and to
this day do continue to bring into our religion.

As for such things as the Scripture teaches concerning deuilles,

And that we should be the more stirred up and enforced so to do, the
Scripture warns us, that there are not one or two or a few enemies, but great
armies that make war with us. For it is said, that Mary Magdalene was
delivered from seven deuyls, Mar. xvi.ix.
wherewith she was possessed. And Christ says, that it is the ordinary
custom, that if after a devil be ones cast out, a man make the place open
again, he brings seven spirits worse than him self, Mat. xii.xlii. Luc.
viii.xxx.
and retourneth into his possession, fynding it empty. Yea it is said that a
whole legion besieged one man. Hereby therefore we are taught, that we must
fight with an infinite multitude of enemies, least despisyng the fewenesse of
them we should be more slack to enter in bataile, or thinkyng that we have some
respite in the mean time granted, we should give our selves to idelnesse.
Where as many times Satan or the devil is named in the singular number,
thereby is meant that power of wickedness which stands against the
kingdom of Justice. For as the Church and the fellowship of saints have
Christ to their head, so the faction of the wicked is painted out unto us with
their prince, that has the chief authority among them. Mat. xxv.xli.
After which manner this is spoken. Go ye cursed into eternal fire that is
prepared for the devil and his angels.

Mat. xiii.xxviii. Ioh. viii.xliiii.
where he is called an enemy, and is said to scatter tares, to corrupt the sede
of eternal life. In a sum, that which Christ testifies of him, that from
the beginning he was a murderer, and a liar, we find by experience in all his
doings. For he assaileth the truth of God with lies, obscureth ye light with
darkness, entangleth the minds of men with errors, raises up hatredes,
kindles contentions and strifes, does all things to this end to overthrow
the kingdom of God, and drown men with himself in eternal destruction. Whereby
appears, that he is of nature froward, spiteful and malicious. For needs must
there be great frowardness in that wit, that is made to assail the glory of
God and salvation of men. And that does John speak of in his epistle, when he
writes, that he sins from the beginning. For he means that he is the
author, captain and principal workman of all malice and wickedness.

But forasmuch as the devil was created by God, let us remember that this
malice which we assign in his nature, is not by creation but by deprauation.
For what so ever damnable thing he has, he has gotten to him self by his
own reuoltyng and fall. Which the scripture therefore g^^eth us warnyng of,
least thinkyng that he came out such a one from God, we should ascribe that to
God himself which is farthest from him: For this reason does Christ say yt
Satan speaks of his own when he speaks lies, Ioh. viii.x^iiii.
and adds a cause why, for that he stood not still in the truth. Now when he
says yt he stood not still in the truth, he shows yt ones he had been in the
truth. And when he makes him the Father of lyeng, he takes this from him,
that he can not say that fault to God whereof he himself is cause to himself.
Although these things be but shortly and not very plainly spoken, yet this is
enough for this purpose to deliver the majesty of God from al sclaunder. And
what makes it matter to us, to know more or to any other purpose concerning
devils? Many perhaps do grudge, that the Scripture does not orderly and
distinctly in many places set forth that fall and the cause, manner, time, and
fashion thereof. But because these things do nothing perteine to us, it was
better, if not to be suppressed wholly, yet to be but lightly touched, and that
partly, because it was not beseming for the Holy ghost to feed curiosity with
vain histories without any fruit: and we se that it was the Lords purpose to
put nothing in his holy oracles but that which we should learn to
edification. Therefore, lest we our selves should tarry long upon things
superfluous, let us be content shortly to know thus much concerning the nature
of devils, that at the first creation they were the Angels of God: but by
swaruing out of kind they both destroyed themselves and are become
instruments of destruction to other. ii. Pet. ii.iiii. Iud. i.vi.^
Thus much, because it was profitable to be known, is plainly taught in Peter
and Jude. God spared not (say they) his Angels which had sinned, and not kept
their beginning, Ti. v.xx
but had forsaken their dwelling place. And Paul naming the elect Angels does
without dout secretly by implication set the reprobate Angels in comparison
against them.

As for the discord and strife that we say is between God and Satan, Job.
i.vi. et. ii.i
For we read in the historye of Job, that he presented himself before God to
receive his commandments, and durst not go forward to do any enterprise
till he had obtained license. So when Achab was to be deceived, he took upon
him that he would be the Spirit of lying in the mouth of all the Prophets,
i. Kin. xxii xx. i. Sa. xvi, xiiii, et, xviii.x. Ps. xxxiiii
and so being sent of God he performed it. For this reason is he called the
evil Spirit of the Lord that tormented Saul, because by him as with a scourge
the sins of the wicked king were punished. And in an other place it is
written, that the plages were laid upon the Egyptians by the evil Angels.
According to these particular examples Paul does generally testify, ii, The,
ii ix,
that the blinding of the wicked is the work of God, whereas before he had
called it the working of Satan. It is evident therefore that Satan is under the
power of God, and so governed by his authority that he is compelled to do him
service. Now when we say that Satan resists God, that the works of Satan
disagree with the works of God, we do therewithal affirm that this
disagremente and strife hangs upon the sufferaunce of God. I speak not now
of his will, nor of his endeavor, but of the effect only. For since the devil
is wicked of nature, he is not inclined to obey the will of God, but is wholly
carried to stubbornness and rebellion. This therefore he has of himself and
of his own wickedness, that of Desire and purpose he wythstandeth God. And by
this wickedness he is stirred up to the enterprising of those things that he
knows to be most against God. But because God holds him fast tied and
restrained with the bridle of his power, he executes only those things that are granted him from God. And so does he obey his creator whether he will or no,
because he is constrained to apply his service whether soever God compels
him.

Ephesians. iiii.xxvii. i. Pete. v.viii. ii. Cor. xii vii.
therefore they hear these exhortations. Do not give place to the deuel. The
devil your enemy goes about as a roaring lion sekyng whom he may devour, who^
resist ye being strong in faith and such like. Paul confesses that he him
self was not fre from this kind of strife when he says, that for a remedy
to tame pride, the Angel of Satan was given to him, by whom he might be
humbled. This exercise therefore is common to all the children of God. But
because that same promise of the breakyng of Satan's head perteyneth generally
to Christ and to all his members, Ge. iii.xv
therefore I say that the faithful can never be overcome nor oppressed by
him. They are many times stryken down, but they are never so astonnied withal
but that they recover themselves. They fall down many times with violence of
strokes, but they are after raised up again: they are wounded but not deadly.
Finally they so labor in all course of their life that in the end they obtain
the victory: ii, Sam xxiiii.i. Romans xvi.xx.
but I speak not this of every doing of theyrs. For we know we that by the
just vengeance of God David was for a time given over to Satan, by his motion
to number the people: and not without cause Paul says there is hope of pardon
least if any have been entangled with the snares of the devil. Therefore in an
other place the same Paul says, that the promise above alleged is begone in
this life, wherein we must wrestle, and is performed after our wrastlyng ended:
when he says the God of peace shall shortly beat down Satan under your
fete. This victory has always fully been in our head Christ, because the Prince
of the world had nothing in him, but in us that are his members it does now
partly appear and shall be perfited, when being unclothed of our flesh by
which we are yet subject to weakness, we shall be full of the power of the
Holy ghost. In this manner when the kingdom of Christ is raised up and
^duaunced, Satan with his power falls down as the Lord himself says. I saw
Satan fall as a lightening down from heaven. For by this answer he confirms
that which the Apostles had reported of ye power of his preaching. Again, When
ye Prince possesses his own palace, Luke. x.xviii, Lu. xi, xxi
al things that he possesses are in peace, but when there comes a stronger,
he is thrown out. etc. And to this end Christ in dying overcame Satan which
had ye power of death, and triu^phed upon al his armies yt they should not hurt
the church, for otherwise they would every momente a hundred times destroy it.
For (considering what is our weakness, and what is his furious strength) how
could we stand, yea never so little time against his manifold and continual
assaults, but being supported by the victory of our captain? Therefore God
suffers not the devil to reign over the souls of the faithful, but only
delivers him the wicked and unbelieving to govern, whom God does not
vouchesaue to have reckened in his flock. For it is said that he possesses
this world without controversy till he be thrust out by Christ. ii. Corin.
iiii.iiii. Ephesians. ii.ii.
Again, that he does blind all them that believe not the gospel, again, that
he performs his work in the stubborn children, and worthily, for all the
wicked are the vessels of wrath. Therefore to whom should they be rather
subject than to the minister of Gods vengeance? Ioh. viii.xlii^i. i. Ioh.
iii.viii.
Finally they are said to be of their Father the devil, because as the
faithful are hereby known to be the children of God because they bear his
image: so they by the image of Satan into which they are gone out of kind, ar
properly discerned to be his children.

As we have before confuted that trifling philosophy concerning the i. Ioh.
iii.viii.
were it not an unfit comparion, if the name of the devil signified nothing else
but evil inspirations? And John adds somewhat more plainly, that the devil
synneth from the beginning. Likewise when Jude brings in Michael the
archangel fyghtyng with the devil, doutlesse he sets against the good Angel
an evil and rebellious Angel. Wherewith agrees that which is red in the hostory
of Job, Job. i.vi.
that Satan appeared with the Holy Angels before God. But most plain of al are
those places that make mention of ye punishment which they begin to feel by the
judgment of God, and specially shall feel at the resurrection. Son of David
why art thou come before the time to torment us? Again, Go ye cursed into the
eternal fire that is prepared for the devil and his Angels. Mat. viii.xxix.
Mat. xxv.xli. Iud. i.ix.
Again, If he spared not his own Angels that had sinned, but cast them down
into hell and delivered the^ into cheines of darkness to be kept unto
damnacio^. etc. How fond should these speches be, that ye devils are ordained
to eternal judgment, yt fire is prepared for them, that they are now already
tormented and vexed by the glory of Christ: if there were no devils at all? But
because this matter needs no disputation among them yt believe the word of the
Lord. and little good is done with testimonies of Scripture among those vain
students of speculation, who^ nothing pleases but that which is new: I
suppose I have performed ye which I purposed, that is that ye godly minds
should be furnished against such fond errors, wherewt unquiet men do trouble
both themselves and other yt be more simple. But it was good to touch this,
least any entangled with that error, while they think they have none to stand
against them, should wax more slow and unprovided to resist.



them with remembrance. But because we are now busyed in that kind that
pertains to order of teaching, it is mete yt we omit those things that
require long declamations. Therefore, to be short, let the readers know, that
then they have conceived by Faith, what this means, that God is the creator
of heaven and earth, if they first follow this universal rule, that they
pass not over with not considering or forgetfulness of those virtues, that
God presents to be seen in his creatures, then, that they so learn to apply
them selves that they may therwyth be thoroughly moved in their hearts. The
first of those we do when we consider how excellent a workemans work it was,
to place and aptly set in so well disposed order the multitude of the stars
that is in heaven, that nothing can be devised more beautiful to behold: to
set and fasten some of them in their standinges so that they can not move,
and to other some to grant a free course, but so that in moving they wander
not beyond their appointed space, so to temper the motion of them all that it
may divide in measure the days and nyghtes, months, years and seasons of
the year, and to bring this inequality of days which we daily see to such a
tempered order that it has no confusyon. Likewise, when we mark his power in
susteyning so great a body, in gouernyng the so swifte whirling about of the
engyne of heaven, and such like. For these few examples do sufficientlye
declare what it is to record the power to God in ye creation of the world. For
else if I should travail as I said to express it all in words, I should
never make an end, forasmuch as there are so many miracles of the power of
God, so many tokens of his goodness, so many examples of his wisdom, as
there be forms of things in the world, yea as there be things either great
or small.

Now remains the other part which comes nerer to Faith, that Gene, i,
xxvi^i. et, ix, ii,
Beside that we hear by Moses that by his liberality all that ever is in the
world is made subject to us. Sure it is that he did it not to mock us with
an emptye name of gift. Therefore we shall never lack any thing, so far as
it shall be auaylable for our preservation. Finally, to make an end, so often as
we name God the creator of heaven and earth, let this come in our minds
withal, that the disposition of al things which he has create, is in his
hand and power, and that we are his children whom he has taken into his own
charge and keeping to foster and bring up: that we may look for all good things
at his hand, and assuredly trust that he will never suffer us to lack things
needful for our safety, to the end our hope should hang upon none other:
that whatsoever we desire our prayers may be directed to him: of what thing
soever we receive profit we may acknowledge it to be his benefit, and
confess it with thanks giving: that being allured with so great sweetness
of his goodness and liberality, we may study to love and honor him withal
our heart.

The.xv. Chapter. What a one man was created: wherein there is entreated of the
powers of the soul, of the image of God, of free will and of the first
integrity of nature.
NOw must we speak of the creation of man, not only because he is among all
the works of God the most noble and most excellent example of his justice,
wisdom and goodness: but also because as we said in the beginning, we cannot
plainly and perfectly know God, unless we have wtall a mutual knowledge of
our selves. Although the same knowledge be of two sorts, the one to know what
we were created at the first beginning, ye other to know what our estate began
to be after the fall of Adam (for it were but to small profit for us to know
our creation, unless we did also in this lamentable fall know what is the
corruption and deformity of our nature:) yet at this time we will be content
with description of our nature when it was pure. And before we descend to this
miserable estate whereunto man is now in thraldom, it is good to learn what a
one he was created at the beginning. For we must take heed that in precisely
declaring only the natural evils of man, we seem not to impute them to the
author of nature. For ungodliness thinks her self to have sufficient defense
in this color, if it may lay for her self that whatsoever fault she has, the
same did after a certain manner proceed from God, and sticks not if she be
accused, to quarrel with God, and to lay ye fault upon him whereof she is
worthily accused. And they yt would seem to speak somewhat more reverently of
the majesty of God, yet do willingly seek to excuse their own wickedness, by
nature, not considering that therein though not openly they blame God also, to
whoes reproach it should fall if it were proved that there is any fault in
nature. Since then we see that our flesh gapeth for all the ways to escape,
whereby she thinks the blame of her own evils may any way be put of from her,
we must diligently trauail to mete with this mischief. Therefore we must so
handle the calamity of mankind that we cut of all excuse, and deliver the
justice of God from al accusation. Afterward in place conueniente we shall see
how far men be now from that pureness that was given to Adam. And first we
must remember, that in this that man was taken out of earth and claye, a bridle
was put upon his pride, for there is no greater absurdity, than for them to
glory in their excellencye that do not only dwell in a cotage of clay, but
also are themselves in part but earth and ashes. But forasmuch as God did not
only vouchesaue to give life unto an earthen vessel, but also it was his
pleasure that it should be the dwelling house of an immortal Spirit, Adam
might justly glory in so great liberality of his maker.

Now it is not to be doubted that man consists of soul and body, and Eccle,
xii, vii, Luc. xxiii.xlvi. Act. vii.lix
yet when Spirit is set by it self it means as much as Soul. As, when
Solomon speaking of death, says that then the Spirit returns to him that
gave it. And Christ commending his Spirit to his father, and Stephen his
Spirit to Christ do both mean none other thing but that when the soul is
delivered from the prison of the flesh, God is the perpetual keeper of it. As
for them that imagine that the Soul is therefore called a Spirit because it is
a breath or a power by god inspired or poured into bodies which yet has no
essence: both the thing it self and all the Scripture shows that they do to
much grossly err. True it is that while men are fastened to the earth more than
they ought to be, they wax dull, yea because they are estranged from the
Father of lights they are blinded with darkness, so that they do not think
upon this, that they shall remain alive after death. And yet is not that light
so quenched in darkness, but that they be touched with some feling of
immortality. Surely the conscience which discerning between good and evil
answers the judgment of God, is an undoubted sign of an immortal Spirit.
For how could a motion without essence atteine to come to the judgment seat
of God, and throw it self into fear by finding her own giltinesse? For the
body is not moved with fear of a Spiritual peine, but yt falls only upon the
soul. Whereby it follows yt the soul has an essence. Moreover the very
knowledge of God does prove that the souls which ascend up above the world
are immortal: for a vanishing liveliness were not able to atteine to the
fountain of life. Finalli forasmuch as so many excellent gifts wherewith man's
mind is endowed, do cry out yt there is some divine thing engraven it, there
are even so many testimonies of an immortal essence. For that sense which is in
brute beasts, goes not out of the body, or at lest extends no further than
to things presently set before it. But the nimblenesse of the mind of man
which veweth the heaven and earth and secrets of nature, and comprehending all
ages in understanding and memory, digesteth every thing in order and gathers
things to come by things past, does plainly show that there lies hydden in
man a certain thing several from the body. We conceive by understanding the
invisible God and Angels, which the body can not do. We know things that be
right, just, and honest, which are hidden from the bodily senses. Therefore it
must needs be that the Spirit is the seat of this understanding, Yea and our
sleep it self, which astonieth a man and seems to take life away from him, is
a plain witness of immortality, forasmuch as it does not only minister unto
us, thoughts of those things that never were done, but also foreknowinges of
things for time to come. I touch these things shortly which even profane
writers do excellently set out with more gorgeous garnishment of words: but
with the godly reders a simple putting in mind of them shall be sufficient.
Now if the soul were not a certain thing by it self several from the body,
the Scripture would not teach that we dwell in houses of clay, that by death
we remove out of the Tabernacle of the flesh, that we do put of that which is
corruptible, that finally at the last day we may receive reward every man as
he has behaved himself in his body. For these places and other that we do
each where commonly light upon, do not only manifestly destinguish the soul
from the body, but also in giving to the soul the name of man do show that it
is the principal part. i. cor. vii.i
Now whereas Paul does exhort the faithful to cleanse themselves from al defiling
of the flesh and the Spirit, he makes two parts of man wherein abides the
filthiness of sin. And Peter where he calls Christ the shepeherde and
bishop of souls, i Pete. ii.xxv. i. Pe i.ix, i. Pe. xiii,
should have spoken fondly if there were no souls about whom he might execute
that office. Neither would that conuenientlye stand together which he says
of the eternal salvation of souls, and where he bids to cleanse our souls,
and where he says that evil desires do fight against the soul, and where the
author of the Epistle to ye Hebrews says, Heb, xiii, xvi.
that the Pastors do watch that they may yield acco^pte for our souls, unless
it were true that souls had a proper essence. To the same purpose serves it
that Paul calls God for witness to his own soul, because it could not be
called in judgment before God unless it were subject to punishment. Math.
x.^xviii. Lu, xii, v. Heb. xii.ix
And this is also more plainly expressed in the words of Christ, when he
bids us to fear him which after that he has killed the body, can throw ye
soul into hell fire. Now where the author of the Epistle to the Hebrews does
distinguishe the Fathers of our flesh from God, which is the only Father of
Spirits, he would not otherwise more plainly affirm the essence of souls.
Moreover, if ye souls remained not alive being delivered from the prisons of
their bodies, Christ should very fondly have brought in the soul of Lazarus
ioying in the bosom of Abraham, Luke xvi.xxii, ii. Cor. v Act. xxiii.viii.
and again the soul of the richman subject to horrible torments. The same
thing does Paul confirm when he teaches that we wander abrod from God, so
long as we dwell in the flesh, and that we enjoy his presence being out of the
flesh. But, because I will not be long in a matter that is not obscure, I will
add only this out of Luke, that it is reckened among the errors of the
Sadduces that they did not believe that there were any Spirits and Angels.

Ge. i.xxvii
For although the glory of God do appear in the outward shape of man, yet is
it no doubt that the proper seat of the image of God is in the soul. I do
not deny that as concerning our outward shape, in as much as the same does
distinguishe and sever us from brute bestes, we do also therein more nerely
approach to God than they: nether will I much stand against the^ which think
that this is to be accounted of the image of God, yt where al other living
creatures do grouellyngwise behold the ground, to man is given an upright
face, and he is commanded to look upon the heaven, and to advance his
countenance toward the stars: so that this remayn certain, that the image
of God which is seen appears in these outward signs, is spiritual. For
Osiander (whom his writyngs declare to have been in fickle imaginations fondly
witty) referryng the image of God without difference as well to the body as to
the soul, mingleth heaven and earth together. For he says, that the Father,
the Son, and the Holy ghost did settle their image in man, because though Adam
had stand without falling, yet should Christ have become man. And so by their
opinion the body that was appointed for Christ, was but an example or figure of
that bodily shape which then was formed. But where shall he find that Christ
is the image of the Spirit? I grant in deed that in the Person of the
Mediator shyneth the glory of the whole Godheade. But how shall the eternal
word be called the image of the Spirit whom he goes before in order?
Finally it overthrows the distinction between the Son and the Holy ghost,
if he do here call him his image. Moreover I would feign learn of him how
Christ does resemble the Holy ghost in the flesh that he took upon him,
and by what marks and features he does express the likeness of him. And
where as this saying: Let us make man after our image, Genes. i.xvi,
does also belong to the Person of the Son, it follows, that he must be the
image of himself: which is against all reason. Beside that, if Osianders
invention be believed, man was fashioned only after the figure and pattern of
Christ in that he was man, and so that form out of which Adam was taken, was
Christ, in that that he was to be clothed with flesh, where as the Scripture
in a far other meaning teaches, that he was create in the image of God. But
their subtle inue^tion is more colorable which do thus expound it, that
Adam was create in the image of God, because he was fashioned like unto
Christ, which is the only image of God. But that exposition also is not
sound. Also some interpreters make a great disputation about Image and
Likeness, while they seek a difference between those two words, where is no
difference at al, saying that this word Likeness is added to expound the
other. First we know that among the Hebrews such repetitions are common,
wherein they express one thing twice: and in the thing it self there is no
doubt, but that man is therefore caled the image of God, because he is like to
God. Whereby appears that they are to be laughed at, which do so subtly
argue about the words, whether they appoint Zelem, that is to say, Image in
the substance of the soul, or Demuth, that is to say, Likeness in the
qualities, or what other thing soever it be yt they teach. For where as God
determined to create man after his own image, this being somewhat darkly spoken
he does as by way of explication repete it in this saying, After his likeness,
as if he would have said, that he would make man, in whom he would represent
him self, as in an image, because of the marks of likeness graven in him.
And therefore Moses a little after recityng the same thing, does repete the
Image of God twice, leauyng out the name of Likeness. And it is a triflyng
objection that Oseander makes, that not a part of man, or the soul only
with the gifts thereof, is called the Image of God, but the whole Adam which
had his name given him of the earth, from whense he was taken. Triflyng, I
say, will all readers that have their sound wit judge this objection. For
where whole man is called mortal, yet is not the soul thereby made subject to
mortality.

Again where he is called a living creature endued with reason, it is not
thereby meant that the body has reason and understanding. Although therefore the
soul is not the whole man, yet is it not inconvenient, that man in respect of
the soul be called the image of God, albeit I hold still that principle
which I have before stablished, that the Image of God extends to the whole
excellence, whereby the nature of man has preeminence among all kinds of
living creatures. Therefore in that word is noted the integrity that man had
when he was endued with right understanding, when he had his affection framed
according to reason, and all his senses governed in right order, and when in
excellent gifts he did truly resemble the excellence of his Creator. And
though the principal seat of the image of God were in the mind and heart, or
in the soul and the powers thereof, yet was there no part of man, not so much
as the body, wherein did not some sparks thereof appear. Certain it is, that
also in all the parts of the world, there do shine some resemblances of the
glory of God: whereby we may gather that where it is said, that his Image is in
man, there is in so saying a certain secret comparison, that auaunceth man
above all other creatures, and does as it were sever him from the common sort.
Mat. xxii.xxx.
Neither is it to be denied, that the Angels were create after the likeness of
God, sith (as Christ him self testifies) our chief perfection shall be to
become like unto them. But not without cause does Moses by that peculiar
title set forth the grace of God toward us, specially where he compares
only visible creatures with man.

But yet it seems that there is not given a full definition of the image of
God, unless it plainlier appear in what qualities man excels: and whereby he
ought to be compted a glass, resemblyng the glory of God. But that can be by
no other thing better known, than by the repayryng of man's corrupted nature.
First it is doubtless, that when Adam fell from his estate, he was by that
departure estranged from God. Wherefore although we grant that the Image of
God was not altogyther defaced and blotted out in him, yet was it so
corrupted, that all that remains, is but vggly deformity. Therefore the
beginning of recovery of safety for us, is in that restoryng which we
obtain by Christ, who is also for the same cause called the second Adam,
because he restored us unto true and perfect integrity. For although where
Paul does in comparyson set the quicknyng Spirit that Christ gives to the
faithful, i. Cor. xv.xlv.
against the living soul wherein Adam was created, he sets forth the more
abundaunte measure of grace in the regeneration: yet doothe he not take away
this other principal point, that this is the end of our regeneration, that
Chrste should new fashion us to the image of God. Colo. iii.x. Ephe. iiii
xxiiii.
Therefore in an other place he teaches, that the new man is renewed
according to the image of him that created him. Wherewith agrees this saying:
put on ye new man which is create according to God. Now it is to be seen, what
Paul does principally co^prehe^d under this renuyng. First he speaks of
knowledge and after of pure righteousness and holiness. Whereby we gather that
the image of God was first of al to be seen in the light of the mind, in ye
uprightness of heart, and soundness of all the parts. For although I grant
that this is a figurative phrase of speech to set the part for the whole: yet
can not this principle be overthrown, that that thing which is the chief in
the renewyng of the image of God, was also the principal in the creation of
him. ii Cor. iii xviii.
And for the same purpose makes it that in an other place he teaches, that we
beholding the glory of God with open face, are transformed into the same image.
Now do we see how Christ is the most perfect image of God, according to
the which we being fashioned are so restored, that in true godliness,
righteousness, pureness and understanding, we bear the image of God. Which
principle being established, i. Cor. xi.vii.
Osianders imagination of the shape of our body does easily vanishe away of it
self. Where as the man alone is in Paul called the Image and glory of God,
and the woman is excluded from that degree of honor, it appears by the rest
of the text, that the same is to be applied only to civil order of policy.
But that under the name of image, Ioh. i.iiii
whereof we speak, is comprehended all that belongs to the spiritual and
eternal life, I think it be already sufficiently proved. And the same thing
does John confirm in other words: saying that the light which was from the
beginning in the eternal word of God was the light of men. For where his
purpose was to praise the singular grace of God, whereby man excels all
other living creatures to sever him from the common ^orte, because he has
atteined no common life, but joined with the light of understanding, he
therwithall shows how he was made after the image of God. Therefore sith the
image of God is the uncorrupted excellence of the nature of man, which shyned
in Adam before his fall, and afterward was so corrupted and almost defaced,
that nothing remains sins that ruin, but disordred, mangled, and filthily
spotted: yet the same does in some part appear in the elect, insomuche as
they are regenerate, and shall obtein her full brightness in heaven. But that
we may know on what parts it consists, it shall be good to entreat of the
powers of the soul. For that speculatiue devise of Augustine is not sound,
Libr. de tri. x. De ciui. dei* xi.
where he says that the soul is a glass of the Trinity, because that there
are in it understanding, will, and memory. Neither is their opinion to be
approved, which set the Image of God in the power of dominion given unto
him, as if he resembled God only in this mark, that he is appointed lord and
possessor of all things, where as in deed the Image of God is proprely to be
sought within him, and not without him, and is an inward good gift of the
soul.

But before I go any further, it is needful that I meet with the dotyng
Genes. ii.vii.
which Seruetto has attempted to bring in again in this age. Where it is
said, that God breathed the breath of life into the face of man, they thought
that the soul did convey into man the substance of God, as if some portion of
the immeasurable God were come into man. But it is easy even shortly to show
how many gross and foul absurdities this deuillish error draws with it.
For if the soul be by deriuation part of the essence of God, it shall follow
that the nature of God is subject, not only to change and passions, but also
to ignorance, evil lusts, weakness, and all kinds of vices. Nothing is more
inconstant than man, because contrary motions do toss and diuersely draw his
soul, oftentimes he is blind by ignorance, often he yeldeth as vanquished even
to small tentations, and we know that the soul it self is the sink and
receiver of al filthiness, all which things we must ascribe to the nature of
God, if we grant that the soul is of the essence of God, or a secret
inflowyng of godhed. Who would not abhorte this monstrous devise? Truly in
deed does Paul allege out of Aratus, that we are the ofspryng of God, but in
quality and not in substance, Act. xvii.xxviii.
in as much as he has garnished us with godly gifts. But in the mean time to
tear in ^under the essence of the Creator, as to say, that every man does
possess part of it, is to much madness. Therefore we must certainly hold,
that the souls, although the image of God be graven in them, were no less
created than the angels were. And creation is not a powryng out of one
substance into an other, but a beginning of essence made of nothing. And
although the spirit of man came from God, and in departing out of the flesh
retourneth to God, yet is not forthwith to be said, that it was taken out of
his substance. And in this point also of Oseander, while he glories in his
illusions, has entangled himself with an ungodly error, not acknowledgyng
the image of God to be in man without his essential justice, as though God by
the inestimable power of his holy spirit could not make us like unto him
self, unless Christ should substantially power him self into us. With what
soever color many do go about to disguise these deceiptes, yet shall they
never so beguile the eyes of the readers, that are in their right wits, but
that they will easilye see that these things savor of the Manichees error.
And where saint Paul entreats of the restoryng of this image, it may be
readyly gathered out of his words, ii. Cor. iii xviii.
that man was made of like form to God, not by inflowyng of his substance,
but by grace and power of his Spirit. For he says, that in beholding the
glory of Christ, we are transformed into the same Image, as by the Spirit of
God, which surely so works in us, that it makes us of one substance with
God.

yet even in the vices themselves there remain emprinted some leauynges thereof.
For whense comes it but of shame, that men have so great care what be reported
of them? And whense comes shame, but of regard of honesty? Whereof the
beginning and cause is, that they understand that they are naturally borne to
observe Justice, in which persuasion is enclosed the sede of religion. For as
without all controversy man was made to meditation of the heavenly life: so is
it certain that the knowledge thereof was engraven in his soul. And surely man
should want the principal use of his understanding, if he should be ignorant of
his own felicity, whereof ye perfection is that he be joined with God, and
therefore it is the chief actio^ of ye soul to aspire thereunto. And so ye more
that every man studieth to approach unto God, the more he thereby proves
himself to be endued with reason. As for them that would have diverse souls
in man, that is, a felyng soul, and a reasonable soul, although they seem to
say somewhat by reason proueable, yet because there is no steadfast certainty in
their reasons, we must reiecte them, unless we listed to accombre our selves
in things triflyng and unprofitable. A great disagreement say they, there is
between the isntrumental motions and the part of the soul endued with reason.
As though reason it self did not also dissent from it self, and some devises
of it do strive with other some, as they were armies of enemies. But
forasmuch as that troublesomnesse proceeds of the corruption of Nature, it
were amysse to gather thereby, that there are two souls, because the powers of
the soul do not agree together, in such well framed order as they ought. But
as for more subtle disputation of the Powers them selves, I leave that to the
Philosophers. A simple definition shall suffice us for edification of
godliness. I grant that the things that they teach are true, and not only
pleasant but also profitable to be known, and well gathered of them, and I
forbydde not such as are desirous to learn to study them. First therefore
I admit that there are five Senses, which Plato better lyked to call
Instruments, whereby all Obiectes, in The^cteto.
are powered into Common sense, as into a place of receypte: then follows
Phantasye, which judges those things one from other that Common sense has
conceived, next is Reason, to which beelongeth the universal judgment of
things: last, is the Understandyng mind, which with earnestly bente and
quiet vewyng beholds all those things, that Reason is wont to discourse
upon, Arist. Etthicorum lib. i. ca. vlt. Ite^ li.vi. cap. 2.
and consider. And to the Understandyng mind, Reason, and Phansy, which are
the three powers of the soul, that rest in knowledge, there do answer three
other that do rest in Appetite, that is to say, Will, the parts whereof are
to couete those things that the Understandyng mind and Reason do lay
before it: the Power of Anger, which catches those things that Reason and
Phansy do minister unto it, The power of Desiryng, which takes hold of those
things that Phantasy and Sense, presents it. Although these things be true,
or at least likely to be true, yet because I fear that they shall more
entangle us with obscurenesse than further us, I think it best to ouerpasse
them. If any man list otherwise to dyuide the powers of the soul, and to
call the one the power of Appetite, which although it be without reason it
self, yet does obey reason, if it be by other mean directed, and to call
the other the power of understanding, which is by it self partaker of reason,
I am not much against it, neither will I confute this opinion, that there are
three beginnyngs of doing: that is to say, Sense, Understandyng, and Appetite.
But let us rather choose a division, that is within the capacity of all men,
which can not be had of the Philosophers. For they when they mean to speak
most plainly, do divide the soul into Appetite and Understandyng, but
either of these they make of two sorts. Understandyng, they say, is sometime
Contemplative, which being contented with only knowledge, Themistocles de anima
lib. 3. ca. 49. De duplici intell. de finibus lib. 3.
has no mouyng of action, which thing Cicero thinks to be expressed by this
word ingenium, wit. Sometime they say it is practical, which by
conceyuyng of good or evil does diuersely move the Will. And appetite they
do divide into Will, and Lust. Will they call that when Appetite which they
call Horme, obeys to reason, and Lust they call that when the appetite
shaking of the yoke of reason, runs out^ to intemperance. So alwais they
imagine reason to be that in man, whereby man may rightly govern him self.

Etthi. li.vi. cap. 2
According whereunto, Aristotle him self has truly said, that fleeyng or
following is in Appetite such a like thing, as in the vnderstandng mind is
affirming and denying. Now how certain the government of Understandyng is to
direct the Will: that we will consider in an other place. Here we mean only to
show that there can be found no power in the soul but that may well be said
to belong to the one of these two members. And in this sort under Understandyng
we comprehend Sense, which other do so distinguishe, that they say Sense is
inclined to pleasure, for which Understanding follows that which is good: and
that so it comes to pass, that the Appetite of sense is Concupiscence and
Lust, the affection of understanding is Will. Again instead of the name of
Appetite, which they better like, I set the name of Will, which is more
commonly used.

and having the light of reason going before him, might se what is to be
followed or forsake. For which cause the Philosophers have called this directing
part the Guider. To this he has adjoined will, to which belongs choice. With
these noble gifts the first state of man excelled, so that he not only had
enough of reason, understanding, wisdom, and judgment, for the government
of this erthly life, but also to clime up even to God and to eternal felicity.
Then to have Choice added unto it, which might direct the appetites, and
order all the instrumental motions, and that so the Will might be altogether
agreeable to the government of reason. In this Integrity, man had freewill,
whereby if he would he might have atteined eternal life. For here it is out of
place to move question of the secret predestination of God: because we are not
now about to discuss what might have chanced or not, but what at that time
was the nature of man. Adam therefore might have stand if he would, because he
fell not but by his own will. But because his will was pliable to either side,
and there was not given him constancy to continue, therefore he so easily fell.
Yet his Choice of good and evil was free. And not that only, but also in his
understanding mind, and in his will was most great uprightness, and all his
instrume^tall parts orderly framed to obedience, until by destroying himself
he corrupted the good things that were in him. From hense comes it that all
the Philosophers were so blinded, for that in a ruin they sought for an upright
buildyng, and for strong joints in an unjointed overthrow. This principle
they held, that man could not be a living creature, endued with reason,
unless there were in him a free choice of good and evil: and they considered,
that otherwise all the difference should be taken away between virtues and
vices, unless man did order his own life by his own advise. Thus far had
they said well if there had been no change in man, which change because they
knew not of, it is no marvel though they confound heaven and earth
together. But as for them which professyng them selves to be the disciples of
Christ, do yet seek for free will in man, that has been lost and drowned in
spiritual destruction, they in going mean between ye Philosophers opinions and
the heavenly doctrine are plainly deceived, so that they touch neither heaven
nor earth. But of these things we shall better speak in place fit for them:
now only this we have to hold in mind, that man at his first creation was
far other than his posterity ever sins, which taking their beginning from
him being corrupted, has from him received an infection derived to them as it
were by inheritance. For then all the parts of his soul were framed to
right order, then stood safe the soundenesse of his understanding mind, and
his will free to choose the good. If any do obiecte that it stood but in
slippry state, because his power was but weak, I answer that that state was
yet such as sufficed to take from him all excuse, neither was it reasonable to
restrain God to this point, to make man such a one as either could not or
would not sin at all, Aug. Ge^ ne. lib. xi, cap. vii.viii.ix.
I grant such a nature had been better, but therefore precisely to quarrel with
god, as though it had been his duty to have given that unto man, is to much
injustice, forasmuch as it was in his own choice to give how much pleased
him. But why he did not uphold him with the strength of steadfast continuance,
that rests hidden in his own secret counsel: it is our part only to be
so far wise as with sobriety we may. Man received in deed to be able if he
would, De correp. and gtati. ad valentini. ca. xi.
but he had not to will that he might be able. For of this will should have
followed steadfast continuance. Yet is he not excusable, which received so much
that of his own will he has wroughte his own destruction. And there was no
necessity to compel God to give him any other then a mean will and a frail
will, that of man's fall he might gather matter for his own glory.

The.xvi. Chapter. That God by his power does monishe and mainteyne the
world, which him self has created, and by his providence does govern all the parts thereof.
BUt it were very fond and bare to make God a creator for a moment, which
does nothing sins he has ones made an end of his work. And in this point
principally ought we to differ from the profane men, that the presence of the
power of God may shine unto us no less in the continual state of the world,
than in the first beginning of it. For though the minds of the very wicked in
only beholding of the heaven and earth are compelled to rise up unto the
creator, yet has faith a certain peculiar manner by it self whereby it gives
to god ^he whole praise of creation. And therefore serves that saying of the
Apostle, which we before alleged, yt we do not understand but by faith, that
the world was made by the word of God. For unless we pass forward even unto
his providence, we do not yet rightly conceive what this means ye God is the
creator, how soever we do seem to comprehend it in mind, and confess it
with tongue. When the sense of the flesh has ones set before it the power
of God in the very creation, it rests there, and when it proceeds furthest
of all, it does nothing but wey and consider the wysedom, power, and
goodness of the workman in making such a piece of work (which things do of
them selves offer and thrust them selves in sight of men whether they will or
no) and a certain general doing in preseruyng and governing ye same, upon
which depends the power of mouyng. Finally it thinks that the lively force
at the beginning put into all things by God, does suffice to sustein them. But
faith ought to perce deper, that is to say, whom it has learned to be the
creator of al things, by and by to gather that the same is the perpetual
governor and preserver of them: and that, not by stirryng with an universal
motion as well the whole frame of the world, as all the parts thereof, but by
susteynyng, cherishing and caring for, with singular providence every one of
those things yt he has created eue^ to ye least sparow. So David after he had
first said that the world was created by God, by and by descends to the
continual course of his providence. By the word of the Lord (says he) the
heavens were stablished, and all the power thereof by the spirit of his mouth.
Ps. xxxiii vi.
By and by he adds, The Lord looked down upon the sons of men. and so the
rest that he says further to ye same effect. For although they do not al
reason so orderly, yet because it were not likely to be believed that God had
care of men's matters, unless he were the maker of the world, nor any man
does earnestly believe that God made the world, unless he be persuaded that
God has also care of his works: therefore not without cause David does by
good order conueye us from the one to the other. Generally in deed both the
Philosophers do teach, and men's minds do conceive that all parts of the
world are quickened with the secret inspiration of God. But yet they atteine
not so far as David both himself proceeds and carries all the godly with
him, Psa. ciiii.xxvii.
saying: all things wait upon thee, that thou may give them fode in due
season. Thou geuest it to them and they gather it. Thou openest thy hand and
they are filled with good things. But if thou hide thy face they are troubled.
If thou take away their breath, they dye and return to their dust. Again if
thou send forth thy Spirit, Act. xvii xxviii.
they are created and thou renewest the face of the earth. Yea although they
agree to the saying of Paul, that we have our being and are moved, and do live
in God, yet are they far from that earnest felyng of grace, which he
commends unto us: because they taste not of gods special care whereby alone
his fatherly favor is known.

That this difference may the better appear, it is to be known, that the
Providence of God, such as it is taught in the Scripture, is in Math. x.xix.
will seek for a cause further of, and will fyrmelye believe that all chances
are governed by the secret council of God. And as concerning things without
life, this is to be thought, that although every one of them have his own
property naturally put into it, yet do they not put forth their power but
only so far, as they be directed by the present hand of God. They are
therefore nothing else but instruments, whereby God continually pours in so
much effect as pleases him, and at his will boweth and turns them to this
or that doing. Of no creature is the power more marvelous or more glorious
than of the sun. For beside that it gives light to the whole world with his
bryghtnesse, how great a thing is this that he cherysheth and quickens all
living creatures with his heat? that he breaths frutefulnesse into the earth
with his beams? that out of seeds warmed in the bosom of the ground, he
draws a budding grenenesse, and susteyning the same with new nouryshmentes
does increase and strengthen it, till it rise up in stalks? That he fedeth it
with continual vapoure till it grow to a flower, and from a flower to fruit?
That then also with bakyng it he brings it to rypenesse? That trees likewise
and vines being warned by him, do first budde and shote forth branches, and
after send out a flower, and of a flower do enge^der fruit? Ge. i.iii.
But the Lord because he would claim the whole glory of all these things to
himself, made the light first to be, and the earth to be furnished with all
kinds of herbs and fruits before that he created ye sun. A godly man
therefore will not make, the sun to be either a principal or a necessary cause
of those things which were before the creation of ye sun, but only an
instrument which God uses because it so pleases him, whereas he might leave it
and do al things as easily by himself. Then when we read yt the sun stood
still two days in one degree at yt prayer of Joshua, Ios, x.xiii ii. Kin. xx.xi,
and yt the shadow thereof went back ten degrees for Ezechias his sake, by
those few miracles God has declared that the sun does not daily so rise and
go down by blind instincte of nature, but yt he to renew the remembrance of
his fatherly favor toward us, does govern the course thereof. Nothing is more
natural than spryng tide to come immediately after wi^ter, somer after spryng,
and harvest in course after summer. But in this orderly course is plainly seen
so great and so vnegal diversity, that it may easily appear that every year,
month and day, is governed by a new and special Providence of God.

Ps. cxv.iii
For whereas it is said in the Psalm yt he does whatsoever he will, therein is
meant his certain and determined will. For it were very fond to expound the
Prophets words after the Philosophers manner, yt God is the first Agent or
doer, because he is the beginning and cause of al moving: whereas the faithful
ought rather in adversity to ease themselves with this comfort, that they
suffer nothing but by the ordinance and commandment of God, because they are
under his hand. If then the gouernemente of God do so extend to al his
works, it is a very childishe cauillation to enclose it within the influence
of nature. And yet they do no more defraude God of his glory than themselves
of a most profitable doctrine, whosoever do restrayn the Providence of God
within so narrow bounds, as if he suffered al things to be carried with an
ungoverned course according to a perpetual law of nature. For nothing were more
miserable than man if he should be left subject to every motion of the heaven,
the air, the earth and the waters. Beside yt by that mean the singular
goodness of God toward every man is to much vnhonorably diminished. David
cries out that babes yet ha^gyng on their mothers breasts are eloquent enough
to magnify ye glory of God, Psa. viii.iii.
because eue^ so sone as they be come out of the womb, they find fode
prepared for the^ by his heavenly care. This is in deed generally true, so yt
yet our eyes and senses ouerpasse not that unmarked which experyence plainly
shows, that some mothers have full and plentiful breasts, some other almost
dry, as it pleases God to feed one more liberally, and an other more
scarcelye^ But they which give the due praise to the almightinesse of God, do
receive double profit thereby, the one that he has sufficiently large ability
to do them good, in whoes possession are both heaven and earth, and to whoes
beck al creatures do attend upon, to yield themselves to his obedience: the
other, that they may safely rest in his protection, to whoes will are subject
al these hurtful things that may any way be feared, by whoes authorite as with
a bridle Satan is restrained with all his furies and al his preparation, upon
whoes beck does hang all that ever is against our safety. And no other way but
this can the immesurable and superstitious fears be corrected or appeased,
which we oftentimes conceive by dangers happening unto us. Superstitiously
fearful I say we be, if where creatures do threaten us or give us any cause
of fear, we be so afraid thereof, as if they had of th^mselues any force or
power to do us harm, or did vnforeseen or by chance hurt us, or as if against
the hurtes that they do, Ier. x.ii.
there were not sufficient help in God. As for example. The Prophet
forbyddeth the children of God that they should not fear the sterres and signs
of the heaven, as the unbelievers are wont to do. He condemns not every kind
of fear. But when the unbelievers to give away the government of the world
from God unto Planets, do feign yt their felicity or misery does hang on ye
decrees and foreshewinges of the stars, and not on the will of God, so comes
it to pass that their fear is withdrawn away from that only one, who^ they
ought to have regarded, unto the stars and comets. Whosoever therefore will beware
of this unfaithfulness, let him keep always in remembrance that there is
not in the creatures a wa^dryng power, working or motion, but that they are
governed by the secret counsel of God, so that nothing can chance but that
which is decreed by him both witting and willing it so to be.

First therefore let the readers learn, that Providence is called yt, not Genesis
xxii.viii.
but that he did cast the care of a thing to him unknown upon the will of God,
which is wont to bring things doutful and confused to a certain end. Whereby
follows that Providence consists in doing: for to much fondely do many
trifle in talkyng of bare forknowledge. Their error is not altogyther so gross
which give unto God a government but disordered, and without advised choice,
(as I have before said,) yt is to say such as whirleth and drives about
with a general motion the frame of the world with all the parts thereof, but
does not peculiarly direct the doing of every creature. Yet is this error not
tolerable. For as they teach, it may be (notwithstanding this Providence
which they call universal) that al creatures may be moved by chance, or man
may turn himself hither or thither by fre choice of his will. And so do they
part ye government between God and man, yt God by his power inspireth into man
a motion whereby he may work according to ye nature planted in him, and man
orders his own doings by his own volu^tary advise: Briefly they mean that
the world, men's matters, and me^ themselves are governed by the power, but not
by the appointmente of God. I speak not of the Epicureans (which pestilence
the world has always been filled with) which dream of an idle and slouthful
God: and other as mad as they, which in old time imagined that God did so rule
above the middle region of the air, that he left things benethe to Fortune:
for against so evident madness the dumme creatures themselves do sufficiently
cry out. For now my purpose is to confute that opinion that is in a manner
commonly believed, which giving to God a certain blind, and I wot not what
uncertain motion, takes from him the principal thing, that is by his
incomprehensible wisdom to direct and dispose al things to their end: and
so in name only and not in deed it makes God a ruler of the world, because it
takes from him the government of it. For what (I beseech you) is it else to
govern, but so to be over them that are under thee, that thou may rule them
by appointed order? Yet do I not altogether reject that which is spoken of the
universal Providence: so that they will again grant me this, that the world
is ruled by God, not only because he mainteineth the order of nature which
himself has set, but also because he has a peculiar care of every one of his
works. True it is that al sorts of things are moved by a secret instinct of
nature, as if they did obey the eternal commandment of God, and that that
which God has ones determined does of it self proceed forward. And hereunto
may yt be applied which Christ says, that he and his father were even from
the beginning always workyng. Act. xvii.xxviii, Heb. i.iii.
And that which Paul teaches that in him we live, are moved and have our
being, and that which ye author of the Epistle to the Hebrews, meaning to prove
the Godhead of Christ says, that by his mighty commandment al things are
sustained. But they do wrong which by this color do hide and darken the
special Providence, which is confirmed by so certain and plain testimonies of
Scripture, that it is marvel that any man could dout of it. And surely they
themselves that draw the same veil which I speak of to hide it, are compelled
by way of correction to add, that many things ar don by ye peculiar care of
god, but then they do wrongfully restrayn the same only to peculiar doings.
Wherefore we must prove that God does so give head to the government of the
successes of al things, and that they al do so proceed from his determined
counsel that nothing happens by chance.

meting of the planetes or other natural causes. But by this mean is there no
room left, nether for ye fatherly favor nor for the judgments of God. If
they say yt God is beneficial enough to mankind because he pours into the
heaven and earth an ordinary power, whereby they do find him nourishment: yt is
to vain and profane an invention, as though the frutefulnesse of one year were
not the singular blessing of God, and dearth and famine were not his curse and
ve^geaunce? But because it were to long to gather together all the resons yt
serve for this purpose, let the authority of God himself suffice us. In the
law and in the Prophets he does oftentimes pronounce, yt so often as he waters
the earth with deaw and rain, he declares his favor, and that when by his
commandment the heaven is hardened like iro^, when corn is consumed with
blasting and other harms, when the fields are stryke^ with hayle and tempests,
it is a toke^ of his certain and special vengeance. If we grant these
things, then is it assured yt there falls not a drop of rain but by the
certain commandment of God. Ps, cxlvi.ix.
David prayseth the general Providence of God, that he gives meat to the
ravens birds ye call upon him: but when God himself threatens famine to
living creatures, does he not sufficiently declare yt he fedeth al living
things sometime with scarce and sometime with more plenteful portion as he
thinks good? It is a childish thing as I said before, Math. x.xxix.
to restrain this to particular doi^ges, whereas Christ speaks without exception,
yt not a sparrow of never so small a price does fall to the ground without the will
of his father. Surely if ye flyeng of birds be ruled by the purpose of God,
Ps. xii.v.
the^ must we needs confess with ye Prophet, yt he so dwells on hye, that
yet he humbles himself to look upon at things that chance in heaven and
earth.

But because we know yt ye world was made principally for ma^kindes Hier.
x.xxiii.
I know, Lord, yt the way of man is not his own, nether belongs it to man
to direct his own steps. And Solomon says, Prou. xx.xxiiii.
the steps of man are ruled by the lord, and how shall a man dispose his own
way? Now let the^ say yt man is moved by God according to ye inclination of his
own nature, but yt man himself does turn ye moving whether it pleases him.
But if that were truly said, then should man have the free choice of his own
ways. Paradue^ture they will deny that, because he can do nothing without the
power of God. But seeing it is certain that the Prophet and Solomon do give
unto God, not only power but also choice and appointment, they can not so
escape away. But Salomo^ in an other place does finely rebuke this rashenesse
of men, that apoint unto themselves an other end without respect of God, as
though they were not led by his hand. Pro xvi.i
The preparations (says he) of the heart are in man, but the answer of the tongue
is of the Lord. It is a fond madness that me^ will take upon the^ to do
things without God, which can not so much as speak but what he will. And the
Scripture to express more plai^ly yt nothing at al is done in ye world but by
his appointment, shows yt those things which seem most happening by chance ar
subject to him. Exo, xxi, xiii.
For what ca^ you more ascribe to chance, tha^ when a broken bow falling from
a tree kills a wayfaring man passing by it? But the lord says far otherwise,
which confesses yt he has delivered hi^ into ye hand of the slaier. Likewise
who does not leave the happening of lettes to the blindness of fortune* But
the Lord suffers it not which claims the judgment of them to himself: for
he says that it comes not to pass by a ma^s own power that stones are cast
into the lap and drawn out again, Pro. xvi.xxxiii.
but that thing which only might be said to come of chance he testifies to
come from him self. For the same purpose makes that saying of Solomon. The
poor man and the usurer mete together, God lyghteneth both their eyes. For
although poor men and rich be mi^gled together in ye world, while every one
has his state assigned him from God, he admonishes yt god which gives light
to al me^ is not blind, and so he exhorts ye poor to patience, because
whosoever are not contented with their own state, they seek to shake of ye burden
yt god has laid upon the^. So an other Prophet rebukes ye ungodly me^,
which ascribe to the diligence of men or to Fortune, that some lie in misery
and some arise up to honor. To come to preferment is neither from the east nor
from the west nor from the south, Psa. lxxv vii.
for God is the judge, he makes low and he makes hie. Because God can not put
of ye office of a judge, thereupon the Prophet proves that by his secret
purpose some ar in honor, and other some remain in contempt.

Exo, xix.xiii.
God raised in ye desert a south wind to bring the people plenty of fowls:
when his pleasure was to have Jonas thrown into the sea, Ioh. i.vi.
he sent out a wind to raise up a tempest. But they that think yt God
governs not the world, will say yt this chanced beside common use. But
thereby I do gather yt never any wind does rise or encrese but by the special
commandment of God. For otherwise it should not be true, Psa. ciiii iiii.
that he makes the winds his messangers, and fiery flame his ministers, yt he
makes the clouds his chariots and rides upon the wings of the wind, unless
he did by his will drive about the clouds and winds, and show in them the
singular presence of his power. So in an other place we are taught that so often
the sea swells with blast of winds, Psa, cvii.xxv.
those violences do testifye a singular presence of God. He commands and
raises up the stormy wyndes and it lifts up the waves thereof, and then he
turns the storm to calm, so that the waves thereof are still. As in an
other place he says, that he scourged the people with burning winds. So
whereas the power of engendring is naturally given to men, yet God wills to it
be imputed to his special grace, that he leaves some in barrenness, and
vouchsaueth to grant issue to other some, Ge. xxx.ii
the fruit of the womb is his gift. Therefore said Jacob to his wife, am I as
God yt I can give thee children? But to make an end: there is nothing more
ordinary in nature than that we be fed with bred. But the Holy ghost
pronounces that not only the growing of the fruits of the earth is the
special gift of God, but also that men live not by only bread, because it is
not the very full feding that nourishes, but the secret blessing of God: Esa.
iii i,
as on the other side he threteneth that he will break the stay of bred. Nether
could we earnestly pray for our daily bred, unless God did give us fode with
his fatherly hand. Therefore ye Prophet, Ps. cxxxvi
to persuade the faithful, Ps^ xx, iiii, xvi.xvii,
that God in feding the^ does fulfill the office of a good father of household,
does put the^ in mind that he gives meat to al flesh. Finally when we have
on ye one side: The eyes of the Lord are upon the righteous, and his ears bent
to their prayers: on the other side: The eye of the Lord is upon ye ungodly to
destroy the memory of the^ out of ye earth: let us know yt all creatures both
above and beneth are ready to obedience yt he may apply them to what use soever
he will, whereupon is gathered yt not only his general providence remains in
his creatures to continue ye order of nature, but also by his marvelous
counsel is applied to a certain and proper end.

They which would bring this doctrine in hatred, do cavil yt this is fatum or
Destenie, Lib. 2. a^ boni. ca. vi.
which also was ones laid for reproach to Augustine. As for us, although we be
loath to strive about words, yet we allow not this word fatum, both because it
is one of those whoes profane novelty S. Paul teaches us to flee, and
because some men go about with the odiousness thereof to bring Gods truth in
hatred. As for ye very opinion of ye Stoikes, it is wrongfully laid to our
charge. For we do not, as ye Stoikes do, imagine a necessity by a certain
perpetual knot and entangled order of causes which is contained in nature: but
we make God the judge and gouernoure of al things, which according to his
wisdom has even from furthest end of eterntie decreed what he would do, and
now by his power puts in execution yt which he has decreed. Whereupon we
affirm yt not only ye heaven and earth and other creatures without life, but
also ye purposes and wills of me^ are so governed by his Providence, yt they be
directly carried to ye end that it appoints. What then? will one say, does
nothing happen by fortune or by chance? I answer yt Basilius magnus has
truly said yt fortune and chance are heathen men's words, with the
signification whereof the minds of the godly ought not to be occupied. For if
every good success be the blessing of God, and every calamity and adversity
be his curse, now is there in men's matters no place left for fortune or
chance. We ought also to be moved with this saying of Augustine. Retr. li. ^
capi. i,
In his books against the Academikes he says. It does displease me yt I have
so often named fortune, albeit my meaning was not to have any goddess meant
thereby, but only a chau^ceable happening in outward things either good or evil
Of which word Fortune are derived those words which no religion forbids us
to use, forte, forsan, forsitan, fortasse, fortuito, yt is parhap,
paraduenture, by fortune and by chance, which yet must al be applied to the
Providence of God. And yt did I not leave, unspoken when I said, for parchaunce
even the same yt is commonly called Fortune is also ruled by secret order. And
we call chance in things nothing else but yt whereof the reason and cause is
unknown. I said this in deed, but it repents me that I did there so name
Fortune. Forasmuch as I se yt me^ have a very evil custom, yt where they ought
to say, thus it pleased God, they say thus it pleased fortune. Finally he does
commonly in his books teach, that the world should be unorderly whirled about
if any thing were left unto Fortune. And although in an other place he
determines that al things are done partly by the free will of man, and partly
by the Providence of God, yet does he a little after sufficiently show that men
are subject unto and ruled by Providence, taking this for a principle, that
nothing is more against conuenience of reason, than to say that any thing
chances but by the ordinance of God, for else it should happen without cause
or order by which reason he also excludes that happening that hangs upon
the will of men: and by and by after he playnlyer says that we ought not to
seek a cause of the will of God. Quest. li. 83. De Tri. li. 3. cap. 4.
And so often as he makes mention of sufferaunce, how that is to be
understood shall very well appear by one place where he proves that the
will of God is the sovereign and first cause of al things, because nothing
happens but by his commandment or sufferaunce. Surely he faineth not God
to sit still idle in a watch toure, when it is his pleasure to suffer any thing,
whereas he uses an actual will (as I may so call it) which otherwise could
not be called a cause.

Io. xiiii.v
his death was not only foreseen with gods eye, but also determined by his
decree. For it is not said that he did foresee how far each man's life should
extend, bu^ that he has set and appointed marks which can not be passed. And
yet so far as the capacity of our mind conceiueth, all things herein seem
happening by chance. What shall a Christian here think? even this, whatsoever
happened in such a death, he will think it in nature chauncing by fortune as it
is in deed, but yet he will not doubt that the providence of God did govern to
direct fortune to her end. In like manner are the happeninges of things to
come. For as al things that be to come are uncertain unto us, so we hang them
in suspense, as if they might fall on either part, yet this remains settled
in our hearts, that nothing shall happen but that which God has already
foreseen. In this meaning is the name of chance often repeted in Ecclesiastes,
because at the first sight men do not atteine to see the first cause which is
far hidden from them. And yet that which is declared in the Scriptures
concerning the secret providence of God, was never so blotted out of the hearts
of men, but that even in the darkness there always shined some sparks thereof.
So the sothsayers of the Philistians, although they waver in doutfulnesse, yet
they ascrybe adversity partly to God partly to fortune. If (say they) the arc
go that way, i Sam. vi, ix
we shall know that it is God that has stryke^ us: but if it go the other way,
then a chance has light upon us. In deed they did folishly, when their
conning of soth saying deceived them, to flee to fortune, but in the mean
while we see them constrained, so that they dare not think that the evil hap
which chanced unto them did come of fortune. But how God with the bridle of
his providence turns al successes whether pleases him, may appear by one
notable example. Behold even at one moment of time, i. Samu. xxiii.xxvi.
when David was found out and nere taken in the desert of Mahon, even then the
Philistines invaded the land, and Saul was compelled to depart. If God meaning
to provide for the safety of his servant did cast this let in Saul's way,
surely although the Philistines going to arms were sodein and beside the
expectation of men, yet may we not say that it came by chance. But those
things that seem to us to happen by chaune, faith will acknowledge to have been
a secret moving of God. I grant there does not always appear the like reason,
but undoubtedly we ought to believe that whatsoever changes of things are seen
in the world, they come by the secret sturring of the hand of God. But that
which God purposes is so of necessity to com to pass, that yet it is not of
necessity precisely nor by the nature of it self. As thereof is a familiar
example in ye bones of Christ, Forasmuch as he had put on a body like unto
ours, no wise man will deny that his bones were naturally able to be broken,
yet was it impossible that they should be broken: whereby we see again that not
without cause were in schools invented the distinctions of necessity in
respect, and necessity absolute, of consequent and consequence, where as God
had subject to bricklenesse the bones of his son, which he had exempted from
being able to be broken, and so brought to necessity by reason of his own
purpose, that that thing could not be, which naturally might have been.

The.xvii. Chapter. Whereto and to what end this doctrine is to be applied,
that we may be certain of the profit thereof.
Now forasmuch as men's wits are bent to vain curious suttleties, it is
scarcely possible but that they shall encombre themselves with entangled
doubts, who soever do not know the true and right use of this Doctrine.
Therefore it shall be expedient here to touch shortly to what end the
Scripture teaches, that all things are ordered by God. And first of all is to
be noted, that the Providence of God ought to be considered as well for the time
to come as for the time past: secondarily that the same is in such forte the
governor of all things, that sometime it woorketh by means, sometime without
means, and sometime against all means. Last of all, that it tends to this
end, that God may show that he has care of all mankind, but specially that
he does watch in rulyng of his church, which he vouchesaueth more nerely to
look unto. And this is also to be added, that although either the fatherly
favor and bountyfulnesse of God, or oftentimes the severity of his
judgment do brightly appear in the whole course of his Providence: yet
sometime the causes of those things that happen are secret, so that this
thought crepeth into our minds, that men's matters are turned and whirled
about with the blind sway of fortune, or so that the flesh stirs us to
murmr, as if God did to make him self pastyme to toss men like tennise
balls. True it is that if we were with quiet and still minds ready to learn,
the very success it self would at length plainly show, that God has an
assured good reason of his purpose, either to train them that be his to
patience, or to correct their evil affections and tame their wantonness, or
to bring them down to the renouncyng of them selves, or to awake their
drowsynesse: on the other side to overthrow the proud, to disappoint the
suttletie of the wicked, to confound their devises. But howsoever the causes
be secret and unknown to us: we must assuredly hold that they are laid up in
hidden store with him, Psalm. xl.
and therefore we ought to cry out with David, God, thou have made thy
wonderful works so many, that none can count in order to thee thy thoughts
toward us. I would declare and speak of them, but they are more than I am
able to express. For although alwais in our miseries we ought to think upon
our sins, that the very punishment may move us to repentance, yet do we
see how Christ gives more power to the secret purpose of his father, than to
punish every one according to his deseruyng. John. ix.
For of him that was borne blind he says: neither has this man sinned nor
his parents, but that the glory of God may be showed in him. For here natural
sense murmureth when calamity comes even before birth, as if God did
unmercifully so to punish the sely innocente, that had not deserved it. But
Christ does testify that in this lokyng glass the glory of his father does
shine to our sight, if we have clear eyes to behold it. But we must keep
modesty, that we draw not God to yield cause of his doings, but let us so
reverence his secret judgments, that his will be unto us, a most just
cause of all things. When thick clouds do cover the heaven, and a violent
tempest aryseth, then because both a heauysome mystynesse is cast before our
eyes, and the thunder troubles our ears, and all our senses are amassed with
terror, we think that all things are confounded and tombled together: and
yet all the while there remains in the heaven the same quietenesse and
calmness, that was before. So must we think that while the troublesome
state of things in the world takes from us ability to judge, God by the
pure light of his righteousness and wisdom, does in well framed order
govern and dispose even those very troublesome motions themselves to a right
end. And surely very monstrous is the rage of many in this behalf, which
dare more boldly call the works of God to account and examyne his secret
meanynges, and to give unadvised sentence of things unknown, than they will
do of the deeds of mortal men. For what is more unorderly than to use such
modesty toward our egals, that we had rather suspende our judgment than to
incur the blame of rashenesse, and on the other side proudely to triumph upon
the dark judgments of God, which it became us to regard with reverence.

own reason informs them. And also they rail at us with all the spitefulness
that they are able, for that not contented with the commandments of the
law, wherein the will of God is comprehended. We do further say, that the
world is ruled by his secret counsels. As though the thing that we teach
were an invention of our own brayn, and as though it were not true that the
Holy ghost does every where expressly say the same, and repeteth it with
innumerable forms of speech. But because some shame restrains them, that
they dare not vomyte out their blasphemies against the heaven: they fayn that
they contend with us, to the end they may the more freely play the madmen.
But if they do not grant that what soever happens in the world, Ps. xxxvi
vii.
is governed by the incomprehensible purpose of God, let them answer to what
end the Scripture says, that his judgments are a deep bottomless deapth.
For where as Moses cries out that the will of God is not to be sought afar
of in the clouds, or in the deapthes, because it is familiarly set forth in
the law: it follows, that his other hidden will is compared to a bottomless
deapth. Romans xl.xxxiii.
Of the which Paul also says: O deapth of the richesse and of the wisdom
and of the knowledge of God: how unsearchable are his judgments, and his
ways paste fyndyng out? for who has known the mind of the Lord, or who
has been his counselor? And it is in deed true, that in the gospel and in
the law are contained mysteries which are far above the capacity of our
sense: but for as much as God for the comprehendyng of these mysteries which
he has vouchesaued to open by his word, does lighten the minds of them
that be his, with the Spirit of Understandyng: now is therein no bottomless
deapth, but a way wherein we must safe walk, and a candell to guide our feet,
and the light of life, and the school of certain and plainly discernable
truth. But his marvelous order of gouernyng the world is worthily called a
bottomless deapthe: because while it is hidden from us, we ought reverently to
worship it. Right well has Moses expressed them both in few words. Deu.
xxix xxix.
The secret things (says he) belong to the Lord our God: but the things
reveled belong to us and to our children for ever. We see how he byddeth us
not only to study in meditation of the law, but also reverently to look up
unto the secret Providence of God. Job. xxvi xiiii.
And in the book of Job is rehearsed one title of this deapth, that it humbles
our minds. For after that the author of that book in surueying up and down
the frame of the world, had honorably entreated of the works of God, at
length he adds: Lo, these be part of his ways, but how littel a portion
hear we of him? According to which reason in an other place he makes
difference between the wisdom that remains with God, and the measure of
wisdom that he has appointed for men. For after he has preached of the
secrets of nature, he says that wisdom is known to God only, Job.
xxviii.xil.
and is hidden from the eyes of all living creatures. But by and by after he
says further, that it is published to the end it should be serched out,
because it is said unto man, behold the fear of God is wisdom. For this
purpose makes the saying of Augustine: Because we know not all things which
God does concerning us in most good order, Li. lxxxiii quest. ca. xxiii.
that therefore in only good will we do according to the law, because his
Providence is an unchangeable law. Therefore sith God does claim unto him
self the power to rule the world, which is to us unknown, let this be to us
a law of sobrenesse and modesty, quietly to obey his sovereign authority,
that his will may be to us the only rule of justice, and the most just cause
of all things. I mean not that absolute will, of which the Sophisters do
babble, separatyng by wicked and profane disagremente his justice from his
power, but I mean that Providence, which is the gouernesse of all things,
from which proceeds nothing but right: although the causes thereof be hidden
from us.

Whosoever shall be framed to this modesty, they neither for the time one
stolen, or committed fornication? because he has done the thing that was
forseene and ordained by the Lord, he is a minister of his Providence. Has
the son carelessely, neglectyng all remedies, waited for the death of his
father? he could not resist God that had so before appointed from eternity.
So all mischeuous doings they call virtues because they obey the ordinance of
God.

But as touching things to come, Solomon does well bring in agreement Prou vi.ix.
The heart of man purposes his way, but the Lord does direct his steps,
meaning that we are not hyndered by the eternal Decrees of God, but that under
his will we may both provide for our selves, and dispose all things belongyng
to us. And that is not without a manifest reason. For he that has limited our
life within appointed bounds, has therwithall left with us the care thereof,
has furnished us with means and healpes to preserve it, has made us to have
knowledge before hand of dangers, and that they should not oppress us
unware, he has given us provisions and remedies. Now it is plain to see what
is our duty: that is to say: If God has committed to us our own life to
defend, our duty is to defend it. If he offer us helps, our duty is to
use them. If he show us dangers before, our duty is not to run rashly
into them. If he minister us remedies, our duty is not to neglect them. But
no danger shall hurt, unless it be fatal, which by all remedies can not be
overcome. But what if dangers be therefore not fatal, because God has
assigned thee remedies to repulse and ouercom the^? See how thy manner of
reasoning agrees with the order of Gods disposition. Thou gatherest that
danger is not to be taken heed of, because forasmuch as it is not fatal, we
shall escape it without taking head at all: but the Lord does therefore enjoin
thee to take heed of it, because he will not have it fatal unto thee. These
mad men do not consider that which is plain before their eyes, that the
skill of taking counsel and head is enspired into men by God, whereby they may
serve his Providence in preserving of their own life: as on the other side by
negligence and slouthe they procure to them selves those evils that he has
appointed for them. For how comes it to pass, that a circumspecte man
while he provides for him self, does wind him self out of euilles that hang
over him, and the fool perishes by unadvised rashenesse, but for that both
folly and wisdom are the instruments of Gods disposition on both parts?
Therefore it pleased God to hyde from us all things to come, to this end that
we should mete with them as things doutefull, and not cease to set
prepared remedies against them, till either they be overcome or be past all
help of care. And for this cause I have before admonished that the Providence
of God does not always show it self naked, but as God by vsyng of means
does in a certain manner clothe it.

The same men do unorderly and unadvisedly draw the chances of nor
manslaughters are committed without the will of God. Why then (say they) shall
a thief be punished, for that he spoiled him whom the Lords will was to
punish with poverty? Why shall the murderer be punished which has slain
him whoes life the Lord had ended? If all such men do serve the will of God,
why shall they be punished? But I deny that they serve the will of God. For we
may not say that he which is carried with an evil mind does service to God
as commander of it, where in deed he does but obey his own wicked lust. He
obeys God, which being informed of his will does labor to that end,
whereunto Gods will calls him. But whereby are we informed of his will, but by
his word? Therefore in doing of things we must see that same will of God,
which he declares in his word. God requires of us only that which he
commands. If we do any thing against his commandment, it is not obedience
but obstinacy and transgression. But unless he would, we should not do it. I
grant. But do we evil things to this end to obey him? But he does not
command us to do them, but rather we run on headlong, not minding what he
wills, but so raging with the intemperance of our own lust, that of set
purpose we bend our travail against him. And by these means in evil doing
we serve his just ordinance, because according to the infinite greatness of
his wisdom, he has good skill to use evil instruments to do good. And see
how foolish is their manner of arguyng. They would have the doers unpunished
for mischeuous acts, because they are not committed but by the disposition of
God. I grant more: that thieves and murderers and other evil doers are the
instruments of Gods Providence, whom the Lord does use to execute those
judgments which he has with himself determined. But I deny that their
evil doings ought to have any excuse thereby. For why? shall they either
entangle God in the same wickedness with them, or shall they cover their
noughtynesse with his righteousness? They can do neither of boeth. Because
they should not be able to excuse themselves, they are accused by their own
conscience. And because they should not be able to blame God, they find all
the evil in themselves, and in him nothing but a lawful use of their
euilnesse. But he works by them. And whence I pray you, comes the stink in
a dead carrion, which has been boeth rotted and disclosed by heat of the
sun? All men do see that it is raised by the beams of the sun. Yet no man
does therefore say, that the sunbeames do stink. So when there rests in
an evil man, ye matter and gyltinesse of evil, what cause is there why it
should be thought that God is any thing defiled with it, if he use their
service at his pleasure. Away therefore with this doggishe frowardness, which
may in deed afar of bark at the justice of God, but can not touch it.

doubt that the singular Providence of God does watch for his preservation,
which Providence will suffer nothing to happen, but that which shall turn
to his good and salvation. And because he has to do first of al with men, and
then with the other creatures, he will assure him self that Gods Providence
does reign in both. As touching men, whether they be good or evil, he will
acknowledge that all their counselles, wills, enterprises and powers are under
the hand of God, so that it is in Gods will to bow them whether he list, and
to restrain them so often as pleases him. That the syngular Providence of God
does keep watch for the safety of the faithful, there are many and most
evident promises to witness. Psalm. iv.xxiii. i. Pet. v.ix. Psa. xci.i. zach.
^i.viii. Esa. xxvi.ii.
Cast thy burden upon the Lord, and he shall nourishe thee, and shall not
suffer the rightuous to fall for ever, because he cares for us. He that
dwells in the healpe of the highest, shall abide in the protection of the God
of heaven. He that touches you, touches the apple of mine eye. I will be thy
shield, a brazen wall: I will be enemy to thy enemies. Although the mother
forget her children, yet will I not forget thee. And also this is the
principal intent in the histories of the Bible, to teach that the Lord does
with such diligence keep the ways of the Saints, that they do not so much
as stumble against a stone. Therefore as a little before we have rightfully
rejected their opinion which do imagine an universal Providence of God, that
stoupeth not specially to the care of every creature: yet principally it shall
be good to reknowledge the same special care toward our selves. Whervppon
Christ after he had affirmed that not the sparowe of least value, Math. x.xxix.
does fall to the ground without the will of the Father, does by and by apply
it to this end, that we should consider that how much we be more worth
than sparrowes, with so much nyer care does God provide for us, and he
extends that care so far that we may be bold to trust that the hears of
our head are numbered. What can we wish our selves more, if not so much as a
hear can fall from our head but by his will? I speak not only of all
mankind, but because God has chosen his church for a dwelling house for
himself, it is no doubt but that he does by singular examples show his care
in governing of it.

The servant of God being strengthened with these both, promyses and examples,
will join with them the testimonies which teach that Exo. iii, xxi,
but also in the Egyptians, and as for the maliciousness of our enemies, he
knows how by diverse ways to subdue it. For sometime he takes away their
wit from them, so that they can conceive no sound or sobre advise, like as he
sent forth Satan to fill the mouths of all the Prophets with lying to
deceive Achab. i. Kings xxii.xxii. i. Kings xii.x.
He made Rechabeam mad by the young men's counsel, that he might be spoiled of
his kingdom by his own folly. Many times when he grants them wit, yet he
makes them so afraid and astonished, that they can not will or go about that
which they have conceived. Sometime also when he has suffered them to go about
that which lust and rage did counsel them, he does in convenient time
break of their violences, and suffers them not to proceed to the end that
they purposed. So did he before the time bring to naught the counsel of
Architophell that should have been to David's destruction. So also he takes
care to govern al his creatures for ye benefit and safety of them yt be his,
ii. Sam. x^ii.vii.
yea and to govern the devil him self, Job. i.x.i.
which as we see durst enterprise nothing against Job without his
sufferaunce and commandment. Of this knowledge necessarily ensues both a
thankfulness of mind in prosperous success of things, and also patience in
adversity, and an incredible assuredness against the time to come. Whatsoever
therefore shall betide unto him prosperously and according to his hearts desire,
all that he will ascribe unto God, whether he feel the bounty of God by the
ministry of men, or be helped by liuelesse creatures. For thus he will think
in his mind: Surely it is the Lord which has inclined their minds to me,
which has joined them unto me to be instruments of his goodness toward me.
In plenty of the fruits of the earth, thus he will think, that it is the Lord
which hears the heaven, that the heaven may hear the earth, that the
earth also may hear her fruits. In other things he will not dout that it is
the only blessyng of the Lord, whereby all things prosper, and being put in
mind by so many causes he will not abide to be unthankful.

Genesis xlv.viii.
whoes hand avails much to emprint in us a patience and quiet moderation
of heart. If Joseph had still continued in recordyng the falsehode of his
brethren, he could never have taken a brotherly mind toward them. But
because he bowed his mind to the Lord, he forgot the injury, and inclined to
meekness and clemency, so farrefoorth that of his own accord he conforted his
brethren and said: It is not you that sold me into Egypt, but by the will of
God I was sent before you to save your lives. You in deed thought evil of me,
but the Lord turned it to good. If Job had had respect to the Chaldees, by
whom he was troubled, he would forthwith have been kendled to revenge. Job.
i.xxi
But because he did therwithall acknowledge it to be the work of God, he
comforted himself with this most excellent saying: The Lord has given, the
Lord has taken away, the Lords name be blessed. So David: when Semei had
railed and cast stones at him, if he had looked upon man, he would have
encouraged his soldiers to reacquite the injury. ii. Sam. xvi.x.
But because he understood that Semei did it not without the mouyng of the
Lord, he rather appeased them. Let him alone (said he) for the Lord has
commanded him to curse. With the same bridle in an other place does he
restrain the intemperance of sorrow. I held my peace (says he) and became as
domme, because thou O Lord, Psalm. xxxviii.x.
did it. If there be more effectualll remedy against wrath and impacience:
surely he has not a little profited which has learned in this behalf to
think upon the Providence of God, that he may always call back his mind to
this point. It is the Lords will, therefore it must be suffered, not only
because it is not lawful to strive against it, but also because he wills
nothing but that which is both just and expedient. In fumme this is the end,
that being wrongfully hurt by men, we leauyng their malice (which would do
nothing but enforce out sorrow, and wheat our minds to revenge) should
remember to climb up unto God, and learn to believe assuredly, that what
soever our enemy has mischeuously done against us, was both suffered and
sent by gods disposition. Paul, to refrain us from recompensing of injuries
does wisely put us in mind, Ep. vi.xii
that we are not to wrestle with flesh and blood, but with the spiritual enemy
the devil, that we may prepare our selves to strive with him. But this is the
most profitable lesson for the appeasyng of al rages of wrath, yt God does arm
as well the devil as al wicked men to strive with us, and yt he sits as judge
to exercise our patience. De. xxviii
But if ye misfortunes and miseries yt oppress us, do chance without ye
work of men, let us remember the doctrine of ye law: whatsoever is prosperous
flows from the fountain of gods blessing, and yt al adversities are his
cursinges: and let ye most terrible warning make us afraid: If ye walk
stubbornly against me, I will also walk stubbornly against you. In which is
rebuked our sluggishnesse, when according to ye common sense of ye flesh
accompting al to be but chance yt happens, of both sorts we are nether
encouraged by ye benefits of God to worship him, Lam. iii.xxxviii. Amo.
iii.vi. Es. xlv.vi
nor prycked forward with his scourges to repe^tau^ce. This same is ye reso^,
why Hieremy and Amos did so sharply rebuke ye Jews, because they thought yt
things as well good as evil came to pass without the commandment of God. To ye
same purpose serves that sermon of Esaias. I the God that create light and
fashyon darkness, that make peace and create evil. I God do make all these
things.

And yet in the mean time a godly man will not wink at the inferior And
because he does not certainly know what success ye business will have that he
goes about, (saving yt in all things he knows that the Lord will provide for
his benefyte) he will with study travail to yt which he shall think expedyent
for him self, so far as he ca^ conceive in mind and understanding. And yet in
taking of counsels he will not be carried on by his own wit, but will commit and
yield himself to ye wisdom of God, that by the guiding thereof he may be
directed to ye right end. But his confydence shall not so stay upon outward
helps, yt if he have them he will carelessly rest upon them, or if he want them
he will be afraied as left destitute, for he will have his mind always fastened
upon the Prouydence of God, neither will he suffer himself to be drawn away
from the steadfast beholding thereof, by consideration of present things. So
though Ioab acknowledged that ye success of battle is in the will and hand of
God, yet he gave not himself to slothfulness but did diligently execute yt
which belonged to his calling, but he leaves it unto ye Lord to govern ye
end. We will stand valiant (says he) for our nation, and for the cities of our
God. ii. S^. x.xii.
But ye Lord do what is good in his eyes. This knowledge shall despoyle us of
rashness and wrongful co^fyde^ce, and shall drive us to continual calling upon
God: and also shall uphold our minds with good hope, so as we may not doubt
assuredly and boldly to despise those dangers that compass us about.

mind by the examples of other, that the same things may happen to our
selves, and that our life ought of duty no more to be fre tha^ theirs, it can
not be but that we must dred and fear them as things yt may light upon us.
Now what can a man imagine more miserable tha^ such a fearfulness? Beside
that, it is not without dishonorable reproach of God to say, that he has set
open man the noblest of al his creatures to their blind and unadvised strokes
of fortune. But here my purpose is to speak only of the misery of man, which
he should feel if he should be brought subject under fortunes dominion.

But when that light of Gods Providence has ones shyned upon a ^s. x^i.iii
For so is it song in the Psalm. For he shall deliver thee from the hunters
snare, and from the noysom pestilence. He will cover thee under his wings, and
thou shall be sure under his feathers. His truth shall be thy shield and buckler.
Thou shall not be afraid of the fear of the night, nor of ye arrow yt flies
by day, nor of the pestilence that walks in ye darkness, nor of ye plage
that destroys at none day. And from thense proceeds that boldness of the
Saints to glory: The Lord is my helper. Ps. ^xviii vi.
I will not fear what flesh may do to me. The Lord is my protector, why shall I
be afraid? If whole camps stand up against me, if I walk in the midst of
the shadow of death. I will not cease to hope well. Whense, I pray you, have
they this that their assuredness is never shaken away from them? but hereby,
that where the world seems in show to be without order whirled about, they
know that God works every where^ whoes work they trust shall be for their
preservation. Now if their safety be assailed either by ye devil or by wicked
men, in that case if they were not strengthened with remembrance and meditation
of Providence, they must needs by and by be discouraged. But when they call to
mind, that the devil and all the route of the wicked, are so every way holden
in by the hand of God as with a bridle, yt they can neither conceive any
mischief against us, nor go about it when they have conceived it, nor if
they go never so much about it, ca^ stir one finger to bring it to pass
but so far as he shall suffer, yea so far as he shall command, and yt they are
not only holden fast bound with fetters, but also compelled with bridle to do
service: here have they abunda^tly wherwt to comfort themselves. For as it is
the Lords work to arm their fury and to turn and direct it whether it
pleases him, so is it his work also to appointe a measure and end, that
they do not after their own will licentiously triumph. i. The. ii.xviii. i.
Cor. xvi vii.
With which persuasion Paul being stablished, did by the sufferaunce of God
appoint his journey in an other place which he said was in one place hindered by
Satan. If he had only said that he had been stopped by Satan, he should have
seemed to give him to much power, as if it had been in Satan's hand to overthrow
the very purposes of God: but when he makes God the judge, upon whoes
sufferaunce all iourneyes do hang: he does therewithal show, that Satan
whatsoever he go about, can atteine nothing but by gods will. For the same
reason does David because for the sondrye chaunges wherewith man's life is tossed
and as it were whirled about, he does flee to this sanctuary, says that his
times are in the hand of God. Psa. xxxi.xvi.
He might have said either the course of his life, or time in ye singular
number. But by the word Times, he meant to express that howesoeuer the state
of man be unsteadfast, whatsoever alterations do now and then happen, they are
governed by God. For which cause Rasin and the king of Israel, Esa. vii.iiii.
when joining their powers to the destruction of Judah, they seemed as
fierbrandes kindled to wast and consume the land, are called by the Prophet
smoking brandes, which can do nothing but breath out a little smoke. Eze.
xxix.iiii.
So when Pharao was terrible to all men by reason of his richesse, strength and
number of men, he himself is compared to a beast of the Sea, and his army to
fishes. Therefore God says that he will take the Captain and the army with
his hoke and draw them whether he list. Finally, because I will not tarry long
upon this point, if a man mark it he shall easily see that the extremity of al
miseries is the ignorance of gods Providence, and the chief blessedness
stands in the knowledge thereof.

Ge. vi.vi i. Samu. xv.xi. Ier. xviii viii.
First, in some places is spoken of the repentance of God, as that he
repented him of the creatyng of man, of the aduauncing of Saul to the kingdom.
And that he will repent him of the evil that he had determined to lay upon his
people, so sone as he perceives any conversion of them. Again there are
rehearsed diverse repelles of his decrees. Ion. iii.iiii.
He had declared by Jonas to the Ninevites that after.xl. days ones past
Niniue should be destroyed, but by and by he was turned with their repentance
to a more gentle sentence. Esa. xxxv iii.v. ii. Kin. xx.^.
He had by the mouth of Esaias pronounced death to Ezechias, which he was moved
by his tears and prayers to differ. Hereupon many do make argument, that God
has not appointed men's matters by eternal decree, but yearly, daily and
hourly decrees this or yt, as every man's deseruinges are, or as he thinks
it equity and justice. Concerning his repentance this we ought to hold, that
the same ca^ no more be in God, tha^ ignorance error and weakness. For if no
man do wittingly and willingly throw himself into the case yt he need to
repent, we can not say yt God does repent, but yt we must also say, yt God is
ignorant what will come to pass, or yt he can not avoid it, or yt he headlong
and unadvisedly runs into a purpose whereof he by and by for thinks him.
But yt is so far from ye meaning of the Holy ghost, yt in the very mention
making of repentance he denies that God had any repenting at all, because he
is not a man that may repent. And it is to be noted that in the same chapter
they are both so joined together, y^ the comparison does very well bring the
show of repugnancie to agreement. His changing is figuratively spoken, that God
repented that he had made Saul king, i. Samu* xv, xxix.
by and by after it is added. The strength of Israel shall not lie, nor shall be
moved with repenting. Because he is not a man that he may repent. In which
words his unchangeableness is affirmed plainly without any figure. Therefore
it is certain yt the ordinance of God in disposyng the matters of men, is
perpetual and above al repentance. And that his constance should not be
doutefull, Nu, xxiii xix.
his very adversaries have been compelled to bear him witness. For Balaam
whether he would or no could not choose but brust out into this saying: yt he
is not like a man to lie: nor as a son of man to be changed, and that it is
not possible that he should not do that he has said, and not fulfill what
soever he has spoken.

What means then this name of Repentance? even in the same sort

Neither does the holy history show that gods decrees were repelled, Ion, iii,
x Esa, xxx^ v,
and that the life of Ezechias was prolonged after warning given him of death.
They that so construe it are deceived in understanding of threteninges: which
although they do simply affirm, yet by ye success it shall be perceived that
they contained a secret condition in the^. For why did God send Jonas to ye
Ninevites to ^ell them aforehande of the ruin of their city? Why did he by
Esaye give Ezechias warni^g of death? For he might have brought to naught both
him and the^ without sending them any word of their destruction. He meant
therefore an other thing, than to make them by foreknowing of their death to see
it coming a far of. Even this he meant: not to have them destroyed: but to
have them amended that they should not be destroyed. Therefore this that Jonas
prophesied that Niniue should fall after.xl. days, was done to this end that it
should not fall. That hope of longer life was cut of from Ezechias, was done
for this purpose that he might obtain longer life. Now who does not see that
God meante by such threateninges to awake them to repentance, whom he made
afraid to the end that they might escape the judgment which they had
deserved by their sins? If that be so agreed, the nature of the things
themselves does lead us to this, to understand in the simple threatening a
secret emplied condition, which is also confirmed by like examples. The Lord
rebuking ye king Abimelech for that he had taken away Abraham's wife from him,
Ge. xxvi.iii,
uses these words. Behold thou shall die for the woman that thou have taken,
for she has a husband. But after he had excused himself, God said thus.
Restore the wife to her husband, for he is a Prophet and shall pray for the
that thou may live. If not: know that thou shall die the death and all that
thou have. You se how in his first sentence he vehemently strikes his mind to
bring him to be more hedefully bent to make ame^des, and in the other does
plainly declare to him his will. Seeing the meaning of other places is like: do
not gather of these that there was any thing withdrawn from the first purpose
of God, by this that he made void the thing which he had before pronounced.
For God does prepare the way for his eternal ordinance, when in giving
warning of the punishment he moves those to repentance whom his will is to
spare, rather than varieth any thing in his will, no not in his word saving that
he does not express the same thing in sillables which it is yet easy to
understand. For that saying of Esaie must needs remain true: Esa, xiiii.xxvii,
The Lord of Hosts has determined, and who shall be able to undo it? His hand
is stretched out, and who shall turn it away?

The.xviii. Chapter. That God does so use the service of wicked men, and so
voweth their minds to put his judgments in execution, that yet still
himself remains pure from all spot.
THere arises a hard question out of other places, where it is said that God
boweth and draws at his will, Satan himself and all the reprobate. For the
sense of ye flesh scarcely conceiueth how he workyng by them, should not gather
some spot of their fault, yea in his common workyng be fre from al fault, and
justly condemn his ministers. Upon this was devised the distinction between
Doing and Suffering: because many have thought this do^t impossible to be
dissolved: that both Satan and all the wicked are so under the hand and power
of God, that he directs their malice unto what end it pleases him, and
uses their wicked doings to the executing of his judgments. And their
modesty were paraduenture excusable, whom the show of absurdity puts in
fear, if it were not so that they do wrongfully with a lyeng defense go about
to deliver the justice of God from al unrightful blame. It seems to them
unreasonable, that man should by the will and commandment of God be made
blind, and so by and by be punished for his blindness. Therefore they seek to
escape by this shift, that this is done by the sufferance, but not by the will
of God. But he himself plainly pronouncyng that he does it, does reiecte
that shifte. As for this that men do nothing but by the secret commandment
of God, and do trouble them selves in vain with deliberating, unless he do by
his secret direction stablishe that which he has before determined, it is
proved by innumerable and plain testimonies. It is certain that this which
we before alleged out of the psalm, that God does all things that he will,
belongs to all the doings of men. If God be the certain appointer of war
and peace, as it is there said, and that without exception: who dare say that
men are carried causelessely with blind motion while God knows not of it, and
sits still? But in special examples will be more lightsome plainness. By
the first chapter of Job we know, that Satan does no less appear before God
to receive his commandments than do the Angels which do willyngly obey. In
deed it is after a diverse manner and for a diverse end, but yet so that he can
not go about any thing but with the will of God. Although there seem afterward
to be added a bare sufferance of him to afflicte the holy man: yet because that
saying is true: Job. i.^i.
The Lord has given, the Lord has taken away, as it pleased God so is it com
to pass. We gather that God was the author of that trial of Job, whereof
Satan and the wicked thieves were ministers. Satan goes about to drive the
holy man by desperation to madness. The Sabees cruelly and wickedly do invade
and rob his goods that were none of theirs. Job knowledgeth that he (...) by
God stripped of all his goods and made poor, because it so pleased God.
Therefore whatsoever men or Satan himself attempt, yet God holds the stern
to turn all their trauayles to the executyng of his judgments. It was Gods
will to have ye false king Achab deceived: ii Kings xxii.ix.
the devil offered his service thereunto: he was sent with a certain
commandment, to be a lying spirit in the mouth of all the Prophets. If the
blyndyng and madness of Achab be the judgment of God, then the devise of bare
Sufferance is vain. For it were a fond thing to say, that the judge does
only suffer and not also decree what he will have done, Act. iiii.xxviii.
and command the ministers to put it in execution. It was the Jews purpose to
destroy Christ, Pilate and the soldiers do follow their ragyng lust, and yet
in a solemn prayer the disciples do confess, that all the wicked men did
nothing else but that which the hand and counsel of God had determined:
Act^s. ii.xxi^^. Act. iii.xviii. ii. Sam. xvi.xxii.
even as Peter had before preached, that Christ was by the decreed purpose and
foreknowledge of God delivered to be slain. As if he should say: that God (from
whom nothing is hidden from the beginning did wittyngly and willyngly appoint
that which the Jews did execute, as in an other place he^^herseth, that God
which showed before by all his Prophets that Christ should suffer, has so
fulfilled it. ii. Sam. xii.xii.
Absolon defilyng his fathers bed with incestuous adultery, committed
detestable wickedness. Yet God pronounces that this was his own work. For
the words are these. Thou haste done it secretly, but I will do it openly,
and before the sun. ^^ter ^.xxv.
Hieremie pronounces that all the cruelty that the Chaldees used in Jury, was
the work of God. For which cause Nabucadnezer is called the servant of God.
God every where cries out that with his hissyng, Es. v.xxvi Esa. x.v. Esa.
xix.xxv.
with the sound of his trumpet, with his power and commandment the wicked ar
stirred up to war. He calls the Assyrian the rod of his wrath, and the axe
that he moves with his hand. The destruction of the holy city and ruin of
the Temple he calls his work. David not murmuring against God, but
acknowledging him for a rightuous judge, yet confesses that the cursings of
Semei proceeded of the commandment of God. ii. Sa. x.x.
The Lord (says he) commanded him to curse. We often find in ye holy
history, yt what soever happens it comes of the Lord, as the departing of
the ten tribes, i. Kin. xi.xxxi. i. Sam. ii xxxiiii.
the death of the sons of Hely, and very many things of like sort. They yt be
meanly exercised in the Scriptures do see, yt for shortnesses sake, I bring
forth of many testimonies but a few, by which yet it appears plainly enough,
yt they do trifle and talk fondly, yt thrust in a bare Suffera^ce in place of
ye Providence of God, as though God say in a watch tower waityng for the
chances of Fortune, and so his judgments should hang upon the will of men.

Pro. xxi.i
that it is bowed hither or thither as pleases God, extends surely to all
mankind, and is as much in effect as if he had said: what soever we conceive
in minds, is by the secret inspiration of God directed to his end. And truly
if he did not work in the minds of men, it were not rightly said, that he
takes away the lip from the true speakers, and wisdom from aged men, that
he takes the heart from the Princes of the earth, that they may wander where
is no beaten way. Ez^c. vii.xxvi. ^^uitic. xxvi.xxxvi. i. Samu. xxvi.
And hereto belongs that which we often read, that men are fearful so
far forth as their hearts be taken with his fear. So David went out of the
camp of Saul and none was ware of it, because the sleep of God was come upon
them all. But nothing can be desired to be more plainly spoken, than where he
so often pronounces, that he blyndeth the eyes of men, and strikes them with
giddynesse, that he makes them drunk with the spirit of drowsynesse, casts
them into madness, and hardneth their hearts. These things also many do refer
to Sufferance, as if in forsaking the reprobate, he suffered the^ to be blinded
by Satan. But that solution is to fond, forasmuch as ye Holy ghost in plain
words expresses, that they are stricken with blindness and madness by ye just
judgment of God. Eccl. vii.^^. ^^ Romans vii.xxi. Ero. viii.xv,
It is said, yt he hardened the heart of Pharao, also that he did make dull and
strengthen it. Some do with an unsavory cauillation mock out these phrases of
speech, because where in an other place it is said, that Pharao did harden his
own heart, there is his own will set for the cause of his hardenyng. As though
these things did not very well agree together, although in diverse manners, that
man while he is moved in working by God, does also work himself. And I do
turn back their objection against them selves. For, if to harden do signify
but a bare Sufferance, then the very motion of obstinacy shall not be proprely
in Pharao. Now how weak and foolish were it so to expound, as if Pharao did
only suffer him self to be hardened? Moreover the Scripture cutteth of all
occasions from such cauillations. For God says, Ero. iiii, xx^, Ios. xi, xx:
Psalm, ^v, xxv,
I will hold his heart. So of the inhabitauntes of the land of Canaan Moses
says, that they went forth to bataile, because ye Lord had hardened their
hearts. Which same thing is repeted by an other Prophet, saying: He turned their
hearts that they should hate his people. Again in Esaie he says, that he will
send the Assyrians against the deceytfull nation, Esa. x.vi.
and will command them to carry away the spoils, and violently take the
pray, not meaning that he will teach wicked and obstinate men to obey
willyngly, but that he will bow them to execute his judgments as if they did
bear his commandments graven in their minds. Whereby appears that they
were moved by the certain appointement of God. I grant that God does
oftentimes work in the reprobate by Satan's service as a mean, but yet so that
Satan does his office by Gods moving, and proceeds so far as is given him.
i. Samu. xvi.xiiii. ii. Corin. xliiii.
The evil Spirit troubled Saul, but it is said that it was of God, that we
may know that the madness of Saul, came of the just vengeance of God. It is
also said, that the same Satan does blind the minds of the unfaithful: but
how so, but only because the effectual workyng of error comes from God
himself, to make them believe lies that refuse to obey the truth? After the
first manner of speaking it is said, Eze. xiiii.ix. Romans i: xxviii,
If any Prophet shall speak lyingly, I God have deceived him. According to the
other manner of speech it is said, that he gives men into a reprobate mind:
and to cast them into filthy desires, because he is the chief author of his
own just vengeance, and Satan is but only a minister thereof. But because we
must entreat of this matter again in the second book, where we shall
discourse of free or bond will of man, I think I have already shortly spoken
so much as this place required. Let this be the sum of all, that for as
much as the will of God is said to be the cause of all things, his Providence
is thought the gouernesse in all purposes and works of men, so as it shows
forth her force not only in the elect, which are governed by the holy
Spirit, but also compels the reprobate to obedience.

Forasmuch as hitherto I have recited only such things as are Psa. li, vi
David does by the way rebuke the madness of men in this so unbridled
licenciousnesse, that of their own filthynesse they do not only argue
against God, but also take upon them power to condemn him. In the mean time
he shortly admonishes, that the blasphemies which they vomit up against the
heaven do not reach unto God, but that he driuyng away the clouds of
cauillations does brightly show forth his righteousness, i. Ioh. v: iiii:
and also our faith (because being grounded upon the word of God, it is above
all the world) does from her hye place contemptuously look down upon these
mystes. For first where they object, that if nothing happen but by the will of
God, then are there in him two contrary wills, because he decrees those
things by secret purpose, which he has openly forbidden by his law, that is
easily wiped away. But before I answer it, I will ones again give the reders
warnyng that this cauillation is thrown out not against me, but against the
Holy ghost, which taught the holy man Job this confession: Job. i.xxi
As it pleased God, so it came to pass. When he was spoiled by thieves, he
acknowledged in the injury and hurt that they did him, the just scourge of
God. What says the Scripture in other places? i. Sa. ii.xxv. Psa. cxv.iii.
The sons of Hely obeyed not their Father, because it was Gods will to kill
them. Also an other Prophet cries out, that God which sits in heaven does
what so ever he will. And now I have showed plainly enough that God is the
author of al those things which these judges would have to happen only by his
idle suffera^ce. He testifies that he creates light and darkness, Esa.
xlv.vii. Amos. iii vi. Deu. xix.v.
that he forms good and evil, that no evil happens which he himself has
not made. Let them tell me, I beseech them, whether he do willyngly or
against his will execute his own judgments? But as Moses teaches, that he
which is slain by the falling of an axe by chance, is delivered by God into
the hand of the striker: so the whole church says in Luke, that Herod and
Pilate conspired to do those things, which the hand and purpose of God had
decreed. Acts. iiii.x.viii.
And truly if Christ were not crucified with the will of God, whense came
redemption to us? And yet the will of God neither does strive with it self,
nor is changed, nor fayneth that he wills not the thing that he will: Ephesians.
i^^.x
but where it is but one and simple in him, it seems to us manyfolde, because
according to the weakness of our wit we conceive not how God in diverse
manner wills and wills not one self thing. Paul, after that he has said,
that the calling of the Gentiles is a hidden mystery, within a little after
says further, that it was manifestly showed the manyfolde wisdom of God:
because for the dullness of our wit the wisdom of God seems to us
manifold, or (as the old interpretour has translated it) of many fashions:
shall we therefore dream that there is any variety in God himself, as though
he either changes his purpose, or dissenteth from himself? Rather when we
conceive not how God will have the thing to be done, which he forbids to
do, let us call to mind our own weakness, and therwithal consider that the
light wherein he dwells, is not without cause called Inaccessible, i. Tim. vi
xvi, Enchirid. ad Lauren. cap. 1^1.
because it is covered with darkness. Therefore all godly and sobre men will
easyly agree to this sentence of Augustine, that sometime man with good will
wills that which God wills not. As if a good son wills to have his
father to live, whom God will have to dye. Again, it may come to pass, that
man may will the same thing with an evil will, which God wills with a good
will. As if an evil son wills to have his father to die, and God also
wills the same. Now the first of these two sons wylleth that which God
wills not, and the other son wills that which God also wills, and yet
the naturalnesse of the first son does better agree with the will of God,
although he wills a contrary thing, than the unnaturalness of the other
son that wills the same thing. So great a difference is there what to will
does belong to man, and what to God, and to what end the will of every one is
to be applied, to have it either allowed or disalowed. For those things which
God wills well he brings to pass by the evil wylles of evil men. But a
littel before he had said, that the Angels apostataes in their falling away,
and all the reprobate, in as much as concerns them selves, did that which
God would not, but in respect of the omnipotency of God, they could by no
means so do, Psalm. cxl.ii.
because while they did against the will of God, the will of God was done
upon them. Whereupon he cries out: Great ar the works of God, and ought to be
sought out of al them that love them: that in marvelous manner the same thing
is not done without his will which is also done against his will, because it
could not be done if he did not suffer it: and yet he does it not against his
will, but willyngly: and he being good, would not suffer a thing to be done
evil, unless for that he is omnipotent, he could of evil make good.

In the same manner is assoyled or rather vanishes away the other ii. Sam.
xvi.xxii.
For though when Absalon abused his fathers wives, it was Gods will to punish
David's adultery with that dishonor: yet did he not therefore command the
wicked son to commit inceste, unless perhappe you mean it in respect of
David, as he speaks of the railynges of Semei. For when he confesses that
Semei rayleth at him by the commandment of God, he does not therein commend
his obedience, as if that froward dog did obey the commandment of God, but
acknowledgyng his tongue to be the scourge of God, he patiently suffers to be
corrected. And this is to be holden in mind, that when God performs by the
wicked that thing which he decreed by his secret judgment, they are not to be
excused, as though they did obey his commandment, which in deed of their own
evil lust they do purposely break. Now how that thing is of God, i. Kin.
xi^.xx.
and is ruled by his secret Providence, which men do wickedly, the election
of king Iarobeam is a plain exaumple, in which the rashenesse and madness of
the people is seuerly condemned, for that they perverted the order appointed by
God, and falsely fell from the house of David, and yet we know it was his will
that he should be anointed. Osee. viii iiii. Osee. xiii xi.
Whereupon in the very words of Osee there appears a certain show of
repugnancie, that where God complained that that kingdom was erected without
his knowledge, and against his will, in an other place he says, that he gave
the kingdom to Iarobeam in his rage. How shall these sayenges agree? that
Iarobeam reigned not by God, and that he was made king by the same God? Even
thus, because neither could the people fall from the house of David, but that
they must shake of the yoke which God had laid upon them: neither yet had
God his liberty taken away, but that he might so punish the unthankfulness
of Solomon. We see therefore how God in not willing false breach of
allegiance, yet to an other end justly wills a falling away from their
prince, whervppon Iarobeam beside all hope was by holy annointyng driven to be
king. i. Kin. xi.xxiii.
After this manner does the holy history say, that there was an enemy raised
up to spoil Salomo^s son of part of his kingdom. Let ye reders diligently
wey both these things, because it had pleased God to have ye people governed
under ye hand of one king. Therefore when it was divided in two parts it was don
against his will. And yet ye division took beginning of his will. For surely,
where as ye Prophet both by words and ceremony of anointing did move Iarobeam
when he thought of no such thing, to hope of ye kingdom, this was not don
without ye knowledge or against ye will of God, which commanded it so to be
done: and yet is the rebellion of the people justly condemned, for yt as it were
against ye will of God, they fell from the posterite of David. In this manner it
is also afterward further said, yt where Rehabea^ proudly despised the request
of ye people, this was done by God to confirm ye word which he had spoken by
the hand of Ahiha, his servant. Lo how against Gods will ye sacred unity is
torn in sunder, and yet with the will of the same God ten tribes do forsake
Salomo^s son. ii. Kin. x.vii.
Let us add an other like example. Where the people co^senting, yea laying
their hands unto it, ye sons of Ahab were slain, and all his ofspryng
rooted out. Iehu said in deed truly, yt nothing of the words of God were fallen
to ye ground, but that he had done all yt he had spoken by the hand of his
servant Elias. And yet not unjustly he rebukes ye citezens of Samaria, for yt
they had put their hands unto it. Ar ye rightuous, says he, If I have
co^spired against my lord, who has killed all these? I have before (as I
think) already declared plainly, how in one self work both ye fault of man does
bewray it self, and also the righteousness of God gloriously apereth. Episto.
48. ad Vincen.
And for modest wits this answer of Augustine shall always suffice: where as the
father delivered the son, and Christ delivered his body, and Judas delivered
the Lord: why in this delyueryng is God ryghtuous, and man faulty? because in
the same one thing which they did the cause was not one, for which they did
it. If any be more combered with this that we now say, that there is no
consent of God with man, where man by the rightuous mouyng of God does that
which is not lawful, let them remember that which Augustine says in an other
place: De gratia and libero arbitrio ad Valent. cap. 20.
Who shall not tremble at these judgments, where God works even in the
hearts of evil men what so ever he will, and yet renders to them according to
their deseruyngs? And truly in the falsehoode of Judas, it shall be no more
lawful to lay the blame of the wicked deed to God, because he himself
wylled him to be delivered, and did deliver him to death, then it shall be to
give away ye praise of our rede^ptio^ to Judas. Therefore ye same writer does in
an other place truly tell us, yt in this examination God does not enquire what
men might have done, or what they have done, but what their will was to do, yt
purpose and will may come into ye account. They yt think this hard, let the^ a
little while consider, how tolerable their own waiwardnesse is, while they
refuse a thing witnessed by plain testimonies of scripture, because it excedeth
their capacity, and do find fault yt those things ar uttered, which God,
unless he had known them profitable to be known, would never have commanded
to be taught by his prophets and apostles. For our being wise ought to be no
more but to embrace with meke willingness to lern, and yt without exception what
soever is taught in ye holy scripturs. As for the^ yt do more frowardly outrage
in prating against it, since it is evident yt they babble against God, they are
not worthy of a longer confutation.

The end of the first book.
The second book of the Institution of Christian religion, which entreats
of ye knowledge of God the Redemer in Christ, which knowledge was first
opened to the Fathers in the time of the Law, and then to us in the Gospel.
The first Chapter. That by Adames sin and falling away, mankind became
accursed, and did degenerate from his first estate: wherein is entreated of
Original sin.
NOt without cause has the Knowledge of himself ben in the old proverb so
much commended to man. For if it be thought a shame to be ignorant of all
things that pertayne to the course of man's life, then much more shameful is
the Not knowinge of our selves, whereby it comes to pass, that in taking
counsel of any thing necessary, we be miserably daseled, yea altogether
blinded. But how much more profitable this lesson is, so much more
dylygentlye must we take heed, that we do not disordrely use it, as we see
some of the Philosophers have done. For they in exhortinge man to know
himself, do withal appoint this to be the end, why he should know himself,
that he should not be ignorant of his own dignity and excellency: and
nothing else do they will him to behold in himself, but that whereby he may
swell with vain confidence, and be puffed up with pride. But the knowledge of
our selves, first stands in this point, that considering what was given us
in creation, and how bountifully God contynueth his gracious favor toward
us, we may know how great had been the excellency of our nature, if it had
continued uncorrupted: and we may withal think upon this, that there is
nothing in us of our own, but that we have as gotten by borrowing all that
God has bestowed upon us, that we may always hang upon him. Then, that we
call to mind our miserable estate after ye fall of Adam, the feeling whereof may
throw down al gloryinge and trust of our selves, Genes. (...)
ouerwhelme us with shame and truly humble us. For as God at the beginning
fashioned us like his own image, to the end to raise up our minds both to the
study of virtue and to the meditation of eternal life, so least the so great
nobleness of our kind, which makes us different from brute beasts,
should be drowned with our slothfulness, it is good for us to know, yt we
are therefore endued with (...) and understanding, that in keeping a holly and
honest life, we should ^^^cede on forward to the appointed end of blessed
immortality. (...) first dignity can not come in our mind, but by and by on
the other(...) heavy sight of our filthiness and shame does thruste it self in
pres^^^^^ sins we in the person of the first man are fallen from our (...)
estate, where upon grows the hatred and lothinge of our sell(...) true
humility, and there is kyndeled a new desire to seek for God, in whom every
of us may recover those good things, whereof we are found altogether void
and emptye.



Therefore, where as in this point the truth of God does agree of the
flesh, a man thinks that he has then well searched himself, when
trustinge upon his own understanding and integrytie, he takes boldenes and
encourages him self to doing the due^ies of virtue and biddinge battle to
vices, trauayleth with all his study to bend himself to that which is comely
and honest. But he that looks upon and tries himself by the rule of Gods
judgment, ^inneth nothing that may raise up his mind to good affiance: and
the more inwardely that he has examined him self, the more he is
discouraged, till being altogether spoiled of all confydence, he leaves to
himself nothing toward the well orderinge of his life. And yet would not God
have us to forgette the first noblenes that he gave to our father Adam,
which ought of good right to awake us to ye study of righteousness and
goodness. For we can not consider either our own first estate, or to what
end we are created, but we shall be pricked forward to study upon
immortality, and to desire the kyngedome of God. But that consideration is so
far from putting us in courage, that rather discouraging us, it throws us
down to humblenes For what is that first estate of ours? even that from
whence we are false. What is that end of our creation? even the same from
which we are altogether turned away: so that lothinge our own miserable
estate, we may gro^e for sorrow, and in groninge may also sighe for the loss
of that dignity. But now when we say that man ought to behold nothing in
himself that may make him of bold courage, we mean that there is nothing
in him upon affiance whereof he ought to be proud. Wherefore, if any list to
hear what knoweledge man ought to have of himself, let us thus divide it,
that first he consider to what end he is created, and endued with gifts that
are not to be despised, by which thought he may be styrred up to the
meditation of the hearing of God and of the life to come. Then let him weye
his own strength, or rather needy want of strength, by perceiving whereof
he may lie in extreme confusion, as one utterly brought to naught. The
first of these considerations tends to this end, that he may know what
is his duty: and the other, how much he is able to do toward the
perfourminge of yt. We will entreat of them both, as the order of teachinge
shall require.

But because it must needs be that it was not a light negligence, he
contented with his own estate, should not with wicked lust adueuree himself
higher. But ye promise whereby he was bidde^ to hope for eternal life, so long
as he did not eat of the tree of life, and again the horrible threatening of
death so sone as he should taste of the tree of knowledge of good and evil,
served to prove and exercise his faith. Hereof it is not hard to gather by what
means Adam provoked the wrath of God against him self. Augustine in deed
says not amiss, when he says, that pride was the beginning of all euels.
For if ambition had not lifted up man higher than was laweful and than was
permitted him, he might have continued in his estate: but we must fetch a more
full definition from the manner of the tentation that Moses describes. For sith
the woman was with the deceit of the Serpent led away by infidelity, now it
appears that disobedience was the beginning of ye fall. Romans 5.19.
Which thing Paul confirms, teaching that all men were lost by one man's
disobedience. But it is withal to be noted, that the first man fell from the
subjection of God, for that he not only was taken with the entisementes of
Satan, but also despising the truth, did turn out of the way to lying. And
surely Gods word being ones despised, all reverence of God is shaken of.
Because his majesty does no other ways abide in honor among us, nor the
worship of him remain inuiolate but while we hang upon his mouth. Therefore
infidelity was the root of that falling away. But thereupon arose ambition
and pride, to which was adjoined unthankfulness, for that Adam in coveting
more than was granted, did irreverently despise the so great liberality of
God wherewyth he was enriched. And this was a monstrous wickedness, that the
son of the earth thought it a small thing that he was made after the
likeness of God, unless he might also be made egall with God. If Apostasy
be a filthy and detestable offense, whereby manne withdraws him self from
the allegiance of his creator, yea outrageously shakes of his yoke: then it
is but vain to extenuate the Sin of Adam. Albeit it was no simple Apostasy,
but joined with shameful reproaches against God, while they assented to the
sclaunders of Satan wherein he accused God of lying envy, and niggardly
grudgyng. Finally, infidelity opened the gate to ambition, ambition was the
mother of obstinate rebellion, to make men cast away the fear of God, and
throw themselves whether their lust carried them. Therefore Bernarde does
rightly teach that the gate of salvation is opened unto us, when at this day
we receive the gospel by our ears: eue^ as by the same windows, when they
stood open to Satan, death was let in. For Adam would never have been so bold,
as to do against the commandment of God, but for this that he did not believe
his word. Truly this was the best bridle for the right keeping of all
affections in good order, to think yt there is nothing better than to keep
righteousness in obeyenge ye commandments of God, and then that ye chief
end of happy life is to be beloved of him. He therefore being carried away
with the blasphemies of the Deuell, did (as much as in him lay) extinguishe the
whole glory of god.

Neither is it marvel if he by his falling away, destroyed all his own
posterity, which perverted the whole order of nature in Heaven and in Earth.
Rom: viij.
All the creatures do groan, says Paul, being made subject to corruption
against their will. If one should ask the cause: no doubt it is for that
they bear part of that punishment that manne deserved for whose use they
were created. Sithe then the curse that goes throughoute all the costs of the
world proceeded from his fault both upward and downward, it is nothing
against reason, if it spread abroad into all his issue. Therefore after that
the heavenly image in him was defaced, he did not alone suffer this punishment,
that in place of wisdom, strength, holiness, truth, and justice, (with
which ornaments he had been clothed) there came in the most horrible
pestilences, blindness, weakness, filthiness, falsehod, and injustice, but
also he entangled and drowned his whole ofspryng in the same miseries. This is
the corruption that comes by inheritance, which the old writers called
Original sin, meaning by this word Sin, the corruption of nature, which
before was good and pure. About which matter they have had much contention,
because there is nothing farther of from common reason, than all men to be made
gilty for one man's fault, and so the sin to become common. Which seems to
have been the cause why the oldest Doctors of the church did but darkely
touch this point, or at least did not set it out so plainly as was
convenient. And yet that fearfulness could not bring to pass, but that
Pelagius arose, whose profane invention was that Adam sinned only to his own
loss, and hurted not his posterity. So through this sutteltie, Satan went
about by hidyng the disease, to make it incurable. But when it was proved by
manifest testimony of Scripture, that sin passed from the first man into al
his posterity, he brought this cauillation, that it passed by imitation, but
not by propagation. Therefore good men travailed in this point, and above al
other Augustine to show that we are corrupted not by foreign wickedness, but
that we bring with us from ye womb of our Mother a viciousness planted in out
begetting, which to deny was most great shamelessness. But the rashenesse
of the Pelagians and Celestians will not seem marvelous to him, which by the
writings of that holy manne shall perceive, how shameless beasts they were
in all other things. Surely it is not doubtfully spoken that David confesses
that he was begotten in iniquities, and by his Mother conceived in Sin. P^*
li.vij.
He does not there accuse the sins of his Father or Mother, but the better
to set forth the goodness of God toward him, he begins the confession of
his own wickedness at his very begettyng. For as much it is evident that
that was not peculiar to David alone, it follows that the common estate of
all mankind is noted under his example. All we therefore that descend of
unclean sede, are borne infected with the contagion of Sin, yea before that
we see the light of this life, we be in the sight of God filthy and spotted.
For who could give clean of the uncleanness? Iobe. xjiij.iiij.
not one: as it is in the book of Job.

We hear that the uncleanness of the parents so passes into the children,
that all without any exception at their beginnynge are defiled. But of this
defilynge we shall not find the beginning, unless we go up to the first
parente of all us, to the wellhed. Thus is it therefore, that Adam was not
only the progenitour, but also the root of man's nature, and therefore in his
corruption was all mankind: worthelye corrupted: which the Apostle makes
plain by comparynge of him and Christ. Romans v.xij.
As (says he) by one manne Sin entered into the whole world, and death by
Sin, and so death went over all men, for as much as all have sinned: so by
the grace of Christ, righteousness and life is restored unto us. What will the
Pelagians here prate? that Adams sin was spread abroad by imitation? Then,
have we no other profit by the righteousness of Christ, but that he is an
example set before us to follow? Who can abide such robbery of Gods
honor? If it be out of question that Christ's righteousness is ours by
communication, and thereby life: it follows also, that they both were so
lost in Adam, as they be recovered in Christ: and that Sin and death so
crepte in by Adam, as they are abolished by Christ. The words are plain, that
many are made righteous by the obedience of Christ, as by the disobedience of
Adam they were made sinners: and that therefore between them two is this
relation, that Adam wrappyng us in his destruct^ion, destroyed us with him, and
Christ with his grace restored us to salvation. In so clear light of truth, I
think we need not a longer or more laborious proof. So also in the first
Epistle to the Corinthians, i. Cor. xv.xxij.
when he goes about to stablishe the godly in the trust of the resurrection,
he shows that the life is recovered in Christ that was lost in Adam. He that
pronounces, that we all are dead in Adam, does also therewithal plainly
testify, that we were infected with the filth of sin. For damnation could
not reach unto them that were touched with no giltinesse of iniquity. But it
can be no way playnelier understood what he means, than by relation of
the other member of the sentence, where he teaches that hope of life is
restored in Christ. But it is well enough known that the same is done no
other way* than when by meruellous manner of communicating, Christ pours
into us the force of his righteousness. As it is written in an other place,
To. viij.x.
that the spirit is life unto us, for righteousness sake. Therefore we may
not otherwise expound that which is said that we are dead in Adam but thus,
that he in sinnynge did not only purchase mischief and ruin to himself, but
also throw down our nature hedlonge into like destruction. And that not only
to the corruption of him self, which perteyneth nothing to us, but because he
infected al his sede with the same corruption, wherinto he was fallen For
otherwise that saying of Paul could not stand true, Ephesians. ij.iij.
that all are by nature the sons of wrath, if they were not already accursed
in the womb. And it is easelye gathered, that nature is there meante not such
as it was create by God, but such as it was corrupted in Adam. For it were not
convenient, that God should be made the author of Death. Adam therefore so
corrupted him self, that the infection passed from him into all his ofsprynge.
And the heavenly Judge him self, Christ, does also plainly enough
pronounce, that all are borne evil and corrupted, where he teaches, that what
soever is borne of flesh, Joan. 3.6.
is flesh, and that therefore the gate of life is closed against all men,
until they be begotten again.

Neither for the understanding thereof is any curiouse disputation Contra
^^lag. (...) ^^^est.
as Augustine says, whether the unbeliever be condemned as gilty, and the
beleuer quitte as innocent, they both do begette not innocents, but gilty,
because they beget of the corrupted nature. Now where as they do in manner
partake of the parents holiness, that is the special blessyng of the people
of God, which proves not but that the first and universal curse of mankind
went before. For of nature is giltinesse, and sanctification is of
supernatural grace.

And to the end that these things be not spoken of a thing uncertain Gal.
5.19.
And these works that arise out of it, as are adulteries, fornications,
theftes* hatreds, murders* banketinges, after the same manner he calls the
fruits of sin albeit they are likewise called sins both commonly in the
Scripture and also by the same Paul him self. Therefore these two things
are distinctly to be noted: that is, that being so in all parts of our nature
corrupted and perverted, we are now even for such corruption only holden
worthily damned and co^uicted before God, to whom is nothing acceptable but
righteousness, innocence and pureness. And yet is not that bond in respect
of an others fault. For where it is said, that by the sin of Adam we are
made subject to the judgment of God, it is not so to be taken, as if we
innocent and vndeseruyng did bear the blame of his fault. But because by his
offendyng we are all clothed with the curse, therefore it is said that he has
bound us. Nevertheless, from him not the punishment only came upon us, but
also the infection distilled from him, abides in us, to the which the
punishment is justly due. Wherefore how so ever Augustine does oftentimes
call it an others sin, (to show the more plainly, that it is conveyed into
us by propagation) yet does he also affirm wythall that it is propre to every
one. To. v.xij.
And the Apostle him self expressly witnesses, that therefore death came
upon all men, because all men have sinned, and are wrapped in Original
sin, and defiled with the spots thereof. And therefore the very infantes
themselves, while they bring with them their own damnation from their mothers
womb, are bound, not by an others, but by their own fault. For though they
have not as yet brought forth the fruytes of their own ini^^^^ie, yet they
have the seed thereof enclosed within them: yea the^r whole nature is a
certain seed of Sin: therefore it can not be but hateful and abominable
to God. Whereupon follows, th^^ (...) proprely accounted sin before God:
for there could be no gi^^inesse without sin. The other point is, that this
perverseness never cesseth in us, but continually brings forth new fruits,
even the same works of the flesh that we have before descrybed: ly^e as a
b^rnynge furnace blows out flame and sparcles, or as a spring does without
ceassyng cast out water. Therefore they which have defyned Origin all sin,
to be a lackyng of Original righteousness which ought to have been in us,
although in deed they comprehend all that is in the thing it self: yet they
have not fully enough expressed the force and efficacy thereof. For our nature
is not only bare and empty of goodness, but also is so plentuous and fruteful
of al euilles, that it can not be idle. They that have said, that it is a
concupiscence have used a word not very far from the matter, if this were
added, which is not granted by the most part, that what so ever is in man,
even from the understanding to the will, from the soul to the flesh, is
corrupted and stuffed full with this concupiscence: or, to end it shortelyer,
that whole man is of him self nothing else but concupiscence.

Wherefore, I have said that all the parts of the soul are possessed possessed
the very castle of his mind, and pride pierced to the innermoste part of his
heart. So that it is a fond and foolyshe thing, to restrain the corruption
that proceeded from thense, only to the sensual motions as they call them, or
to call it a certain nouriture that allureth, styrreth and draws to sin
only that part, which among them is called Sensuality. Wherein Peter
Lombarde ha^he disclosed his gross ignorance, which seekynge and s^archynge
for the place of it, says that it is in the flesh, as Paul witnesses, not
proprely in deed, but because it more appears in ye flesh as though Paul
did mean only a part of the soul, and not the whole nature which is in
comparison set against supernatural grace. And Paul there takes away all
doubt: teachinge that corruption rests not in one part alone, but that
nothing is pure and clean from the deadly infection thereof. For entreatynge
of corrupted nature, he doothe not only condemn the inordinate motions of
appetites yt appear, but specially trauayleth to prove that the understanding
mind is subject to blyndenesse, and the heart to perverseness. And ye same
third chapter to the Romans is nothing else but a description of original
sin. That appears more plainly by the renewinge. For the spyrite which is
compared with the old man and the flesh, does not only signify the grace
whereby the inferioure or sensual part of the soul is amended, but also
conteyneth a full reformation of all the parts. Ephesians. 4.27.
And therefore Paul does command, not only that our gross appetites be
brought to naught, but also yt we our selves be renewed in the spirit of our
mind, as likewise in an other place he bids us to be transfourmed in
newness of mind. Romans 12.2.
Whereupon follows, that the same part, wherein most of all shines the
excellence and nobleness of ye soul, is not only wounded, but also so
corrupted, that it needs not only to be healed, but in manner to put on a
new nature. How far sin possesses both the understanding mind and the
heart, we will see hereafter. Here I only purposed shortly to touch that
the whole man from ye head to the foot is so overwhelmed as with an
ouerflowinge of water, that no part of him is l^te from sin, Romans 8 7.
and that therefore what soever proceeds from him is accounted for sin, as
Paul says, that all the affections of the flesh or thoughts, are enmities
against God, and therefore death.

Now let them gooe, that presume to make God author of their sins, because
we say that men are naturally synful. They do wrongfully seek the work of
God in their own fylthynesse, which they ought rather to have sought in the
nature of Adam, while it was yet sound and uncorrupted. Therefore our
destruction comes of the fault of our own flesh and not of God, for
as much as we perished by no other mean but by this, yt we degendred from our
first esta^e. But yet let not any man here murmr and say, that God might have
better foreseen for our salvation, if he had provided yt Adam should not have
fallen. For this objection both is to be abhorred of al godly minds, for ye to
much presumptuous curiosity of it, and also pertains to ye secret of
predestination which shall after be entreated of in place convenient. Wherefore
let us remember that our fall is to be imputed to the corruption of nature,
that we accuse not God himself the author of nature. True in deed it is, that
the same deadely wound sticks fast in nature: but it is much material to
know, whether it came into nature from else where, or from ye beginning has
rested in it. But it is euydent that ye wound was given by sin, Therefore
there is no cause why we should complain but of our selves: which thing ye
Scripture has dyligently noted. Eccl. 7.13.
For Ecclesiastes says: This have I found, yt God has made manne
righteous, but they have sought many inventions. It appears yt the
destruction of man is to be imputed only to him self, for as much as having
gotten vpryghtnesse by the goodness of God, he by his own madness is fallen
into vanity.

Ephesians. ^.3.
For, for ye same cause the Apostle teaches yt we are all by nature the
children of wrath. How could God, whom all his meanest works do please, be
wrathefull against the noblest of all his creatures? But he is rather
wrathefull against the corruption of his work, than against his work it
self. Therefore if, for that man's nature is corrupted, manne is not unfitly
said to be by nature abominable to God, it shall be also not vnaptely called
naturally perverse and corrupted. As Augustine fears not in respect of
nature corrupted, to call the sins natural, which do necessaryly reign in
our^ flesh where the grace of God is absente. So vanysheth away the foolyshe
tryfelynge devise of the Maniches, which when they imagined an euellnesse
having substance in man, presumed to forge for him a new creator, least
they should seem to assign to the ryghteous God the cause and beginning of
evil.

The second Chapter. That man is new spoiled of the Freedom of will, and
made subject to miserable bondage.
Sithe we have seen, that ye dominion of sin, sins ye time that it held ye
first man bound unto it, doothe not only reign in all mankind, but also
wholly possesses every soul: now must we more nerely examine, sins we are
brought into that bondage, whether we be spoiled of all freedom or no: And if
yet there remain any parcel, how far the force thereof proceeds. But to
the end that the truth of this question may more easyly appear unto us, I
will by the way set up a mark, where unto the whole sum may be
dyrected. And this shall be the best way to avoid error, if the dangers be
considered that are like to fall on boothe sides. For when man is put from
all vpryghtnesse, by and by he thereby takes occasion of slouthfullnesse: and
because it is said, that by himself he can do nothing to the study of
righteousness, fourth with he neglects yt wholly, as if yt pertained
nothing unto him. Again, he can presume to take nothing upon himself, be yt
never so little, but that both Gods honor shall be thereby taken from him,
and man himself be overthrown with rash confydence. Therefore, to the end
we strike not upon these rocks, this course is to be kept, that man being
enfourmed that there remains in him no goodness, and being on every side
compassed about with most miserable necessity may yet be taught to aspire to
the goodness whereof he is void, and to the liberty whereof he is deprived,
and may be more sharpelye styrred up from slouthfullnesse, than if it were
fained that he is furnished with greatest power. How necessary this second
point is, every man sees. The first, I see, is doubted of by more than yt
ought to be. For this being set out of controuersye, it ought then
plainly to stand for truth, yt nothing is to be taken away from man of his
own, so far as it behooves that he be thrown down from false boastinge of
him self. For if it were not granted to man to glory in himself even at
that time when by the bountefulnesse of God he was garnished with most
singular ornaments, how much ought he now to be humbled, sithe for his
unthankfulness he is thruste down from hye glory into extreme shame? At yt
time, I say, when he was advanced to the highest degree of honor, the
Scripture attributes nothing else unto him, but that he was created after the
image of God, whereby it secretly teaches, that man was blessed, not by his
own good things, but by the partakynge of God. What therefore remains now,
but that he being naked and destitute of all glory, do acknoweledge God, to
whose liberality he could not be thankful when he flowed full of the
richesse of his grace; and that now at length with confession of his own
poverty he glorify him, whom in the acknoleging of his good gifts, he did
not gloryfye? Also it is as much our profit, that all praise of wisdom and
strength be taken from us, as yt pertayneth to the glory of God, that they
join our ruin with the robbery of God, that give unto us any thing more,
than that which is true. For what is else done when we are taught to ^yght of
our own force, but that we be lyfted up on hye on a staff of a reed, that
it may by and by break, and we fall to the ground? Albeit, our forces are
yet to much commended when they are compared to ye staff of a reed. For it
is but smoke all yt vain men have imagined and do babble of them. Wherefore not
without cause is this excellence sentence often repeted by Augustine, yt free will
is rather throwe^ down hedlonge, than stablished by them yt defend it. This I
thought nedeful to speak before, as by way of preface for many men's sakes,
which when they hear man's power overthrown from ye ground, yt the power of
God may be builded in man do much hate this manner of disputing as dangerous*
much more superfluus, which yet appears to be both in religion necessary,
and for us most profitable.

Whereas we have a little before said, that in the understanding a Queen
governs the will, for they say that it is so endued with Divine light, that
it can give good counsel, and so excels in lively force that it is able
well to govern. On the other side, that Sense is dulle and bleare^yed, that it
always creeps on the ground, and walloweth in gross obiectes, and never
lyfteth up it self to true insyght. That the Appetite, if it can abide to
obey reason, and do not yield it self to Sense to be subdued, is carried on to
the study of virtues, holds on the right way, and is transfourmed into
Will: but if yt give it self subject into the bondage of Sense, it is by it
corrupted and perverted, so that it degendreth into Lust. And whereas by their
opinion there do sit in the soul those powers that I have spoken of
before, understanding sense, appetite or will, which word Will is now more
commonly used, they say that understanding is endued with reason, the best
gouernesse toward good and blessed life, so that it do hold it self within
his own excellence, and show forth the force yt is naturally given it. But
that inferioure motion of it, which is called Sense, wherewith man is drawn
to error and deceit, they say to be such, that it may be tamed with the
rod of reason, and by little and little be vanquished. They place Will in
the myddest between reason and Sense, as a thing at her own orderinge, and
having liberty whether it list to obey to reason, or give forth it self
to be rauyshed by Sense.

De legbili^^. 1. Tusc. que. lib. 3.
as it were with ropes of stringes of synowes as Plato says. For which
reason Cicero says, yt these sparks given by nature, are with perverse
opinions and evil manners by and by quenched: But when such diseases have
ones gotten places in ye minds of men, they grant yt they do more
outragiously ouerflowe, than that they easily may be restrained: and they
stick not to compare them to wild horses which throwinge away reason as it
were casting the Charyote dryuer, do range vnrulyly and without measure. But
this they make no question of, Arist. ^th. lib. 3. cap. 5.
that virtues and vices are in our own power. For if (say they) it be in
our choice to do this or that, then is it also in our choice not to do.
Now if it be in our choice not to do, then is yt also to do. but of free
choice we seem to do those things yt we do, and to forbear those things
that we forbear. Therefore if we do any good thing when we list, we may
likewise leave it undone: if we do any evil, we may also eschew ye same. Yea
some of them have burste forth into so great licentiousnes, that they have
bosted yt it is in deed yt Gods gift yt we live, Seneca.
but our own that we live well and holily. And thense comes that saying of
Cicero in the person of Cotta: De not. de. lib. 3.
because every man him self gets virtue to himself, therefore never any of
the wise men did thank God for it. For (says he) for virtue we be praised,
and in virtue we glory, which should not be if yt were the gift of God,
and not of our selves. And a little after. This is the judgment of all men
that fortune is to be asked of God, but wisdom to be taken of himself. This
therefore is the su^me of the opinion of all the Philosophers, that the reason of
man's understanding is suffycyente for right governance: that Will being
subject to yt, is in deed moved by Sense to evil things. But even as it
has free election, so can it not be stopped, but that it follow reason for
her guide in all things.

Among the ecclesiastical writers, al be it there have been none that did not
acknowledge both that the soundenesse of reason in manne Hom. de proditione
Iudae.
Chrysostom has in one place: Because God has put both good and evil
things in our own power, he has given us Freedom of election, and he
wythholdeth not the unwilling, Chrysostom. in Genesis hom. 18.
but embraces the willing. Again, Oftentimes he that is evil, if he will,
is turned into good, and he that is good by slouthfullnesse falls and
becomes evil, because God made our nature to have free will, Hom. 5^.
and he lays not necessytye upon us, but geuynge convenient remedies,
suffers all to lie in the mind of the paciente. Again, As unless we be
helped by the grace of God, we can never do any thing well: so unless
we bring that which is our own, we can not obtain the favor of god.
And he had said before, that it should not be all of gods help, but we must
also bring somewhat. And this is commonly a famylyar word with him, let us
bring that which is ours, god will supply the rest. Dialog. 3. contra
^elagium.
Wherewith agrees that which Hieremye says, that it is our part to begin,
but gods to make an end: our part to offer what we can, his to fullfyll
what we can not. You see now that in these sayings they gave to man toward
the study of virtue more than was meet, because they thought that they could
not otherwise awake the dullness that was naturally in us, but if they did
prove that in it only we sinned. With what apt handeling they have done the
same, we shall after see. Surely that the sayings which we have rehearsed
are most false, shall by and by appear. Now although the Grecians more
than other, and among them principally Chrysostom have passed measure in
aduancinge ye power of man's will yet all ye old writers, except Augustine, do
in this point so either vary, or waver, or speak doubtefully, that in manner
no certainty can be gathered of their writings. Therefore we will not
tarrye upon exact reckenynge of every one of their sayings, but hear and
there we will touch out of every one of them so much as the plain
declaration of the matter shall seem to require. As for them that followed
after, while every one for himself sought praise of wyttte, in defending of
man's nature, they fell continually by little and little one after an other into
worse and worse, till it came so far that man was commonly thought to be
corrupted only in his sensual part, and to have reason altogether, and will
for the more part uncorrupted. In the mean time this flewe about in all men's
mouths, that the natural gifts were corrupted in man, and the supernatural
were taken away. But to what meaning that tended, scarsely the hundredth man
did even slightly understand. As for my part, if I would plainly show of
what sort is the corruption of nature, I could be easily contented with these
words. But it is much material that it be hedefully weyed what a man,
being in all parts of his nature corrupted and spoiled of his supernatural
gifts, is able to do. They therefore which boasted them selves to be the
Disciples of Christ, spoke of this matter to much like Philosophers. For the
name of Freewill still remained among the Larines, as if manne had still
abiden in uncorrupted state. And the Grecians were not ashamed to use the word
much more arrogantly: For they called it Autexousion, that is to say, of her
own power, as if man had the power of him self. Because therefore all, even to
the commune people, had received this principle, that man was endued with
Free will, and many of them that would seem excellent, can not tell how
far it extends: first let us search out the force of the word it
self, and then let us proceed on by the simplicity of the Scripture to show
what man is able to do of his own nature, toward good or evil. What Free
will is, where as it is a word commonly found in all men's wrytynges, yet
few have defined yet it seems that Origin rehearsed that thing where of they
were all agreed, Lib. 3. (...).
when he said, that it is a power of reason to discer^e good or evil, and a
power of will to choose either of them. And Augustine varyeth not from him,
when he teaches that yt is a power of reason and will, whereby good is chosen
while grace assisteth, and evil when grace cesseth. Bernarde, while he
means to speak more suttlely, speaks more darkely, which says, that it
is a consent by reason of the liberty of will that can not be lost and the
judgment of reason that can be avoided. And the definition of Anselmus is not
familiar enoughe, which says, that it is a powere to keep vprightenesse for
it self. Lib. 2. (...) 24.
Therefore Peter Lombarde and the other Schoolmen, have rather embraced
Augustines defynytyon, by cause yt both was playner and did not exclude the
grace of God, without the which they saw that Will was not sufficient for yt
self. But they bring also of their own such things as they thought either
to be better, or to serve for playner declaration. First, they agree that the
name of Arbitrium, that is free choice, is rather to be referred to reason,
whose part is to discern between good and Evil things: and the adjective
Free, pertayneth properly to will, P^rt. 1. (...). 8^. ar^. 3.
which may be turned to either of both. Wherefore sithe freedom proprely
belongs to will, Thomas says that it would very well agree if Free will be
called a power of chosyng which being mixed of understanding and appetite,
does more incline to appetite. Now have we in what things they reach that
the power of Free will consysteth, that is to say, in reason and will. Now
remains that we shortly see how much they give to either part.

They are commonly wont to make subject to the free determination Amb. lib.
1. cap. 2.
he reckeneth up three sorts of Wylles, the first Sensitive, the second
Natural, ye third Spyrytuall, of which he says, that man has the first
two at his own lybertye, the last is the work of the holly ghost in man.
Which whether it be true or no shall be entreated in place fytte for it, for
now my purpose is but shortly to rehearse the opynyons of other, and not to
confute them. Hereby it comes to pass, that when writers speak of free will,
they pryncipally seek not what yt is able to do to civil or outewarde
doings, but what it can do to the obedience of ye law of God. Which latter
point I think so to be the pryncipall, that yet I think the other is not to
be neglected. Of which meaning I trust, I shall show a good reason. There
has been a distinction received in Schools, that reckeneth up three sorts
of freedoms, the first from necessytye, the second from sin, the third
from mysery. Of which the first so naturally stycketh fast in man, that yt
can by no mean be taken away: the other two are lost by sin. This
dystinction I wyllingly receive, saving that there necessytye is wrongefully
confounded with compulsion: between which two how much dyfference there is,
and how necessary that dyfference is to be considered, shall appear in an
other place.

If this be received, then shall it be out of controversy that man Lib. 2.
did. 26.
While the Master of ye Sentences goes about to make that plain, he says
there are two sorts of grace necessary for us, whereby we may be made mete to
do a good work: the one they call a Working grace, whereby we effectually will
to do good: the other a Together workinge grace, which follows good will in
helpinge it. In which division this I mislike, yt while he gives to ye grace
of God an effectual desire of good, he secretly shows his meaning yt man
already of his own nature, after a certain manner, desires good though
vneffectually. As Bernarde affirminge that good will is in deed the work of
God yet this he grants to man, yt of his own motion he desires yt good
will. But this is far from ye meaning of Augustine, from whom yet Lombard
would seem to have borrowed this divisio^. In the second part of ye divisio^,
the doubtfulnes of speech offends me, which has bredde a wrong
exposition. For they thought that we do therefore work together with the
Second grace fo God, because it lies in our power, either to make void the
First grace by refusing it, Amb. lib. 2. cap. 4.
or to confirm it by obedientlye folowinge it. Whereas the author of the book
Of the calling of the Gentiles, does thus express it, that it is free for
them that use the judgment of reason, to depart from grace, that it may be
worthy reward not to have departed, and that the thing which could not be
done but by the workynge together of the holly ghost, may be imputed to their
merits, by whose will it was possible to have not ben done. These two things I
had will to note by the way, that now, reader, thou may see how much I
dissent from the soundest forte of ye Scholeme^. For I do much farther differ
from the later sophisters, even so much as they be farther gone from the
ancient time. But yet somewhat, after such a sort as it is, we perceive by
this division, after what manner they have given Free will to man. For at length
Lombard says, Lib. 2. did. 25.
that we have not free will therefore, because we are alyke able either to do or
to think good and evil, but only that we are free from compulsion: which
freedom is not hindered, although we be perverse and the bondemen of sin,
and can do nothing but sin.



Lib. 1. contr^^ul. Hom. 5^. in Joan. Ad A^ast. cap. 44.
First of all Augustine, which sticks not to call it Bond will. In one
place he is angry with them yt deny free will but he declares his chief
reason why, when he says only, Let not any man be so bold to deny the
freedom of will, that he go about to excuse sin. But surely in an other
place he confesses, that the will of man is not free without the holy
ghooste, for as much as yt is subject to lusts that do bind and conquer
yt. De perfect. ^st.
Again, that when will was overcome with sin whereinto it fell, nature
begane to want freedom. Enchir. ad 1 au. ca. ^0. ^a Bonif. lib. 3. ca 8.
Ibid. ca. 7.
Again, that man having ill used his free will, lost both himself and yt.
Again Free will is become captive, that it can do nothing toward
righteousness. Again, that it can not be free, which the grace of God
has not made free. Again, Ad. B^ns. lib. ^. ca. 3.
that the justice of God is not fullfylled when the law commands, and man
does as of his own strength, but when the holy ghost helps, and man's will
not free, but made free by God, obeys. And of all these things he shortly
renders a cause, when in an other place he writes, that man received great
force of free will when he was created, Ad Bonis. lib. 3. ca. 7.
but he lost it by sinninge. Therefore in an other place, after that he had
showed that free will is stablished by grace, he sharply inueieth against them
that take it upon them without grace. De uerbis aposi. ser. 3.
Why therefore (says he) dare wretched men either be proud of freewil before
that they be made free, De spiritu and litera. cap. 30.
or of their own strength if they be already made free? And they mark not
that in the very name of Freewyll, is mention of freedom. ij. Cor. iij.viij.
But where the spirit of the Lord is, there is freedom. If then they be the
bondemen of sin, why do they boste them of free will? For of whom a man is
overcome, to him he is made bond. But if they be made free, why do they
boaste them as of their own work? Are they so free, that they will not be
his bondseruauntes, which says: John. xv.v
Without me ye can do nothing? Beside that also in an other place he
seems sportyngly to mock at the use of that word when he said, De
correp. and gra. ca. 13.
that will was in deed free, butte not made free, free to righteousness, but
the bondeseruaunt of sin. Which saying in an other place he repeteth and
expounds, that manne is not free from righteousness, but by choice of will,
and from sin he is not free, but by grace of the Sauyoure. He that doothe
testify, that the freedom of man is nothing else but a freemakinge or
manumission from righteousness, seems trymely to mock at the vain name
thereof. Therefore if any manne will permytte the use of this word with no
evil signification, he shall not be troubled by me for so doing. But
because I think yt can not be kept without great peril, and that it
Mulde turn to a great benefit to the Church, if yt were abolyshed: neither
will I my self use yt, and I would wyshe other, if they ask me counsel, to
forbear yt.

I may seem to have brought a great prejudice against my own armure. But
it is not hard to make appear, that in such doubtefullnesse of speech, they
nothing, or very little, esteemyng man's strength, have given the praise of
all good things to the holy ghost, if I hear recyte certain sentences of
theyrs, whereby that is plainly taught. De predestinatione sanctorum lib. 4.
Augu. in Genesis
For what means that saying of Cypryane, which Augustine so often repeteth,
that we ought to glory of nothing, because we have nothing of our own,
but that man wholly despoyled in him self, may learn to hang all upon God.
What means that saying of Augustine and Eucherius, when they expound, that
Christ is the tree of life to whom he that reaches his hand, shall live?
and that the tree of knowledge of good and evil, is the free choice of will,
whereof who so tastes, forsakynge the grace of God he shall dye? Hom. 1. in
aduen^.
What means that of Chrysostom, that every man is naturally not only a
sinner, but also altogether sin? If we have no good thing of our own: if
manne from top to tooe be altogether sin: if yt be not lawefull to
attempt how much the power of Free will is able to do, how then may yt
be lawefull to part the praise of a good work between God and man? I
could rehearse of this sort very many sayings out of other, but least any
manne should cavil that I choose out those things only that make for my
purpose, and do craftelye leave out such things as make against me,
therefore I do forbear such rehersall. Yet this I dare affirm, how so
ever they be sometime to busye in auauncynge Freewyll, that this yet was their
purposed mark, to teach manne being altogether turned away from trust
of his own power, to have his strength reposed in God alone. Now come I to
the simple setting fourth of the truth, in considering the nature of man.

Iere. 17.5.
as are, Cursed is he which trusts in in manne and sets flesh to be
his arm. Again, that God has not pleasure in the strength of a horse, Ps.
^^lv^^.x.
neither delyteth in the legs of man, but delyteth in them that fear him,
and attend upon his mercy. Esaias. xl.xxix.
Again, that yt is he which gives strength unto him that fayneteth, and
unto him that has no strength, he increases power, even the young men
shall faynte and be wearye, and the young men shall stumble and fall, butte
they that weyte, upon the Lord, shall renew their strength. All which
sayings tend to this end, that we lean not upon any opinion of our own
strength, be yt never so little, if we mean to have God favorable unto us,
Iac. iiij.vi
which resysteth the proud, and gives grace to ye humble. And then again,
let these promyses come into our remembrance. I will pour out water upon
the thyrstye, Esa. xliiij.iiii.
and Floudes upon the dry ground. Again, All ye that thyrste, come unto the
waters. Which promyses do testyfye, Esa. v.i.
that none are admytted to receive the blessings of God, but they that pyne
away with feelynge of their own pouertye. And such promyses are not to be
passed over, as is that of Esaye: Esa.
Thou shalt have no more son to shine by Day, neither shall the
bryghtenesse of the Moon shine unto thee: for the Lord shall be thine
everlasting light, and the God thy glory. The Lord in deed doothe not take
away the shynynge of the Son or Moon from his servants, but because he
will himself alone appear glorious in them, he calls their confydence
far away, even from those things, that are compted in their opinion most
excellent.

Truly, that saying of Chrysostom has allwaye excedyngelye Hom. de perf.
euangel. Epist. 56. del Diosc.
what was the first thing in the rules of eloquence, answered Pronunciation:
and what was the second, he answered Pronunciation: and what was the third,
he answered Pronunciation: so if one ask me of the rules of Christian
relygyon, the First, the Second, and Third time, and always I would
answer Humylytye. But he means not humilytye, when a man knowinge some
little virtue to be in himself, absteyneth from pride and hautynesse of
mind, butte when he truly feels him self to be such a one, as has no
refuge butte in humylytye: In Joan. hom. 49.
as in an other place he declares. Let no man (says he) flatter him
self: of his own he is a deuell. That thing whereby he is blessed, he
has of God only. For what haste thou of thine own, butte sin? Take away
from thee, sin which is thine own, Li. de Not. and gratia, cap. 52. In
Psalm. 45.
for righteousness is Gods. Again, why is the possybylytye of nature so
presumed on? yt is wounded, mayned, troubled and lost, yt needs a true
confession, and not a false defense. Again, when every manne knows that in
himself he is nothing, and of himself he has no help, his weapons in
him self are broken, the wars are ceased. But yt is needful, that all the
weapons of wickedness be brooken in sunder, shyuered in pieces and burnte,
that thou remain unarmed and have no help in thy self. How much more weak
thou art in thy self, so much the more the Lord receives thee. So upon the
three score and tene Psalm he forbyddeth us to remember our own
righteousness, that we may acknowledge the righteousness of God: and he
shows that God does so commend his grace unto us, that we may know our
selves to be nothing, that we stand only by the mercy of God, when of our
selves we are nothing but evil. Let us not therefore strive here with God
for our right, as if that were wythdrawen from our salvation which is given
to him. For as our humbleness is his hienesse, so the confession of our
humbleness has his mercy ready for remedy. Neither yet do I require that
man^e not convinced should wyllyngely yield himself: nor if he have any
power, that he should turn his mind from yt, to be subdued unto true
humylytye. But that layinge away, the disease of selfeloue and desire of
victory wherewyth being blinded, he thinks to highely of himself, he
should well consider himself in the true lookynge glass of the Scripture.

Ihon. i.v.
that the light shyneth yet in darkness, but the darkness comprehended yt
not: In which words boothe things are plainly expressed, that in the
perverted and degendred nature of man, there shine yet some sparks that
show that he is a creature having reason, and that he differs from brute
beasts, because he is endued with understanding: and yet yt this light is
choked with great thyckenes of ignorance, that yt can not effectuallye
get abroad. So Dyll, because yt is inseperable from the nature of man,
peryshed not, but was bound to perverse desires, that yt can covet no good
thing. This in deed is a full definition, but yet such as needs to be made
plain with more words. Therefore, that the the order of our talk may
proceed according to that first distinction, wherein we divided the soul of man into understanding and will: let us first examyne the force of
understanding. So to condemn it of perpetual blyndenesse, that a man leave
unto it no manner of skyll in any kind of things, is not only against the
word of God, but also against the experience of common reason. For we see
that there is planted in manne a certain desire to search out truth, to
which he would not aspyre at all, but having felt some sauoure thereof
before. This therefore is some syghte of man's understanding, that he is
naturally drawn with love of truth, the neglectyng whereof, in brute beasts
proves a gross Sense without reason, all be yt, this little desire such as
yt is faynteth before yt enter the beginning of her race, because it by and by
falls into vanity. For the wit of man can not for dullness keep the
right way to search out truth but straieth in diverse erroures, and as it
were groopynge in darkness, oftentimes stombleth, till at length yt wander
and vanysheth away, so in seekynge truth, yt doothe bewraye how vnfytte yt
is to seek and find truth. And then yt is sore troubled with an other
vanytye, that oftentimes yt dyscerneth not those things to the true
knoweledge, whereof yt were expedyente to bend yt self, and therefore yt
tormenteth yt self with fond curyosytye, in searchynge out things
superfluous and nothing worth: and to things most necessary to be known,
it either takes noe heed, or neglygentlye or seldom tourneth, but surely
scarce at any time applies her study earnestlye unto them. Of which
perverseness, whereas the profane writers do commonly complain, yt is
found, that all men have entangled them selves with it. Wherefore Solomon in
all his Ecclesiastes, when he had gone through all these studyes, in which
men think them selves to be very wise, yet he pronounces, that they are all
vain and tryfelynge.

Yet do not all trauales of Wit* so always become void, but that the bounds
thereof. Heavenly things, I call the pure knowledge of God, the order of true
righteousness and the mysteries of the heavenly kingdom. Of the first sort
are policy, governance of householde, all handy crafts, and liberal
Scienses. Of the second sort are the knowledge of God and Gods will, and the
rule to frame our life according to yt. Concerning the first, this we must
confess, because man is a creature by nature given to live in companies
together: he is also by natural instinction bente to cheryshe and to preserve
the feloweshyppe of these companies, therefore we see that there are in the
minds of all men universal impressions of a certain civil honesty and
order. Hereby yt comes to pass, that there is found noman that
understands not, that all companies of men ought to be keepte in order with
laws, and that conceyueth not in his mind the prynciples of these laws.
Hereof comes that same perpetual consent, as well of all nations as of all
men, unto laws, because the seeds thereof are naturally planted in all
men without any teacher or lawemaker. And I weye not the disscusions and
fyghtynges that afterward arise* while some desire to peruerte law and
right, the loose absolute gouernementes of kings, that lust strayeth abroad
in steed of right, as the eues and robbers, some (which is a fault more
than common) think that to be unjust, which other have stablyshed for
just: and on the other side styffely say, that to be laudable, which other
have forbidden. For these men do not therefore hate laws, because they do
not know that laws are good and holly, but for that they ragynge with heddye
lust, do fight against manyfeste reason, and for their fansi^ do abhor
that, which in understanding of mind they allow. The latter sort of stryuyng
is such, that yt takes not away that first conceiving of equity. For when
men do strive among them selves, concerning the points of laws, they
agree together in a certain sum of equity. Wherein is proved the weakness
of manns wit, which even then when it seems to follow the right way, yet
halteth and staggereth, but still this remains true, that there is sown in
all men a certain seed of polytyke order. And that is a large proof, that
in the ordering of this life, no man is void of the light of reason.

given to men naturally an universal conceyuynge of reason and of
understanding. Yet is yt so an universal benyfyte, that therein every manne
ought for himself to acknoweledge the peculiar grace of God. To which
thankefullnesse the creatore him self doothe suffycyently awake us, when he
creates natural fools, in whom he makes us to see with what gifts man's
soul excels, if it be not endued with his light, which is so natural in
all men, that yt is yet altogether a free gift of his lyberalytye toward
every man. But the invention and ordrely teaching of the same arts, or a
more inward and excellent knoweledge of them which is propre but to a few,
is no perfect argument of the common conceyuynge of wit, yet because
without dyfference it happens to the godly and ungodly, yt is ryghtefully
reckened among natural gifts.

So often therefore as we light upon profane writers, let us be

But in the mean time yte let us not forgette, that these are the Exo.
xxxi.ij. and.xxxv*xxx.
should be poured into Beseleel and Oliab by ye spirit of god, it is no mer^el
if ye knowledge of those things which are most excellent in man's life, be
said to be communicated unto us by the spirit of God. Neither is there cause
why any manne should ask, what have the wicked to do with Gods spirit, which
are altogether estranged from God. For where it is said that the spirit of
God dwells in the faithful only, that is to be understood of the spyrite
of sanctification, by the which we are consecrate to God him felfe, to be his
temples: yet does he nevertheless fill move and quicken all things with the
virtue of the same spirit and that according to the property of every kind
which he has given to it by law of creation. If it have been the Lords will
that we should be helped by the travail and service of the wicked in natural
Phylosophie, Dialectike, the mathematical knoweledges, and other: let us use
it, least if we neglecte the gifts of God, willingly offered in them, we
suffer just punishment for our slothfulness. But least any should think a man to be blessed, when under the elements of this world there is granted
unto him so great an ability to conceive truth, it is also to be added that
all this power to understand, and the understanding that follows thereof, is
a vanishyng and transitory thing before God, where there is not a stedefaste
fundation of truth. For Augustine teaches most truly, whom (as we have said)
the Master of the Sentences, and the other Scholemen are compelied to assent
unto, Lib. 2. did 25.
as the free gifts were taken from man after his fall, so these natural
gifts which remained, were corrupted. Not that they can be defiled of
themselves in as much as they come from God, but because they cease to be pure
to a defiled manne, that he should have no praise of them.

(...) 6.^4
where it is said, that the spyrite of the Lord ^^ad them, whom he called to
rule the people. Finally, in every noble art there is a special instruction.
By which reason the strong men followed Saul whose hearts the lord had
touched. 1. ^a. 10.6.
And when his ministering in the kingedome was propheeyed of Samuel said thus:
1. S^. 16.1^.
The spirit of the lord shall come upon thee, and thou shall be an other man.
And this was continued to the whole course of gouernemente: as after it is
spoken of David, that the spirit of the Lord came upon him from that day
forward. But the same is spoken in an other place as touching particular
motions: yea in Homere men are said to excel in wit, not only as Jupiter
has dealte to every manne, but also as the time required. And truly
experience teaches, while many times such men stand amassed as were most
sharp and deepewytted, that the wits of men are in the hand and will of God
to rule them at every moment: for which reason yt is said, that the takes
wit from the wise, that they may wander out of the way. ^
But yet in this diversity we see remaining some marks of the Image of God,
which do make difference between all mankind and other creatures.

Now is to be declared what man's reason sees, when it comes

But because we being drunk with a false persuasion of our own Ihon. 1.4.
when he writes, that life was in God from the beginning, and the same life
which should be the light of men, and that the light did shine in
darkness, and the darkness comprehended it not. He shows in deed, that
man's soul is lightened with the brightness of gods light, so that it is never
altogether without some small flame, or at least some sparcle of it, but yet,
that with such a light he comprehends not God. And why so? because man's
quickenesse of wit, as toward the knowledge of God, is but mere darkness. For
when the holy ghost calls men darkness, he at ones spoyleth them of all
ability of spiritual understanding. Therefore he affirms, that the faithful
which embrace Christ, John. i.xiij.
are borne not of blood, or of the will of the flesh, or of man, but of God. As
if he should say: flesh is not capable of so hye wisdom to conceive God and
that which is Gods, unless it be lightened with the spirit of God. Matthew. xvi
xvij.
As Christ testified, that this was a special revelation of the father, that
Peter did know him.

Ps. xxxiiij x. i. Cor. xii. Ihon. iij.xxvij.
For with thee is the fountain of life, and in thy light we shall see light.
The Apostle testifies the same thing, when he says that no man can call
Jesus the lord, but in the holy ghost. And John Baptist seeing the dullness of
his disciples, cries out, that no man can receive any thing, unless it be
given him from above. And that he means by Gift a special illumination, and
not a common gift of nature, appears hereby, that he complains that in so
many words as he had spoken to tommende Christ to his Disciples, he prevailed
nothing. I see (says he) that words are nothing to inform men's minds
concerning divine things, unless the Lord give understanding by his spirit.
Yea and Moses, when he reprocheth the people with their forgetfulness, yet
notes this withal, that they can by no means grow wise in the mysteries of
God, but by the benefit of God. Deuteronomy. xxix ij.
Thine eyes (says he) have seen those great tokens and wonders, and the
Lord has not given thee a heart to understand, nor ears to hear, nor eyes
to see. What should he express more, if he called us blocks in considering
the works of God? Whereupon the Lord by the Prophet promises for a great
grace, Ie. xxiiij.vij.
that he will give the Israelites a heart, that they may know him:
signifiyng thereby, that man's wit is only so much spiritually wise, as it
is lightened by him. And this Christ plainly confirmed with his own mouth,
Ihon. vi.xxiiij.
when he says that no man can come to him, but he to whom it shall be given
from the Father. What? is not he him self the lively Image of the Father, in
whom the whole bryghtnesse of his glory is expressed unto us? Therefore he
could not better show what our power is to know god, than when he says,
that we have no eyes to see his Image, where it is so openly set present
before us. What? Came he not into the earth for this purpose, to declare his
Fathers will unto men? And did he not faithfully do his office? Yes surely.
But yet nothing is wroughte by his preaching, unless the inward
Schoolmaster, the holyghost, set open the way to our minds. Therefore none
come to him, but they that have heard and ben taught of the Father. What manner
way of learning and hearing is this? Even, when the holy ghost by marvelous
and singular virtue forms the ears to hear, and the minds to understand.
And least that should seem s^raung, he allegeth the prophecy of Elaye, where
when he promises the repairing of the church that they which shall be gathered
together to salvation, Esa. iiii.xiii.
shall be taught of the Lord. If god there foresheweth some peculiar thing
concerning his electes, it is evident that he speaks not of that kind of
learning that was also common to the wicked and ungodly. It remains
therefore that we must understand it thus, that the way into the kingdom of
God is open to no man, but to him to whom the holy ghost by his enlightening
shall make a new mind. But Paul speaks most plainly of all, which of
purpose entryng into discourse of this matter. After he had condemned all men's
wisdom of folly and vanity, and utterly brought it to naught, at the last
concludes thus: 1. Cor. ii.iiiii.
that natural man can not perceive those things that are of the spirit of
God: they are foolishness unto him, and he can not understand them, because
they are spiritually judged. Whom does he call natural? even him that
stays upon the light of nature. He I say comprehe^deth nothing in the
spiritual mysteries of God. Why so? is it because by slothfulness he
neglects it? Nay, rather although he would travail never so much, he can do
nothing, because forsooth they are spiritually judged. What means that?
because being utterly hidden from the light of man^ they are opened by the only
revelation of the spirit: so that they are reckened for folly where the
spirit of God gives no light. Before he had auaunced those things that God
has prepared for them that love him, above the capacity of eyes, ears and
minds. Yea he testified that man's wisdom was as a certain veil, whereby
man's mind was kept from seeing God. 1. Cor. i.xx
What mean we? The Apostle pronounces, that the wisdom of this world is
made folly by god: and shall we forsooth give unto it sharpness of
understanding, whereby it may pearce to the secret places of the heavenly
kingdom? Far be such beastelinesse from us.

And so that which here he takes away from men, in an other Ephesians. i.xv.
give to you the spirit of wisdom and revelation. Now thou hear that all
wisdom and revelation is the gift of god. What follows? and lightene ye
eyes of your mind. Surely if they need a new revelation, then are they
blind of themselves yt follows after: That ye may know what is the hope of
your calling. etc. Therefore he confesses, that the wits of men are not
capable of so great understanding to know their own calling And let not some
Pelagian babble here, that god does remedy that dullness or unskillfulness,
when by the doctrine of his word he directs ma^s understanding, whether
without a guide he could not have atteined. For David had a law, wherein was
comprehended all the wisdom that may be desired, and yet not contented with
that, he requires to have his eyes opened, that he may consider the mysteries
of the same law. Ps. C.xix.xviij.
By which speech truly he secretly says, that the sun ryseth upon the
earth where the word of God shines to men: but they get not much thereby,
until he himself that is therefore called the father of lights, Iac. i.xvij
do give them or open their eyes, because where so ever he shines not with his
spirit, al things are possessed with darkness. So the Apostles were well and
largely taught by the best schoolmasters: yet if they had not needed the
spirit of truth to instruct their minds in that same doctrine which they had
heard before, John. xi^ij xxvi.
he would not have bidden them look for him. If the thing that we ask of God,
we do thereby confess that we want: and God in that that he promises it us,
does argue our need, let no man now doubt to confess that he is so much able
to understand the mysteries of God, as he is enlightened with his grace. He
that gives to him self more understanding is so much the more blind, for
that he does not acknoweledge his own blindness.

To. ij.xiiii.
that the Gentiles which have no law, while they do the works of the law,
are to themselves instead of a law, and do show the law written in their
hearts, their consciences bearing them witness, and their thoughts accusyng
them within themselves, or excusing them before the judgment of God. If the
Gentiles have righteousness naturally graue^ in their minds, surely we can
not say that we are altogether blind in the order of life. And nothing is more
common, than that man by the law natural, of which the Apostle speaks in
that place, is sufficiently instructed to a right rule of life. But let us way
to what purpose this knowledge of the law is planted in men: then it shall by
and by appear, how far it brings them toward the mark of reason and
truth. The same is also evident by the words of Paul, if a man do mark the
placing of them. He had said a little before, that they which sinned in the
law, are judged by the law: they that have sinned without law, do perish
without law. Because this might seem unreasonable, that the gentiles should
perish without any judgment going before, he by and by adds, that their
conscience is to them in stead of a law, and therefore is sufficient for their
just damnation. Therefore the end of the law natural is, that man may be made
inexcusable. And it shall be defined not il after this sort that it is a
knowledge of conscience, that sufficiently discerns between just and unjust,
to take away from men the pretense of ignorance, while they are proved gilty
by their own testimony. Such is the tenderness of man toward him self, that
in doing of euyls, he always turns away his mind so much as he may from the
feling of sin. In Pretagora.
By which reason it seems that Plato was moved to think that there is no
sin done but by ignorance. That in deed were fitly said of him if men's
hypocrisy went so far in hiding of vices, that the mind might not know
itself gilty before God. But when the sinner seking to escheue the judgment
emprinted in him, is now and then drawn back unto it, and not suffered so to
wink, but that he be compelled whether he will or no, some time to open his
eyes: it is falsely said that he sins only by ignorance. Paraph. in lib. 3.
de anima. cap. 46.
Themistius says more truly, which teaches that understanding is seldom
deceived: that it is blyndenesse when it goes any further, that is, when he
comes down to the special case. Every man, if it be generally asked, will
affirm, that manslaughter is evil: but he that conspireth to kill his enemies,
deliberateth upon it, as on a good thing. The adulterer generally will condemn
adultery, but in his own, privately he will flatter himself. This is
ignorance, when a man coming to the special case forgets the rule, that
he had lately agreed upon in the general question. Of which thing Augustine
discourses very finely in his exposition of the first verse of the.lvij.
Psalm: albeit the same thing is not continual. For sometime the shamefulnesse
of the evil deed so presses the conscience, that not deceyuynge him self
under false resemblance of a good thing, but wittingly and willingly he runs
into evil. Medaea apud Ouidium.
Out of which affection came these sayings: I see thee better and allow it,
but I follow the worse. Wherefore, me think, Aristotele has very aptely made
distinction between Incontinence and Temperance. Ethic. 7. cap. 3.
Where incontinence reigns, he says, that there by reason of troubled
affection or passion, knoweledge is taken away from the mind, that it marketh
not the evil in his own act, which it generally sees in the like: and when
the troubled affection is cooled, repentance immediately follows. But
intemperaunce is not extinguished or broken by feeling of sin, but on the
other side obstinately stands still in her conceived choice of evil.

Now when thou hear judgment universally named in the difference them, if
by any mean he may put it away: and the judgment of ma^s reason is none
other, but that it is the part of servile and base courage, to suffer it
patiently: and again, the part of an honest and free borne heart* to shake it
of. And revenge of injuries, is rekened for no fault among the Philosophers.
But the lord condempning that to much nobleness of courage, commands his
to keep ye same patience, that is so ill reported among men. And in all the
keeping of the law, our understanding marketh not desire of mind at all. For
a natural manne suffers not him self to be brought to this, to acknowledge
the diseases of his desires. The light of nature is choked up, before that it
come to the first entry of this bottomless depth. For when the Philosophers
note immoderate motions of mind for faults, they mean those motions that
appear and show forth themselves by gross tokens, but they make no account
of those evil desires that do gently tickle the mind.

ij. Cor. iij.v.
Paul shows when he says, that we are not sufficient to think any thing
of our selves, as of our selves. He speaks not of will or affection, but he
takes also this away from us, that we should not think that it can come in
our minds how any thing is to be done well. Is our diligence, insighte,
understanding, and head so corrupted, that it can devise or think upon
nothing that is right before the Lord? That seems to hard to us, that do
unwillingly suffer our selves to be spoiled of the sharpness of reason,
which we account a most precious gift. But to the holy ghost it seems
most full of equity, which knows that all the thoughts of wisemen are
vain: and which pronounces plainly, that all the invention of man's heart,
Ps. xciiij.xi.
is only evil. If all that our wit conceived, deuiseth upon, purposes and
goes about, is always evil, Genesis vi.iij. and. viij.xxi.
how can it come in our mind to purpose, that which pleases God, to whom
only holiness and righteousness is acceptable? So is it to be seen, that
the reason of our mind, which way so ever it turn it self, is miserably
subject to vanity. David knew this weakness in him self, Ps. ^
xix.xxciiij.
when he prayed to have understanding given him, to learn the Lords
commandments a right. For he sec^e^ly says therein, that his own wit
suffices him not, which desires to have a new given him. And that he does
not only ones, but almost ten times, in one Psalm, he repeteth the same
prayer. By which repetyng he privily declares, with how great need he is
driven to pray it. And that which he prays for himself alone, Phil. i.iiij.
Paul commonly uses to pray for the churches. We cease not (says he) to
pray for you, Col. i.ix.
and to desire that ye may be filled with the knowledge of God in all wisdom
and spiritual understanding, that ye may walk worthily of God. etc. But so
often as he makes that thing the good gift of God, let us remember that he does
withal testify, Aug. lib. 2. De peccat. mer. and remiss. cap. 5.
that it lies not in man's power. And Augustine so far acknoweleged this
defaut of reason to understand those things that are of God, that he thinks
the grace of illumination to be no less necessary for our minds, than the
light of the sun is for our eyes. And not content with that, he adds a
correction of that, saying, that we lift up our eyes to see the light: but the
eyes of our mind lie shut, unless the Lord open them. And the Scripture
teaches that our minds are not enlightened one day alone, that they may
afterward see by themselves: for that which I even now alleged out of Paul,
belongs to continual procedinges and encresinges. And this does David
expressly set out in these words: Ps. C.xix, x.
With my whole heart I have sought thee, make me not to straye from thy
commandments. For when he had been regenerated and had not sclenderly
profited in true godliness, yet he confesses, that for every moment he needs
continual direction, least he should swerve from the knowledge wherewith he
is endued. Psa. lj.xij.
Therefore, in an other place he prays to have the right spirit renewed,
which he had lost by his own fault, because it belongs to the same God to
restore unto us the same thing being lost for a time, which himself gave at
the beginning.

Now is Will to be examined, wherein stands the chief liberty as we say,
This man is well, or in good case. Finally, although a man ^o never so much
desire to attain that is good, yet he follows it not. As there is no man to
whom eternal blessedness is not pleasant, yet is there none that aspireth
unto it, but by the moving of the holy ghost. Wherefore sith the natural
desire in men to be well, makes nothing to prove the fredome of will, no more
than in metalles and stones, does the affection inclinyng to the perfection of
their substance: let us consider in other things, whether Will be so
infected and corrupted in all parts, that it engenders nothing but evil: or
whether it keeps still any percell unhurt from whense do grow good desires.

To. vi^.xv
I do not the good that I would, but the evil that I would not, that I do.
To will is present unto me, but to perform it, I find not. But after this
manner is the discourse that Paul there follows, altogether wrongfully
perverted. For he entreats of the Christian wrestling (which he shortly
touches to the Galatians) which the faithful continually feel within them
selves, Ga. v.xvij
in the battle of the flesh and the spirit. But the spirit is not of nature,
but of regeneration. And that the Apostle does there speak of the regenerate,
appears by this, that when he had said, that there dwells no goodness in
him, he adds an exposition, that he means it of his flesh. And therefore he
says, that it is not he that does the evil, but sin that dwells in him.
What means this correction in me, that is, in my flesh? Even as much as if
he had said thus: God dwells not in me of my self, for there is no good to
be found in my flesh. Hereupo^ follows that manner of excuse: I my self do
not the evil* but sin that dwells in me. Which excuse belongs only to
the regenerate, which do with the chief part of their soul tend unto good.
Now, the conclusion that is adjoined after, declares all this matter
evidently. I am delited (says he) with the law, Romans vij.xxij.
according to the inward man. But I see an other law in my members, fighting
against the law of my mind. Who has such a stryuing in him self, but he
that being regenerate by the spirit of God, carries the leauinges of his flesh
about with him? Ad Bonif. lib. 1. cap. 10. Et in l^. Retract.
Therefore Augustine, whereas ones he had thought that, that had been spoken of
the nature of man, revoked his exposition as false, and ill agreyng together.
And truly, if we allow this, that men without grace have some motions to
good, though they be but small, ii. Co. iij.v
what shall we answer to the Apostle which says, that we are not
sufficient so much as to think any thing? What shall we answer to the
Lord that pronounces by Moses, that every invention of man's heart is only
evil. Genesis viij.xxi.
Wherefore, sith they have stombled by false taking of one place, there is no
cause why we should stay upon their judgment. Let rather this saying of
Christ prevail, He that does sin, Ioh. viij.xxxiiij.
is the servant of sin. We are all sinners by nature, therefore we be all
holden under the yoke of sin. Now if whole manne be subject to the dominion
of sin, then must it needs be, that the will it self which is the chief
seat thereof* be bound fast with most straight bonds. Phi ij.xii^
For otherwise that saying of Paul would not stand together, that it is God
which works will in us, if any will did go before the grace of the holy
ghost. Away therefore with all that many have triftingly spoken concerning
preparation. For although sometime the faithful do pray to have their heart
formed to the obedience of the law, as David does in many places: yet it is to
be noted, that even that desire of prayeng is from God. Which we may gather of
his words; Ps. li.xij.
for when he wishes to have a clean heart created within him, surely he
takes not on him self the beginning of creation. De uerbis Apostoli sermon. 10.
Therefore let rather this saying of Augustine have place with us: God will
prevent thee in all things: And sometime prevent thou his wrath. How?
Confess that thou haste all these things of God that what so ever good thou
haste, is of him: what soever evil, it is of thy self. And a little after.
Nothing is ours but sin.

The third Chapter. That out of the corrupt nature of man proceeds nothing but
damnable.
BUt manne can not be any way better known in either Ioh. iij.vi
That which is borne of flesh, is flesh: as it is easy to prove, then is he
proved to be a very miserable creature. For the affection of the flesh, Romans
viij.vi.
as the Apostle witnesses, is death, for as much as it is enimitie against
God, and so is not subject, nor can be subject to the law of God. Is flesh
so perverse, that with all her affection she continually uses enmity against
God? that she can not agree with the rightousnesse of the law of God? Finally,
that she can bring forth nothing but matter of death? Now, grant that in the
nature of man is nothy^yge but flesh, and gather any good out of it if thou
canste. But (they say) the name of flesh belongs only to the sensual, and
not the hyer par^e of the soul. But that is sufficiently confuted by the
words of Christ, and of the Apostle. It is the Lords argument, that manne
must be borne again, Ioh. iij.^xi
because he is flesh. He commands not to be borne again according to the
body. But in mind he is not borne again, if a part of it be amended, but
when it is all renewed. And that does the comparison, set in both places,
confirm. For the spirit is so compared against the flesh, that there is
left no mean thing between them. Therefore whatsoever is not spiritual in
man, is after the same reason called fleshly. But we have nothing of the
Spirit but by regeneration. It is therefore flesh whatsoever we have of
nature. But of that matter, if otherwise we could have any doubt, that is
taken away from us by Paul, Ephesians. iiij.xiij.
where after we had described the ould^man, whom he had said to be corrupt
with concup^scences of error, he bids us to be renewed in the spirit of
our mind: you see he does not place unlawful and evil lusts only in the
sensitive part, but also in the very mind, and therefore requires a renuinge
of it. And truly a little before he had painted out such an image of man's
nature, as did show that there was no part wherein we were not corrupted and
perverted: for whereas he writes that al nations do walk in the vanity of
their mind, are darkened in understanding, estra^ged from the life of God,
Ephesians. iiij.xvij.
by reason of the ignorance that is in them, and the blindness of their
heart: it is no doubt that this is spoken of all them whom the Lord has not
reformed to the uprightness both of his wisdom and justice: which is also
made more plain by the comparison by and by adjoined, where he puts the
faithful in mind, that they have not so learned Christ. For of these words
we gather, that ye grace of Christ is the only remedy whereby we be delivered
from that blindness and the euels that ensue thereof. For so had Esaias also
prophesied of ye kingdom of Christ, Esa. lx.ij.
when he promised, that the Lord should be an everlasting light to his
Church, when yet darkness covered the earth, and a m^ste the peoples.
Whereas he testifies, that the light of God shall arise only in the Church,
truly without the Church he leaves nothing but darkness and blindness. I
will not rehearse perticularly such things as are written every where,
specially in the Psalms and in the Prophets against the vanity of man. Psa.
lxij.x.
It is a great thing that Dauide writes, if he be weyed with vanity, that he
shall be vayner than vanity it self. His wit is wounded with a grievous
weapon, when all the thoughts that come out of it, are scorned as foolyshe,
^rifelynge mad and perverse.

Ier. xvij.^^.
but such a one as shall be like a most bright loking glass, wherein we may
behold the whole image of our nature. Romans xiij.x.
For the Apostle, when he goes about to throw down the arrogance of
mankind, does it by these testimonies, That there is not one ryghteons manne,
There is not one manne that understands or that se^keth God, Psalm. xiiij.iiij.
All are gone out of the way, they are made unprofitable together, there is
none that does good, no not one: their throat is an open sepulcher, Esa.
iix.xij
with their tongues they work deceytfully, the poison of Serpents is under
their lyppes, whose mouth is full of cursing and bytternesse: whose feet are
swyfte to shed blood, in whose ways is sorrow and unhappiness, which
have not the fear of God before their eyes: With these thunderboltes he
inueyeth, not against certain men, butte against the whole nation of the
sons of Adam. Neither declyneth he against the corrupt manners of one or
two ages, butte accuses the contynuall corruption of nature. For his purpose
is that place, not simply to chide men, to make them amend, but to teach
rather that all men are oppressed with calamity, impossyble to be overcome,
from which they cannot get up again, unless they be plucked out by the
mercy of God. And because, that could not be proved unless it had been by
the overthrow and destruction of nature, he brought forth these testimonies
whereby is proved that our nature is more than destroyed. Let this therefore
remain agreed, that men are such as they be here described, not only by
fault of evil custom, but also by corruptnesse of nature. For otherwise the
Apostles argument can not stand, that there is no salvation for manne but by
the mercy of God, because he is in him self utterly lost and paste hope. I
will not here busy my self in proving the applyeng of these testimonies that
no man should think them unfitly used. I will so take them as if they had been first spoken by Paul, and not taken out of the Prophets. First he
takes away from manne rightousnesse, that is integrity and pureness, and
then understanding. The want of understanding, he proves by Apostasy or
departing from God, whom to seek is the first degree of wisdom. But that
want must needs happen to them that are fallen away from God. He says
further, that all are gone out of the way and become as it were rotten, that
there is none that does good, and then he adioyneth the heinous faults,
wherewith they defile their members that are ones let lose into wickedness.
Last of all he testifies that they are void of the fear of God, after whose
rule our steps should have been directed. If these be the inheritable gifts
of mankind* it is in vain to seek for any good thing in our nature. In
deed I grant that not all these faults do appear every manne: yet can not
be denied that this Hydra lurketh in the hearts of all men. For as the
body while it already fostreth enclosed within it, the cause and matter of
disease, although the pain be not yet vehement, can not be called healthy:
no more can the soul be reckened sound, while it swarmeth full of such
diseases of vices, albeit the similitude does not agree in all points. For in
the body be it never so much diseased, there remains a quickness of life:
but the soul being drowned in this gulf of destruction, is not only trouble
with vices, but also altogether void of all goodness.

The same question in a manner which has been before assoyled, it, but
inwardely to restrain it. For if the lord would suffer the minds of all men
as it were with loose reins to run wildly into all sorts of lusts, without
doubt there would be no man, but he would in plain experience make us believe,
that all those euels wherewith Paul condemns all nature, Gom. ^.10
are most truly said of him. For what? Can thou exempt thy self out of
the number of them, whole feet are swift to shed blood, their hands defiled
with robberies and manslaughters, their throtes like unto open Sepulchers,
their tungues deceitful, their lips venymous, their works unprofitable,
wicked, rotten, deadly, whole mind is without God, whose inwardes are
perverseness, whose eyes are bent to entrappinges, their hearts lift up
dispiteousely to triumph over other, and all the parts of them applied to
infinite mischeues. If every soul be subject to all such monsters, as the
Apostle boldly pronounces, truly we see what would come to pass, if the
Lord would suffer the lust of man to wander after his own inclination.
There is no mad beast that is so hedlong carried away, there is no stream be
it never so swifte and strong, whereof the ouerflowyng is so violent. The Lord
heals these diseases in his elect by this mean that we will by and by set
forth. In some he only restrains them with putting a bridle in their mouth,
only that they break not out, so far as he foreseeth to be expedient for
preserving of the university of things. Hereby some are holden in by shame,
some by fear of laws, that they burste not forth into many sorts of
filthiness, howebeit they do for a great part not hide their uncleanness.
Some because they think that an honest trade of life is good, do after a
certain sort aspire toward it. Some rise up above the common sort, that by
their majesty they may keep other in their duty. So God by his providence
bridleth the perverseness of nature, that it break not forth into doing: but
he cleanses nor within.

Aug. lib. 4. c^^ra ^^ ^^um.
But what if the mind were perverse and crooked, and following any thing rather
than upright straightness? And that it was such there is no doubt, if you
grant that he was a natural manne. Now what power of man's nature to goodness
will you rehearse unto me in this behalf, if in the greatest show of pureness
it be found that he is always carried to corruption: Therefore, least ye
commend a man for virtue, whose vices deceive you under virtues Image, do
not so gene unto the will of man power to desire goodness, so long as it
remains taste in her own perverseness. Albeit this is a most sure and easy
solution of this question, that these are not common gifts of nature, but
special graces of God, which he diversely and to a certain measure deals
among men that are otherwise ungodly. For which reason we fear not in common
speech to call one man well natured, and an other of evil nature, and yet we
cease not to include them both under the universal state of man's corruption,
but we show what special grace God has bestowed upon the one, which he has
not vouchsaued to give to y^e other, when his pleasure was to make Saul king,
he formed him as a new man: and that is the reason why Plato alludinge to the
fable of Homere, says that kings sons are created notable by some singular
mark, because God prouidinge for mankind, furnishes these with a principle
nature whom he appoynteth to bear government: and out of this store house
came all the great Captains that are renomed in histories. The same is also
to be thought of private men. But because as every man has most excelled,
so his ambition has most moved him forward (with wh^che spotte all virtues
are defiled, so that they lose all favor before God,) it is to be accounted
nothingeworth, what soever seems praiseworthy in ungodly men, beside that the
chief part of uprightness fails, where there is no study to advance the
glory of God, which all they want whom he has not regenerate with his
spirit. Neither is yt vainly spoken in Esaie, Esa. xi.i^^
that upon Christ rests the spirit of the fear of God, whereby we are
taught, that so many as are strange from Christ, are without the ^eare of God,
which is the beginning of wisdom. As for the virtues that deceive us with
vain show, I grant they shall have praise in the court of policy, and in
the common fame of men, but before the heavenly judgment seat, they shall
be of no valewe to deserve righteousness.

With such bondage of sin therefore as Will is deteyned, it can Ier.
xxxi.xviij.
As Jeremy prays to the Lord to turn him, if he will have him turned.
Whereupon the Prophet in the same chapter, deserybynge the spiritual
redemption of the faythefull people, says that they were redeemed out of the
hand of a stronger, meaning with how streyghte fetters a sinner is bound so
long as being forsaken of the Lord, he lives under the yooke of the
Deuell. Yet Will still remains, which with most bente affection is both
inclyned and hastes to sin. For manne was not depryued of Will when he did
cast him self into this necessytye, but of the soundenesse of Will. And
Bernarde says not vnaptelye, which teaches that to Will ys^ in us all: but
to Will good is a profytynge, to will ill is a defaute: and therefore symplye
to will, is the work of man: to will evil, of corrupt nature: to will
well, of grace. Now whereas I say, that will put from liberty is by
necessytye drawn or led into evil, yt is marueyll if that should seem a
hard speech unto any manne, which neither has any absurdity in yt, nor
varieth from the use of holy men: But it offends them that can make no
dyfference between necessytye compulsyon. But yt a man ask them, is not God
of necessytye good? is not the deuell of necessytye evil? what can they
answer? For so is goodness knitte with Gods divinity, that it is no more of
necessary that he be God then that he be good. And the deuell is by his fall
so estranged from partaking of goodness, that he can do nothing but evil.
But now if any robber of God do bark against this and say, that God deserves
small praise for his goodness, which is compelled to keep: shall not this be
a ready answer to him, that it comes to pass by his infinite gooddesse and
not by violent impulsion, that he can not do evil. Therefore if this, that it
is of necessity that God do well, do not hinder the free will of God in doing
well, if the deuell which can not do but evil yet willingly sins, who
shall then say that a man doothe therefore less wyllyngely sin for this
that he is subject to necessity of sinning. This necessity, whereas
Augustine e^che where speaks of it, Lib. de persect. in^it.
even then also when he was enuiously pressed with the cauilation of Celestius,
he sticked not to affirm in these words, up liberty it came to pass that
manne was with sin, but now the corruption which stowed for punyshemente,
has of, liberty made necessity. And so often as he falls into mention
thereof, he bo^bteth not to speak in this manner of the necessary bondage of
sin. De not. and great. and alibi.
Therefore let this sum of that distinction be kept, that manne syns he is
corrupted, synneth in deed wyllyngely and not against his will nor compelled,
by a most bente affection of mind, and not by vyolente compulsion, by motion
of his own lust, and not by foreign constraynte: but yet of such
perverseness of nature as he is, he can not but be moved and driven to
evil. If this be true, then surely yt is plainly expressed that he is
subject to necessytye of ^yn^ynge. Ser. super. Ca^te. 81.
Bernarde agreeynge to Augustine writes thus, only manne among all living
creatures is free: and yet by mean of sin, he also suffers a certain
violence, but of will and not of nature, that even thereby also he should not
be depryued of freedom, for that which is willing is free. And a little
after, will being changed in it self into worse, by I woote not what
corrupt and marvelous manner so makes necessity, that very necessity for
as much as it is willinge, can not excuse will, and will forasmuch as it is
drawn by aluremente, can not exclude necessity, for this necessity is after
a certain manner willing. Afterward he says, that we are pressed down with a
yoke, but yet none other but of a certain willing bondage, therefore by
reason of our bondage we are miserable, by reason of our will we are
inexcusable, because will when it was free, made it self the bond servant of
sin. At length he concludes, that the soul is so after a certain
marvelous and evil manner holden both a bond servant and free, under this
certain willinge and ill free necessity: a bond seruante by reason of
necessity, free by reason of will, and that which is more marvelous and more
miserable, therein gylty wherein it is free, therein bond wherein it is gylty,
and so therein bond wherein it is free. Herby truly the readers do perceive
that I bring no new shynge, which long ago Augustine brought fourth out
of the consent of all godly men, and almost a thousand years after was
kept still in monks Cloisters. But Lombarde when he could not distynguyshe
necessity from compulsion, gave matter to a pernicious error.

On the otherside it is good to consider what manner remedy is Phil. i.vi.
that he trusts that he which began a good work in them, will perform it
unto the day of Jesus Christ: is no doubt, that by the beginnynge of a good
work, he means the very beginning of conversion, which is in will.
Therefore God begins a good work in us by stirryng up in our hearts the
love, desire and endeavor of righteousness, or (to speak more properly) in
bowyng, framyng and directyng our hearts to righteousness: he ends it in
confirmyng us to perseverance. And that no man should cavil that good is
begone by the Lord, when will being of it self weak is helped: the holy
ghost in an other place declares what will is able to do being left unto it
self. Eze. xxxvi xvi.
I will give you (says he) a new heart. I will put a new spirit in the
mids of you. And I will take away the stony heart from your flesh, and I
will give you a heart of flesh. And I will put my spirit in the mids of
you, and I will make you to walk in my commandments. Who shall say that
the weakness of man's will is strengthened with help, whereby it may
effectually aspire to the choice of that that is good, when it must be whole
transformed and renewed? If there be any softness in a stone which by some
help being made tenderer will abide to be bowed every way, then will I grant
that the heart of man is pliable to obey that which is right, so yt that
which in it is imperfect, be supplied by the grace of God. But if he meante
to show by this similitude, that no goodness could ever be wroong out of our
heart unless it be made thoroughly new: let us not part between him and us,
that which he chale^geth to him self alone. If therefore a stone be transformed
into flesh, when God turns us to the desire of that which is right: then is
all that which was of our own will taken away, and that which comes in
place thereof is all of God. I say that will is taken away, not in that it is
will, because in the conversion of man, that which was of the first nature
abides whole: also I say that it is created new, not that will then
begins to be, but that it be turned from an evil will into a good. And this
I affirm to be wholly done by God, because we are not able so much as to
think, ii. Cor. viij vi. Phi. ij.xiij.
as the same Apostle witnesses: therefore in an other place he says, that
God does not only help our weak will, or amend our perverse will, but that
he works in us to will. Whereupon is easily gathered, that which I said
before, that what so ever good is in will, it is the work of only grace. In
which sense in an other place he says, ij. Cor. xij.vi.
that it is God that works all in all. Neither does he there entreat of the
universal government, but gives unto God alone the praise of al good things
that the faithful have. And in saying, all* truly he makes God the author
of spiritual life, even from the beginning to the end. Which self same thing
he had taught before in other words, i. Cor. viij.vi.
saying that the faithful are of God in Christ. where he plainly makes mention
of the new creation, wherein that which was of common nature before, is
destroyed. For there is to be understood a comparyson between Adam and
Christ, which in an other place he more plainly expresses, where he
teaches that we are the work of God created in Christ to good works, which
he has prepared that we should walk in them. For he goes about by this
reason to prove, that our salvation is of free gift, because the beginning
of all goodness, is at the second creation, which we obtain in Christ.
But if there were any power of our selves, were yt never so small, we should
have also some portion of merit. But he to prove us altogether nothing
worth, resoneth that we have deserved nothing, because we are create in
Christ to good works, which God has prepared. In which words he
signifies again, that all parts of good works, even from ye first motion,
are propre to God only. For this reason, ye Prophet after he had said in ye
Psalm yt we are the workemanshipe of God, that there should be no particion,
adds by and by, We made not our selves. That he speaks there of
regeneration, which is ye beginning of spiritual life, appears by ye tenor
of the text, where it by and by after follows yt we are his people and ye
flock of his pastures: we see now, how he not contended simply to have given
to God ye praise of our salvation, does expressly exclude us from all felowshipe
with him, as if he would say, that there rests no piece, be it never so
little, for man to glory in, because it is all of God.

Ad Bonif. Epist. 106.
as Augustine teaches, that grace goes before every good work, but so, that
will does accompany it and not lead it, as a waytinge maid after it, and
not a forgoer. Which thing being not evil spoken by the holy man, Peter
Lombarde does disordrely wri^he to this purpose. But I affirm, that as well in
the words of the Prophet which I have alleged as in ye other places, these
two things be plainly signified, that the Lord does both correct our
corrupted will or rather destroy it, and also of himself puts in place
thereof of a good will. In as much as it is prevented by grace, in yt respect
I give you leave to call it a Waiting maid, but for that being reformed, it
is the work of the Lord: this is wrongfully given to man that he does with will
coming after, obey grace going before. Therefore it is not well written of
Chrysostom, Ser. de invent. S. Cru^i^.
yt neither grace without will, nor will without grace can work any thing: as if
grace did not work very will it self, as even now we have seen by Paul.
Neither was it Augustines purpose when he called man's will ye waiting maid of
grace, to assign unto her a certain second office in doing a good work, but
because this only was his intent, to confute ye wicked doctrine of Pelagius,
which did set ye principal cause of salvation in man's deserving: therefore he
stood only upon this point, yt grace was before al deserving, which was
sufficient for ye matter that he then had in hand, not medlinge in ye mean
time with the other question, concerning ye perpetual effect of grace, which yet
in an other place be excellently well handles. For sometimes when he says, yt
the lord does prevent ye unwilling that he may will, and follows the
willing that he will not in vain, he makes him altogether the whole author
of the good work. Albeit his sentences touching this matter, Au. lib. 2. de
remiss. peccat. ca. 18. John. vi.xlv.
are to plain to need any long arguyng upon them. Men (says he) do labor
to find in our will something that is our own and not of God, but how it may
be found I know not. And in his first book against Pelagius and Celestius,
where he does expound that saying of Christ* Every one that has heard of my
father comes to me, he says: Freewill is so helped not only that it may
know what is to be done, but also may do it when it has known it. And so
when God teaches, not by the letter of the law, but by the grace of ye spirit,
he so teaches, that he that has learned, does not only see it in knowing, but
also desire it in willing, and perform it in doing.

And because we are now in hand with ye chief point whereupon the Ier.
xxxij.xxxix.
is from himself. And he utters not this in one place only. For he says in
Jeremy: I will give them one heart and one way, that they may fear me al
their days. And a little after. I will give the fear of my name into their
heart, that they depart not from me. Again in Ezechiel: Eze. xi.xix
I will give them one heart, and I will give a new spirit in their bowels. I
will take away the stony heart out of their flesh, and I will give them a heart
of flesh. He could not more evidently claim to himself, and take from us
what so ever is good and right in our will than when he declares that our
conversion is a creation of a new spirit, and of a new heart. For it
follows always, that both out of our will proceeds no goodness till it be
reformed: and that after reformation, so much as it is good, is of God and not
of us.

1. Reg. viij ^viij.
He shows the frowardenesse of our heart, which naturally reioyseth to
rebel against the law of God if it be not boowed. Ps. C. xix.xxxvi.
And the same thing is in the Psalm: Lord incline my heart to thy
testimonies. For the comparison of contrariety is always to be noted, which
is between the perverse motion of the heart whereby it is carried to
obstinatie, and this correction whereby it is led to obedience. Ps. li.xij.
When David feelyng him self for a time without the directyng grace, prays
God to create a new heart within him, to renew a right spirit within his
bowelles: does he not acknowledge that all the parts of his heart are full of
uncleanness, and his spirit writhen with crooked perverseness? and in calling
the cleanness which he prays for, the creature of God, does he not
attribute it wholly to God? But if any manne take exception and say, that the
very prayer is a token of a godly and holy affection: our answer is ready,
that though David were by that time somewhat come to amendment, yet does he
still compare his first state with that sorrowefull fall that he had felt.
Therefore taking upon him the person of a man enstranged from God, he for
good cause prays to have given him all these things that God gives to his
elect in regeneration. And so being like a dead manne, he wishes him self to
be created of new, that of the bondeslaue of Satan, he may be made the
instrumente of the holyghoste. Marvelous and monstrous surely is the lust of
our pride. God requires nothing more earnestly, than that we should most
religiously keep his Sabbat, that is in resting from our own works, but of us
nothing is more hardly obtained, than bidding our own works farewell, to give
due place to the works of God. If sluggishnesse hindered not, Christ has
given testimony evident enough of his graces, to make them not to be
enuiously suppressed. Ioh. xv.i.
I am (says he) the Uine, you be the branches: My Father is a husbandeman.
As the branche can not bear fruit of it self, unless it abide in the Uine,
no more can you, unless you abide in me. For without me you can do nothing. If
we bear fruit none otherwise than a branch buddeth being plucked out of the
ground and without moisture: we need no more to seek what is the aptness of
our nature to goodness. And this is a plain conclusion: Without me ye can do
nothing. He does not say that we are to weak to be sufficient for our
selves: but in bryngyng us to nothing, he excludes all opinion of power be it
never so little. If we being graffed in Christ, bear fruit like a Uine,
which takes her efficacy of liveliness both from the moisture of the earth,
and from the deaw of heaven, and from the cherishyng of the son: I see
nothing remain for us in doing a good work, if we keep whole for God that
which is his. That fond subtle devise is alleged in vain, that there is a
juice already enclosed within the branche, Matthew. xv, xiij.
and a certain power to bring forth fruit, and that therefore it takes not
all from the earth or from the first root, because it brings somewhat of
her own. For Christ does mean nothing else, but that we are a dry stick
and nothing worth, when we be severed from him, because by our selves being
separate, we have no power to do well: as also in an other place he says.
Every tree that my father has not planted, Phil. i^, xiij.
shall be rooted up. Wherefore the Apostle ascribes all the whole unto him in
the place already alleged. It is God (says he) that works in us both to will
and to perform. The first part of a good work is will: the second is a
strong endeavor in doing it: the author of both is God. Therefore we steal
it from God, if we take to our selves any thing, either in will or in
effectual workyng. If it were said that God does help our weak will, then
somewhat were left for us. But when it is said that he makes will, now all
the good that is in it, is set out of us. And because the good will is yet
still oppressed with weight of our flesh that it can not rise up. He said
further, that to overcome the hardenesse of that battle, there is ministered
unto us steadfastness of endeavor, even to the effect. For otherwise it could
not stand together which he teaches in an other place, i. Cor. xij.vi.
that it is God alone that brings to effect all things in all, wherein we
have before taught that the whole course of spiritual life is comprehended.
For which reason, Ps. lxxxvi.xi.
David, after he had prayed to have the ways of the Lord opened unto him,
that he might walk in his truth, by and by adds: Unite thou my heart to
fear thy name. In which words he signifies, that even they that are well
minded, are subject to so many withdrawynges of mind, that they easily vanish
or fall away if they be not stablisshed to constantie. For which reason in an
other place, after he had prayed to have his steps directed to keep the word
of God, he requires also to have strength given him to fight. Ps. C. xix. C.
xxxiij.
Let not any iniquity (says he) bear rule over me. After this sort
therefore does the Lord both begin and end good work in us: that it may
all be his work, that will conceyueth a love of that which is right, that it
is inclined to the desire thereof, that it is stirred up and moved to endeavor
of followyng it. And then that our choice, desire* and endeavor fainte not, but
do proceed even to the effect: last of all that manne goes forward
constantly in them, and continues to the end.

And he moves the will, not in such sort as has in many ages For the
Apostle does not teach, that the grace of a good will is offered us if we do
accept it, but that he will perform it in us: which is nothing else, but that
the Lord by his spirit does direct, how and govern our heart, and reigns
in it as in his own possession. Eze. xi.xix and, xxxvi.xxvij.
Neither does he promise by Ezechiel, that he will give to the elect a new
spirit only for this end, that they may be able to walk in his
commandments, but to make them walk in deed. Neither can Christ's saying,
Ioh. ix.xlv
(every one that has heard of my Father comes to me) be otherwise taken,
than to teach that the grace of God is effectual of it self: Li. de prae.
de^^. (...).
as Augustine also affirms. Which grace, God vouchesaueth not to give to all
men generally without regard, as that saying (as I think) of Occam, is
commonly spoken among the people, that it denies nothing to him that does
what lies in him. Men are in deed to be taught that Gods goodness is laid
open for all men, without exception that seek for it. But for as much as
they only begin to seek for it, whom the heavenly grace has breathed
upon, not so much as this little piece ought to be plucked away from his
praise. Truly this is the prerogative of the elect, that being regenerate by
the spirit of God, they are moved and governed by his guidyng. Therefore
Augustine does worthyly as well mock them, that claim any part of willing
them to them selves, as he does reprehende other which think that, that is
generally given to all men, which is the special testimony of free
election. Augu. de (...) s^r. 11.
Nature, (says he) but not grace, is common to all men. Calling it a
brickle sutteltie of wit like glass, that glistereth with mere vanity, where
it is generally extended to all which God gives only to whom it pleases
him. And in an other place. How came thou? by beleuyng. Fear thou, least
while thou take upon thee that thou haste found the just way, thou perish
out of the just way. I came (say thou) by Free will. I came by mine own
will, why swellest thou? will thou hear that this also is given thee* Hear
even him that calls: No man comes to me unless my Father draw him. John.
vi.xliiii. (...)
And it is without controversy gathered out of John's words, that the hearts
of the godly are so effectually governed by Gods workyng, that they follow
with an vnc^^ngeable affection. He that is begotten of God (says he) can not
s^^ne, because the seed of God abides in him. For we see that the mean
motion which the Sophisters imagine, which we at our liber^^e may either
obey or refuse, is openly excluded, where an effectual constancy to continue
is affirmed.

use thereof, are rewarded with the later gifts: they add also, that now
grace alone does not work in us, but that it is only a worker together with
us. Of the first this we ought to believe, that the Lord while he daily
enricheth and heapeth his servants with new gifts of his grace, because he
likes and favors the work which he has begone in them, finds in them
somewhat whereupon to bestow greater graces. And hereto serve those sayings:
To him that has, Mat. 25.21 Luc. 19.17.
shall be given. Again: Oh, good servant, because thou haste ben faithful in
few things, I will set thee over many. But here two things are to be taken
heed of, that neither the lawefull use of the first grace be said to be
rewarded with the later graces, nor it be so co^pted a rewarding, that it cesse
to be reckened the free grace of God. I grant therefore, that this blessyng of
God is to be looked for of the faithful, that how much the better they have
used the first graces, they shall be increased with so much the greater. But I
say, that this use also is of the Lord, and that this rewardyng is of his
free good will. And they use no less wrongfully than vnhappyly that old
destruction of workynge and together workyng grace. Augustine used the same in
deed, but delayeng it with a fit definition, that God in together workyng
with us does end, yt which in workinge he begins, and that it is still the
same grace but changes name, according to the diverse manner of effect.
Whereupon follows, that he does not part it between God and us, as if there
were a mutual meetyng together by the motion of both, but only notes the
multiplication of grace. To which purpose belongs that which in an other
place he teaches, that many gyltes of God do go before the good will of man, among the which the self same is one. Whereupon follows, that he
leaves nothing that it may claim to it self. Phil. 2.^^,
Which thing Paul also has namely expressed: For when he had said that it
is God, which works in us both to will and to perform, he by and by
adds, that he does them both of his good will: declaryng by this word,
that it is his free goodness. Whereas they are wounte to say, that after we
have ones given place to the first grace, our own endeavors do now work
together with the grace that follows, to this I answer: if they mean that
we, after we have been ones by the power of the Lord broken to the obedience
of righteousness, do ^ our own accord go forward, and are inclined to
follow the workynge of grace, I speak nothing against it. For it is most
certain, that there is such a readiness of obeyng, where the grace of God
reygueth. But whense comes that, but from this, that the spirit of God always
agreyng with it self, does cherishe and confirm to steadfastness of
continuyng, the same affection of obeyeng, which it self engendered at the
beginning. But if they mean that man takes of him self some what whereby to
labor with the grace of God, they are most pestilently deceived.

And to this purpose is that saying of the* Apostle wrongefully 1. Cor. 15.10.
For they take it so: that because it might seem somewhat arrogantly spoken
that he preferred him self before them all, therefore he corrected it with
referryng the praise to the grace of God, but yet so that he calls him self
a worker together with grace. It is marvel that so many which otherwise were
not evil men, have stombled at this straw. For the Apostle does not write
that the grace of the Lord labored with him, to the intent to make him self
partener of the labor, but rather by this correction he gives away all the
praise of the labor to grace only. It is not I (says he) that have labored,
but the grace of God that was with me. But the doubtfulnesse of the speech
deceived them: but specially the ill translation wherein the force of the Greek
article was left out. For if it be translated word for word, he does not
say, that grace was a worker together with him, but that the grace that was
with him was the worker of all. And the same thing does Augustine teach, not
darkely, though shortly, where he thus says: The good will of man goes
before many gifts of God, Ps. lix.xi.
but not before all. But of them which it goes before, it self is one, then
follows his reason: Psa. xxiij.vi.
because it is written: His mercy has prevented me: And his mercy shall
follow me. It preuenteth manne not willing, to make him will: and it follows
him willing, that he will not in vain. Sermon. 2. in Cant.
With whom Bernarde agrees bringing in the church speaking thus: Draw me in
a manner unwilling, that thou may make me willing: draw me lyeng
slothful, that thou may make me run.

Capi^e. 2.
that to Adam was given the grace of continuyng in good if he would: and to us
is given to will, and by will to overcome concupiscence: that he therefore had
to be able if he would, but not to will that he might be able: to us is given
both to will and to be able. That the first liberty was to be able not to
sin, ours is much greater, not to be able to sin. And least he should be
thought to speak of the perfection to come after immortality (as Lombard
wrongfullly draws it to that meaning) within a little after he plucketh out
this doubt. For (says he) the will of holy me^ is so much kindled by the holy
ghost, that they therefore are able, because they so will: they therefore will,
ij. Cor. xij.ix.
because God works that they so will. For if in so great weakness, in which
yet behooves the power to be made perfect, for repressing of pride, their own
will were left unto them, that by the help of God they may if they will, and
God does not work in them to will: then among so many temptations will
should needs fall down for weakness, and therefore could not continue.
Therefore is succor given to the weakness of man's will, that it should be
moved without swaruyng or seueryng by the grace of God, and therefore should
not afinte how weak so ever it be. Cap* 14.
Then he entreats more largely how our hearts do of necessity follow the
moving of God that works affection in them. And he says, that the Lord
does draw men in deed with their own wills, but with such as he him
self has wrought. Now have we that thing testified by Augustines mouth,
which we principally desire to obtain, that grace is not only offered by God
to be received or refused at every man's Free election, but also that grace is
the same, that forms the election and will in the heart: so that every good
work that follows after, is the fruit and effect thereof, and that it have
no other will obeyeng it, but the same which it has made. For these are also
his words out of an other place, that nothing but grace makes eeuery good
work in us.

But whereas he says in an other place, that will is not taken Epist. c.v.
but from an evil will turned into a good, and helped when it is good: he
means only that manne is not so drawn, that without any motion of heart he
is carried as by an outward impulsion, but that he is inwardely so affected,
that from his very heart he obeys. That grace is specially and freely given
to the elect, Epist. c.vi
he writes thus unto Boniface: We know that grace is not given to all men,
and to them to whom it is given, it is not given according to the merits of
works, nor according to the merits of will, but of free favor: and to them
to whom it is not given, we know that it is by the just judgment of God
that it is not given. And in the same Epistle he strongly fights against that
opinion, that the grace following is given to the deservings of men, because
in not refusinge the first grace, they showed themselves worthy. For he will
have Pelagius grant, that grace is necessary to us for every of our doings,
and is not given in recompense to works, that it may be grace in deed. But
the matter can not be comprehended in a shorter sum, than out of the eight
chapter of his book to Ualentine of Correptione and Grace, where first he
teaches that man's will obteyneth not grace by liberty, but liberty by grace:
and that by the same grace, by affection of delight printed in him, it is framed
to continuance, that it is strengthened with invincible force: that while grace
governs, it never falls away: Epist. xlvi.
when grace forsakes, it by and by tombleth down. That by the free mercy of
God it both is converted to good, and being converted abides in it, that the
direction of man's will to good, and steadfastness after direction, hangs upon
the only will of God, and not upon any merit of his own. And so to manne is
left such a free will, if we list so to call it, as he writes of in an
other place, that can neither be turned to God, nor abide in God but by grace,
and by grace is able all that it is able.

The fourth Chapter. How God works in the hearts of men.
ii. Cor. ii^^.iiii.
that the god of this world has blinded the minds of the unbelievers ordained
to destruction, that they should not see the light of the Gospel. And in an
other place: That he works in the disobedient children. Ephesians. ii.ii.
The blindynge of the wicked, and as the wicked deeds that follow thereupon,
are called the works of Satan, of which yet the cause is not to be sought
elsewhere, than in the will of man, out of which arises the root of evil,
wherein rests the fundation of the kingdom of Satan, which is Sin.

Job. i.
be an example. The Chaldees killed his herdemen, and like enemies in war,
drove away his cattle for booties. Now is their wicked deed plainly seen,
and in that work Satan is not idle, from whom the History says, that all
this did proceed. But Job himself did acknowledge the work of the lord in it,
whom he says to have take away from him those things, that were taken away by
the Chaldees. How can we refer the self same work to God, as author, to
Satan as author, and to man as author of it, but that we must either excuse
Satan by the company of God, or report God to be the author of evil. Uery
easily: if first we look upon the end, why it was done, and then the manner
how. The purpose of the Lord is by calamity to exercise the patience of his
servant: The devil goes about to drive him to despeir. The Chaldees against
right and law, seek gain of that which is an other man's. Such diversity in
purposes, makes great difference in the work. And in the manner of doing there
is no less diversity. The Lord leaves his servant to Satan to be afflicted:
and the Chaldees, whom he did chose for ministers to execute it, he did leave
and deliver to him to be driven to it. Satan with his venomous stinges,
pricked forward the minds of the Chaldees, which otherwise were perverse of
them selves to do that mischief: they furiously run to do wrong, and do bind
and defile all their members with wicked doing. Therefore it is properly said,
that Satan does work in the reprobate, in whom he exercises his kingdom:
that is to say, the kingdom of wickedness. It is also said, that God works
in them after his manner, because Satan him self, for as much as he is the
instrument of his wrath, according to his bidding and commandment, turns
him self hither and thither to execute his just judgments. I speak not here
of Gods universal moving, whereby as al creatures are sustained, so from thence
they take their effectual power of doing any thing. I speak only of that
special doing, which appears in every special act. We see therefore that it
is no absurdity, that one self act be ascribed to God, to Satan, and to man:
but the diversity in the end and manner of doing, causes that therein
appears the justice of God to be without fault, and also the wickedness of
Satan and man, bewrays it self to their reproach.

The old writers in this point also, are sometime to precisely afraid, Li. de
pr.^ dest. and great.
Augustine him self sometime was not free from that superstition, as where he
says, that hardening and blynding, perteine not to the work of God, but to
his foreknowledge. But the phrases of scripture allow not these subtilties,
which phrases do plainly show that there is therein somewhat else of God, besides
his forknowledge. And Augustine himself, in his v. book against Iulianus,
goes earnestly about with a long process, to prove that sins are not only
of the permissio^ or suffera^ce of God, but also of his power, that so former
sins might be punished. Likewise, that which they being fourth, concerning
permission, is to weak to stand. It is oftentimes said, that God blyndeth and
hardens the reprobate, that he turns, boweth, and moves their hearts, as
I have else where taught more at large. But of what manner yt is, it is never
expressed, if we flee to free forknowledge or sufferance. Therefore we answer
that it is done after two manners. For first, where as when his light is taken
away, there remains nothing but darkness and blyndnesse: where as when his
spirit is taken away, our hearts ware hard and become stones: where as when
his direction cesseth, they are wrasted into crokednesse, it is well said that
he does blind, harden and bow them from whom he takes away ye power to se,
obey and do rightly. The second manner, which comes nere to the property of
the words, is that for the executing of his judgments by Satan the minister
of his wrath, he both appoints their purposes to what end it pleases him,
and stirs up their wills, and stre^gtheneth their endeavors. Deuteronomy. i^.xxx.
So when Moses reherseth that king Sehon did not give passage to the people,
because God had hardened his spirit, and made his heart obstinate, he by and
by adioyneth the end of his purpose: that he might (says he) give him into
our hands. Therefore because it was Gods will to have him destroyed, the making
of his heart obstinate, was Gods preparation to his destruction.

Job. xii.xx
and takes away reason from the Elders. He takes the heart away from them
that are set over the people, he makes then to wa^der where no way is. Again,
Lord why haste thou made us mad, Esaias. lxiij xvij.
and hardened our heart, that we should not fear thee^ Because they judge
rather of what sort God makes men by forsaking them, than how he perfourmeth
his work in them. But there are other testimonies that go further: as are
these of the hardening of Pharao. I will harden the heart of Pharao, that he do
not hear you, Exodus iiij.xxj. and vii.^ij and x.i.
and let the people go. Afterward he says, that he has made heavy and
hardened his heart. Did he harden it, in not susteining it? That is true in
deed: but he did somewhat more that he committed his heart to Satan, to be
confirmed with obstinacy. Where upon he had before said: Exodus iij xix.
I will hold his heart. The people went out of Egypt, the inhabitants of that
country came fourth and met the^ like ennemies. By whom were they styred up?
Truly Moses affirms to the people, Deuteronomy. ij.xxx.
that it was the Lord that had hardened their hearts. And the Prophet
reciting the same history, says, that he turned their hearts, Psa. E. v.xxv.
that they should hate his people. Now can you not say, that they stumbled
being left without the counsel of God. For if they be hardened and turned,
then they are of purpose bowed to that self thing. Moreover so often as it
pleased him to punish the transgressors of the people, how did he perform
his work in the reprobate? so as a man may see, that the effectualnesse of
working was in him, and they only did service as ministers. Esaias. v.xxvi. and
vij.xviij. Ezech. xij.xiij. and.xvij.xx. Ier. l.xxiii Esa. x.xv. Depr^edest
sa^^t.
Wherefore sometime he threatened that he would call them out with his whistle,
sometime that they should be like a net for him to entangle them, and sometime
like a mallet, to strike the Israelites. But specially he then declared how he
is not idle in them, when he called Sennacherib an Are, which was both
directed and driven by his hand to cut. Augustine in one place does not
amiss, appoints it after this sort: that in as much as they sin, it is
their own: in as much as in si^ning they do this o^ that it is of the power
of God, that divided the darkness as pleases him.

this or to that, may sufficiently be proved, though it were but by one place
only. i. Sa. xvi. and. xviij. x. and. xxix.
For it is oftentimes said in Samuel, that the evil spirit of the Lord, and
an evil spirit from the Lord, did either violently carry or leave Saul. To
say that this spirit was the holy Ghost, is blasphemous. Therefore the unclean
spirit is called the spirit of God, because it answers at his commandment
and power, being rather his instrument in doing, than an author of it self.
This is also to be added withal, ij. These. ij.x.
which Paul teaches, that the efficacy of error and deceiving, is sent by
God, that they which have not obeyed the truth, may believe lies. But there is
always great difference in one self same work, between that which the Lord
does, and that which Satan and the wicked go about. He makes the evil
instruments that he has under his hand, and may turn whether he list, to
serve his justice. They, in as much as they are evil, do bring fourth in
effect the wickedness that they have conceived by corruptnesse of nature. The
rest, of such things as serve for to deliver the majesty of God from
slander, and to cut of all shifting from the wicked, are already set fourth
in the chapter concerning Providence. For in this place my purpose was only to
show how Satan reigns in the reprobate man, and how God works in them
both.

Although we have before touched, yet it is not plainly declared Er. xi.iij.
Who did procure the good wills of the Egyptians to the Israelites, to lend
them all their most precious jewels? They would never have found in their
hearts to have so done of their own accord. Therefore their hearts were more
subject to the Lord, than ruled by them selves. Genesis xliij.xiiij.
And truly if Jacob had not been persuaded that God put into men diverse
affections as pleases him, he would not have said of his son Joseph, whom he
thought to be some Heathen Egyptian: God grant you to find mercy before
this man. As also the whole Church confesses in the Psalm, Psalm. C.vi xlvj.
that when it pleased God to have mercy upon it, Psalm. 106 46. 1. Sam. 11 6.
2. Sa. 17.10. Ios. 2.9. Leuit. 26.36. Deuteronomy. 28.63.
he meekened the hearts of the cruel nations. Again, when Saul so waxed on
fire with anger, that he prepared him to war, the cause is expressed, for
that the spirit of God did enforce him. Who turned away Absolons mind from
embracinge the counsel of Achitophel, which was wont to be holden as an
oracle? Who inclined Rehabeam to be persuaded with the young men's advise? Who
made the nations that before were great, to be afraid at the coming of
Israel? Truly the harlot Rahab confessed, that it was done by God. Again,
who threw down the hearts of Israel with dread and fearfulness, but he that
in the law threatened that he would give them a fearful heart?

Pro. 20.12.
That the ear may hear, that the eye may see, the Lord works both. For I
take it that he speaks not of the creation, but of the special grace of
using them. Pro. 21.1.
And when he writes that the Lord holds in his hand and boweth whether he
will the heart of the king as the streams of waters: truly under the
example of one special sort, he comprehends the whole generaltie. For it
the will of any man be free from subjection, that preeminence principally
belongs to the will of a King, which uses as it were a kingdom upon the
wylles of other: but if the will of the King be ruled with the hand of God,
no more shall our will be exempted from the same estate. Li. de gratia and
libero arb. ad Valent. ca. 20.
Upon this point there is a notable saying of Augustine. The Scripture if it
be diligently looked upon does show, that not only the good wills of men
which he of evil makes good, and so being made by him self does direct to
good doings and to eternal life, but also these wills that preserve the
creature of the world, are so in the power of God, that he makes them to be
inclined whether he will and when he will, either to do benefits, or to
execute punishementes, by a judgment most secret in deed, but the same
most righteous.

Here let the Readers remember, that the power of man's will is not to be weyed
by the success of things, which some unskillful men are unorderly wont to
do, For they seem to them selves to prove trimly and wittely that man's will is
in bondage, because even the highest Monarchs have not all things flowyng after
their own desire. But this power whereof we speak, is to be considered within
man and not be measured by outward success. For in the disputacion of
freewyll, this is not the question, whether man may for outward impedimentes,
perform and put in execution all those things that he has purposed in
mind: but whether he have in every thing both a free election of judgment,
and a free affection of will, which both if man have, then Attilius Regulus,
enclosed in the narrowenesse of a tonne, set full of sharp pricks, shall no
less have free will than Augustus Caesar, governing a great part of the world
with the beck of his countenance.

The fifth Chapter. A confutacion of the objections that are wont to be brought
for defense of Free will.
YT might seem that we have said enough, already, concerning the bondage of
man's will, if they that with false opinion of liberty, labor to throw it
down hedlong, did not on the contrary part pretend certain reasons to
assail our meaning. First they heap up together diverse absurdities, whereby
they may bring it in hatred as a thing abhorring from common reason: afterward
they set upon it with testimonies of scripture. Both these enginse we shall
beat back in order. If (say they) Sin be of necessity, then cesseth it to
be sin: if it be voluntary, then may it be avoided. These were also the
weapons of Pelagius to assail Augustine, with whose name we will not yet have
them oppressed, till we have satisfied them, concerning the matter it self. I
deny therefore that sin ought the less to be imputed, because it is
necessary. I deny again that this does follow which they conclude, that it
may be avoided, because it is voluntary. For if any man will dispute with God,
and seek to escape from his judgment by this pretense, because he could none
otherwise do: God has that answer ready which we in an other place have
spoken of, that it is not of creation, but of the corruption of nature that men
being made bondeslaues to sin, can will nothing but evil. For whence comes
this want of power which the wicked would gladly pretend, but upon this, that
Adam of his own accord made him self subject to the tyranny of the Deuell?
Hereupon therefore grew the corruption, with the bonds whereof we are holden
fast tied, for that the first man fell from his creator. If all men be justly
holden gylty of this falling away, let them not think them selves excused by
necessity, in which it self they have a most evident cause of their
dampnation. And this I have above plainly set fourth, and I have given an
example in the Deuel him self, whereby it might appear, that he which
necessarely synneth, does nevertheless wyllyngly sin: as again in the
elect angels, where as their will can not be declyne from good, yet it
cesseth not to be a will. Ser. 8^. in Ca^.
Which same thing Bernard also aptly teaches: that we are therefore the more
miserable, because our necessity is voluntary: which yet holds us so
subject unto it, that we be the bond slaves of sin, as we have before
reheased. The second part of their argument is faulty, because from voluntary
it streightway leapeth to free: but we have before proved, that it is
voluntarely done which yet is not subject to free election.

In Epit. ad C^^ciphon. and diacon. 1.
and also reherseth it in their own words. If the grace of God work in us:
then it, not we that labor, shall be crowned. Of punishementes I answer, that
they are iustlye laid upon us from whom ye gyltinesse of sin proceeds. For
what matter makes it, whether sin be done by free or bond judgment, so it
be done by voluntarye lust: specially sith manne is hereby proved a sinner,
for that he is under the bondage of sin. As to the rewards of
righteousness: a great absurdity forsoothe it is, if we confess that they
hang rather upon Gods bountifullnesse, than upon our own deservings. How
often find we this thing repeted in Augustine: that God crouneth not our
deservings, but his own gifts: and that they are called rewards, not as due
to our deseruinges, but such as are rendered to the graces already bestowed
upon us? Wisely in deed they note this, that now there remains no place for
deservings, if they come not out of the fountain of free will: but where they
reckon that which we say so far differynge from truth they are much
deceived. In Psalm. 31.
For Augustine doubts not, commonly to teach for necessary, that which they
think so unlawful to confess, as where he says: What be the merits of
any men what so ever they be? when he comes, not with due reward, but
with free grace, then he alone being free, and that makes free from sin? He
finds all men sinners. In Psalm. 70
Again, If that shall be rendered to thee that is due to thee; thou art to be
punyshed: what is done then? God has not given thee punyshement which is
due, butte gives thee grace which is not due. If thou will be estraunged
from grace, boaste of thy deservings. Epist. 52. De uerbis Apostol. sermo. 4.7
Again: Thou art nothing by thy self. Sins are thine, butte deservings
are Gods, punyshemente is due to thee: and when reward comes, he shall
crown his own gifts, and not thy deservings. And in the same meaning in an
other place, he teaches that grace is not of deseruynge, butte deseruynge of
grace. And a little after he concludes, that God with his gifts goes before
all deservings, that out of the same he may gather his own deseruinges,
and doothe give altogether freelye, because he fyndeth nothing whereupon to
save. Butte what need is yt to make a longer regyster, when such sentences
are often found in his wrytynges? 1. Cor. iiij.vij.
But the Apostle shall yet better deliver them from this error, if they hear
from what beginning he conueieth the glory of the Saints: Whom he has
chosen, them he has called: whom he has called, them he has justified:
whom he has justified, them he has gloryfyed. Why then, as witnesses
the Apostle, are the faythefull crowned? because by the Lords mercy and not
by their own endeavor they are boothe choosen and called and iustyfyed. Away
therefore with this vain fear, that there shall no^e more be any
deservings, if free will shall not stand. For yt is most foolyshe to be
frayed away and to flee from that to which the Scripture calls us. 1. Cor.
iiij.vii.
If (says he) thou haste received all things, why gloryest thou, as if thou
had not received them? Thou see that for the same cause he takes all
things from free will, to leave no place for deservings: butte as the
bountiefullnesse and lyberalytye of God is manyfolde, and impossible to be
spente out, those graces which he bestows on us, because he makes them
ours, he rewards as if they were our own virtues.

Moreover they bring fourth that which may seem to be taken Hom. 2.2. in
Genesis
If this be not the power of our will, to choose good or evil, then they
that are partakers of the same nature, must either all be evil or all be
good. And not far from that is he, what soever he was, that wrote the book
Of the calling of the Gentyles, which is carried about under the name of
Ambrose, when he makes this argument, Lib. 2. ca. 4.
that no man should ever depart from the faith, unless the grace of God
did leave unto us the state of mutabylyte: wherein yt is marueyle, that so
excellent men fell beside them selves. For how chaunseth yt came not in
Chrysostomes mind, that yt is Gods election that so makes dyfference between
men? As for us, we fear not to grant that which Paul with great
earnestness affyrmeth, Romans iii.x.
that all together are perverse and given to wickedness: butte with him we
adioyne this, that by Gods mercy yt comes to pass that all abide not in
perverseness. Therefore whereas naturally we are all sick of one desease,
they only recover health upon whom yt has pleased God to lay his healynge
hand. The rest whom by just judgment he passes over, pyne away in
their own rottenesse till they be consumed. Neither is yt of any other cause,
that some contynewe to the end, and some fall in their course begone. For
contynuaunce yt self is the gift of God, which he gives not to all
indyfferently, butte deals yt to whom yt pleases him self. If a man ask
for a cause of the dyfference, why some contynewe constantly, and some fail by
vnstedfastenesse, we know none other cause butte that God susteyneth the one
sort strengthened with his power that they perysh not, and does not give the
same strength to the other sort, that they may be exaumples of inconstancy.

Further they press us, saying, that exhortations are vaynelye learn that by
thine own fault thou haste yt not: in prayer learn whense thou may
receive that which thou wolddeste have. Of the same argument in a manner is
the book of the Spyryte and Letter, where he teaches that God measures not
the commandments of his law by the strength of man, but when he has
commanded that which is right, he freelye gives to his elect power to
fullfyll yt. And this is no matter of long dysputacion. First we are not
only in this cause, butte also Christ and all the Apostles. Now let the
other look how they will get the maysterie in stryuynge, that match them
selves with such adversaries. John. xv.v.
Does Christ, which testyfyeth that we can do nothing without him, any
thing the less rebuke and chastyce them, that without him did evil? Does
he less exhort every manne to apply him self to good works? How
severely does Paul inuey against the Corynthians for neglecting of
charytye? i. Cor. iij.iij. Romans ix.xvj.
and yet he prays for charity to be given to the same men from God. He
testifies in the Epistle to the Romans, that it is neither of him that
wylleth, nor of him that runs, but of God that has mercy, and yet he
cesseth not afterward to admonish, to exhort and to rebuke. Why do they not
therefore speak to the Lord, that he do not so lose his labor in
requyrynge of men those things which he himself alone can give, and in
punyshynge those things which are done for want of his grace? Why do they
not admonyshe Paul to spare them, i. Cor. iij.vij.
in whose power it is not to will or to run, butte in the mercy of God,
going before them which now has forsaken them? As if the Lord had not a
very good reason of his doctrine, which offreth yt self redily to be found
of them that reverently seek yt, but how much doctrine, exhortation and
rebukynge do work of themselves, to the chaungynge of the mind, Paul
declares, when he writes, that neither he that planteth is any thing, nor
he that waters, but the Lord that gives the increase only effectually
woorketh. So we see that Moses severely stabelysheth the commandments of
the law, and the Prophets do sharply call upon them, and threaten the
transgressors, whereas they yet confess, that men do then only wax wise,
when a heart is given them to understand, that it is the propre work of God
to circumcise the hearts, and in steed of stony hearts to give hearts of
flesh, to writ his law in the bowels of men: finally in renewynge of
souls to make that his doctrine may be effectual.

mock them out if the might, are thrown down with the force of them whether
they will or no. But the chief profit toward the faithful is to be
considered: in whom as the Lord woorketh all things by his spirit, so he
leaves not the instruments of his word, and uses the same not without
effect. Let this therefore stand which is true, that all the strength of the
godly rests in the grace of God, according to that saying of the Prophet:
Ezech. xi.xix.
I will give them a new heart that they may walk in them. But thou will
say: Why are they now admonyshed of their duetye, and not rather left to the
direction of the holy ghost? why are they moved with exhortation, sithe they
can make no more haste than the styrrynge forward of the holy ghooste
woorketh? why are they chastised if at any time they be gone out of the way,
sith they fell by the necessary weakness of the flesh? O man, what art
thou to apoynte a law for God? If it be his pleasure, that we be prepared by
exhortation to receive the self same grace, whereby is wroughte that the
exhortation is obeyed, what haste thou in this order to bite or carpe at? If
exhortations and rebukynges did nothing else profit with the godly, but to
reprove them of sin, they were even for that thing only to be compted not
altogether unprofitable. Now, for as much as by the holy ghooste woorkynge
inwardly, they much avail to inflame the desire of goodness, to shake of
sluggyshnesse, to take away the pleasure and venymo^^s sweetness of
wickedness, and on the other side to engendre a hatred and irkesomnesse
thereof: who dare cavil that they are superfluus? If any manne require a
plainer answer, let him take this: God woorketh after two sorts in his
elect, inwardly by his spirit, outwardely by his word: By his spirit, by
enlyghtninge their minds, by framinge their hearts to the love and keepinge
of justice, he makes them a new creature: By his word, he stirs them to
desire, to seek and atteine the same renuinge: by them both he shows fourth
the effectual woorkinge of his hand, according to the proportion of his
dystributio^. When he sends the same word to the reprobate, though not
for their amendment, yet he makes it to serve for an other use: that both
for the present time they may be pressed with witness of conscience, Ih^^.
vj.xliiij.
and may against the day of judgment be made more inexcusable. So though
Christ pronounce that no man comes to him, but whom the Father draws,
and that the elect do come when they have heard and learned of the father:
yet doothe not he neglecte the office of a teacher, but with his voice
dylygentlie calls them, whom it necessarily behooves to be inwardely
taught by the holly Ghost, ij. Co^. ij.xvj.
that they may any thing profit. And Paul teaches, that teachinge is not
in vain with the reprobate, because it is to them the sauoure of death to
death, butte a sweet sauoure to God.

They be very laborious in heapinge together of testimonies of and put to
flyghte: so shall yt be very easy for us to overthrow them with all their
route. For, because the places that they abuse against us, when they are ones
dyuyded into their ordres, do meet upon a few special points, we shall
with one answer satysfye many of them: therefore yt shall not be needful
to tarrye upon dyssoluynge every one of them partycularlye. Their chief force
they set in the commandments, which they think to be so tempered to
our strengthes, that what soever is proved to be required by the one, yt
necessarylye follows that yt may be performed by the other. And therefore
they run through every of the commandments, and by them do measure the
proportion of our strength. For (say they) either God mocketh us when he
charge us with hollyenesse, godliness, obedyence, chastity, love, and
meekness: and when he forbids us uncleanness, ydolatrie, vnchastenesse,
wrath, robberye, pride, and such like: or he requires only those things
that are in our power. Now, we may dyuyde into three sorts in manner all
the commandments that they heap together. Some require our first
conversion to God, some speak symply of the keepynge of the law: some
command us to continue in the grace of God that we have received. First
let us speak of them all in generality, and then descend to the special
sorts. To extend the power of man to the commandments of the law, has
in deed long ago begone to be commune, and has some show: butte yt
proceeded from most rude ignorance of the law. For they that think yt a
heinous offense, if yt be said that the keepynge of the law is ympossyble,
do rest forsoothe upon this most strong argument, that else the law was
given in vain. For they speak in such sort as if Paul had nowhere
spoken of the law. For, I beseache them, what mean these sayings, that the
law was set because of transgressions: That by the law is the knoweledge of
sin: Gala. iij.x. Romans iij.xx. Romans vij.vii. i. Tim. i.v. i. These. iij.xii
That the law makes sin: that the law entered, that sin might abound:
was yt meante that the law was to be lymyted to our strengthes, least yt
should be given in vain? or rather that yt was set far above us to
convince our weakness? Truly by the same man's defynition, the end and
fullfyllynge of the law is Charytye. Butte when he wysheth the minds of the
Thessalonians to be filled with charity, he does sufficientlye confess,
that the law sounds in our ears without profit, unless God inspire the
whole sum thereof in our hearts.

comes of the goodness of God, and therefore moves us to prayer, whereby
we may require to have it given us. If there were only the commandment
and no promise, then were our strength to be tried whether they were
sufficient to answer the commandment, but sith there are promyses joined
wythall, which cry out, that not only our aid, but also all our whole
power consysteth in the help of Gods grace, they do testify enoughe and more,
that we are altogether unfit, much more insufficient to keep the law.
Wherefore let this proportion of our strengthes with the commandments of
Gods law be no more enforced, as if the Lord had measured the rule of
justice, which he purposed to give in his law, according to the rate of
our weakness. Rather by his promysses we ought to consider, how vnreadye
we are of our selves which in every behalf do so much need his grace.
But who (say they) shall be persuaded that it is like to be true, that the
Lord appointed his law to stocks and stones? Neither does any manne go
about to persuade yt. For the wicked are neither stocks nor stones, when
being taught by the law that their lusts do strive against God, they are
proved gyltye by their own wytenesse. Nor yet the godly, when being put in
mind of their weakness, they flee unto grace. For which purpose serve these
sayings of Augustine. In Enchir. ad Lau. de great. and li. arb. ca. 16. Hom.
29. in Joan.
The Lord commands those things that we can not do, that we may know
what we ought to ask of him. Great is the profit of the commandments, if
so much be given to free will, that the grace of God be the more honored.
Faith obtayneth that which the law commands, yea the law therefore
commands, that faith may obtain that which was commanded by the law:
yea God requires faith yt self of us, and fyndeth not what to require,
unless he give what to find. Epist. 24.
Again, Let God give what he commands, and command what he will.

That shall more plainly be seen in rehersinge the three sorts of Joel. 2.12.
The Lord oftentimes commands both in the law and in the Prophets, that
we be converted unto him. Iere. 31.18.
But on the other side, the Prophet answers, Convert me, Lord, and I
shall be converted: for after that thou did convert me, I repented etc. He
commands us to circumcise the uncircumcised skin of our heart: Deuteronomy.
10.16 and 30.16. Ez^. 36.26.
and by Moses he declares yt this circumcision is done by his own hand. He
each where requires newenesse of heart, but in an other place he testifies
yt it is given by himself. That which God promises (says Augustine) we do
not by free will or nature, Lib. de Do. Christi. 3.
but he himself does it by grace. And this is ye same note that he himself
reherseth in the v. place among the rules of Ticonius, yt we well make
difference between the law and the promises, or between the commandments and
grace. Now let them go, that gather by the commandments whether man be
able to do any thing toward obediences in such sort yt they destroy the
grace of God, by which ye commandments them selves are fullfylled. The
commaundeme^ts of the second sort are simple, by which we are bydden to
honor God, to serve and cleave unto his will, to keep his comaundemtes to
follow his doctrine. But there are innumerable places that do testify that it
is his gift what so ever righteousness, holiness, godliness or purity may
be had. Of the third sort was that exhortacion of Paul and Barnabas to the
faithful, which is rehearsed by Luke, that they should abide in the grace of
God. But from whence that strength of constancy is to be had, the same Paul
teaches in an other place. Ephe. v^.xvj. Ephe. ^^ij.xxx.
That remains, says he* brethren, be ye strong through the Lord. In an
other place he forbyddeth us, that we do not grieve the spirit of God,
wherewith we are sealed up unto the day of our redemption. But because the
thing that he there requires, could not beperfourmed by men, therefore he
wysheth it, to the Thessalonians, These. xij.
from God, namely, that he would reckon them worthy of his holy calling, and
fulfill all the purpose of his goodness, and the work of faith in them.
Likewise in the second Epistle to the Corinthians, i^. Cor. vii^ xi.
entreating of alms, he oftentimes commands their good and godly will: yet
a little after; he thanketh God that put it in the heart of Titus, to take upon
him to give exhortacion. If Titus could not so much as use the office of his
mouth to exhort other, but only so far as God did put it unto him, how
should other have been willing to do, unless God him self had directed
their hearts?

Zach i^i^.
Turn ye to me, and I will turn to you. What manner of help the Lord
brings us, we have above showed, and it is not needful here to repete it.
This one thing I would have granted me, that it is vainly gathered that
there is required in us a power to fulfill the law, because God does
command the obedience of it: For as much as it is evident, that for the
fulfillyng of all the commandments of God, the grace of the lawegeuer is
both necessary for us and promised unto us. Thereby then it appears, that at
least there is more required of us than we are able to pay. Ier. xiij.iij
And that saying of Hieremie can not be wyped away with any cauillatio^s: that
the covenant of God made with the ancient people, was void, because it was
only literal, and that it could no otherwise be stablyshed, than when the
spirit comes unto it, which frames the hearts to obedience. Neither does
that saying, Turn ye to me, and I will turn unto you, favor their error.
For there is meant, not that tourning of God, wherewith he renueth our hearts
to repentance, but wherewyth he by prosperity of things does declare him
self favorable and merciful: as by adversity he sometime shows his
displeasure. Where as therefore the people being vexed with many sorts of
miseries and calamities, did complain that God was turned away from them: he
answers, that they shall not be destitute of his favor, if they return to
uprightness of life, and to him self that is the pattern of righteousness:
Therefore the place is wrongfully wrested, when it is drawn to this purpose,
that the work of our conversion should seem to be parted betwixt God and
men. These things we have comprehended so much the shortelyer, because the
propre place for this matter shall be where we entreat of the Law.

The second sort of their arguments is much like unto the first. Amos. 5.14.
ye shall eat the good things of the earth: but if ye will not, the swoarde
shall devour you, because the Lords mouth has spoken it. Esa. 5.16 Ier. 4.1.
Deu. 28.1 Leu. 16.3.
Again, If thou put away thine abominations out of my syghte, then shalt
thou not be driven out: If thou shalt obey dylygently the voice of the Lord
thy God, and observe and do all his commandments which I command thee
this day, then the Lord thy God will set the on hye above all the nations of
the earth. And other like. They do inconueniently and as it were in mockery
think, that these benefits which the Lord does offer in his promises, are
assigned to our own will: unless it were in us to stablyshe them or make
them void. And right easy yt is to amplify this matter with eloquent
complaints, that the Lord does cruelly mock us, when he pronounces that
his favor hangs upon our will, if the same will be not in our power: And
that this liberality of God should be a goodly thing forsoothe, if he so
set his benefytes before us that we have no power to use them: and a
merueylous assuredness of his promyses, which hang upon a thing impossyble,
so as they might never be fulfilled. But of such promises as have a condition
adioined, we will speak in an other place: so that it shall be plain, that
there is no absurdity in the impossyble fullfyllynge of them. And for so much
as concerns this place: I deny that God does ungently mock us. when he
moves us to deserve his benefytes, whom he knows to be utterly unable to
do it. For whereas the promyses are offered both to the faythefull and to the
wicked, they have their use with boothe sorts. As God with his commandments
prycketh the conscience of the wicked, that they should not to swetely take
pleasure in their sins, without any remembrance of his judgments: so in his
promyses he does in a manner take them to witness, how unworthy they are
of his goodness. For who can deny that it is most ryghtfull and
conuenyente, that the Lord do good to them of whom he is honored, and punyshe
the despysers of his Majesty, according to his severity? Therefore God does
well and ordrely, when in his promyses he adioyneth this condytyon to the
wicked that are bound with the fetters of sin, that they shall then only
enjoy his benefytes, if they depart from their wickedness: or for this
purpose only, that they may understand that they are woorthylye excluded
from these things, that are due to the true woorshyppers of God. Again,
because he seeks by all means to stir up the faythefull to call upon his
grace, yt shall not be inconuenyente, if he attempt the same thing also by
promysses, which we have showed that he has done to great profit with
commandments toward them. Being enfourmed of the will of God, by his
commandments, we are put in mind of our misery, which do withal our heart
so far dissent from the same, and we be therwithal pricked forward to call
upon his spirit, whereby we may be directed into the right way. ^ But because
our sluggishnesse is not sufficiently sharpened with commandments, there
are added promises which with a certain sweetness may allure us to the love
of them. And that the more desire that we have of righteousness, we may be
the more seruent to seek the favor of God. Lo how in these requests, (If
you will: If you shall hear,) the Lord neither gives us power to will nor to
hear, and yet mocketh us not for our want of power.

Number. xiiij xliij.
Of which sort are these places. Amaleck and the Chananee are before you,
with whose sword you shall fall, because ye would not obey the Lord, because
I called and ye answered not, Ier. xxxij xiij.
I will do to this house as I did to Silo. Again, this nation has not heard
the voice of the Lord their God, nor has received discipline, Ier. xxxij.
therefore it is cast away from the Lord. Again, because ye have hardened your
heart and would not obey the Lord, all these euilles are happened unto you.
How (say they,) could such reproaches be laid against them which might
redely answer? As for us, we loved prosperity, and feared adversity. But
where as for to obtain the one and avoid the other, we obeyed not the Lord,
nor hearkened to his voice: this was the cause thereof, for that it was not at
our liberty so to do, because we were subject to the dominion of sin.
Uaynly therefore are these euylles laid to our charge, which it was not in our
power to avoid. But leuyng the pretense of necessity, wherein they have but a
weak and sickly defense, I ask of them whether they can purge them selves of
all fault. For if they be found gylty of any fault, then the Lord does not
without cause reproach them, that it came to pass by their peruesnesse, that
they felt not the fruit of his clemency. Let them answer therefore, whether
they can deny, that their frawarde will was the cause of their stubbournesse.
If they find the spryng head of the evil within them selves, why gape they to
find out foreine causes, that they might seem not to have been authors of
their own destruction? But if it be true that by their own fault and none
others, sinners are both deprived of the benefits of God, and chastised with
punishementes, then is there great reason why they should hear these reproaches
at the mouth of God: that if they go obstinatly forward in their faults,
they may learn in their miseries rather to accuse and abhor their own
wickedness, than to blame God of unjust cruelty: that if they have not cast
of all wyllyngnesse to learn, they may be weary of their sins, by the
deservings whereof they see them selves miserable and undone, and may
return into the way, and acknowledge the same with earnest confession which
the Lord rehearses in chiding them* For which purpose it appears by the
solemn prayer of Daniel, Dan. ix.
which is in the ninth Chapter, that those chydinges of the Prophets which
are alleged, did avail with the Godly. Of the first use we see an example
in the Jews, to whom Hieremie is commanded to declare the cause of their
miseries, whereas yet it should not have fallen otherwise than the Lord had
foresaid. Iere. vij.xxvij.
Thou shalt speak unto them all these words, and they shall not hear thee:
thou shalt call them, and they shall not answer thee. To what end then did
they singe to deaf men? that being even loathe and unwilling, yet they should
understand that it was true that they heard, that it were wicked sacrilege if
they should lay upon God ye blame of their euels which rested in them selves. By
these few solutions thou may easily deliver thy self from the infinite
heap of testimonies, which, for to erecte an image of free will, the enemies
of the grace of God are wont to gather together, as well out of the
commandments as out of the protestations against the professors of the
law. Ps. lxxviij.viij. Psalm. lv.v.ij.
It is reprochefully spoken, in the Psalm concerning the Jews: A froward
generation that have not made their heart straight. Also in an other Psalm,
the Prophet exhorts the men of his age, not to harden their hearts, and
that because all the fault of obstynacie remains in the perverseness of
men. But it is fondely gathered thereof, that the heart is pliable to either
side, Ps. C.xix C.^ij.
the preparinge whereof is only of God. The Prophet says: I have enclyned my
heart to keep thy commandments: because he had willingely and with a
cherefull earnest affection of mind addycted himself to God, and yet he does
not boaste him self to be the author of his own inclination, which he
confesses in the same Psalm to be the gift of God. Therefore we must hold
in mind the admonition of Paul, Philip. i^.xij.
where he ^^ddeth the faithefull to work their own salvation with fear and
trembling, because it is the Lord that works both the willinge and the
perfourminge. In deed he assigns them offices, to be doing, that they
should not give them selves to sluggyshnesse of the flesh: but in that he
commands the^ to have fear and carefullnesse, he so humbles them, that
they may remember that the same thing which they are commanded to do, is the
propre work of God, wherein he plainly expresses, that the faithefull
work, passiuely, as I may so call it, in so much as power is ministered them
from Heaven, ij. Pet. i.v
that they should cleame nothing at all to them selves. Wherefore when Peter
exhorts us that we should add power in faith, he grants not unto us a
second office, as if we should do any thing severally by our selves, but
only he awaketh the slothefullnesse of the flesh, wherewyth commonly faith
yt self is choked. To the same purpose seems that sayeinge of Paul: i.
These. xix.
Extinguyshe not the spirit. for slouthefullnesse does oftentimes crepe upon
the fayethfull, if it be not corrected. Butte if any manne conclude there upon,
that yt is in their own choice to cheryshe the light being offered them, his
ignorance shall be easily confuted: because the self same dylygence that
Paul requires, ij. Cor. vij.
comes only from God. For we are also oftentimes commanded to purge our
selves from all fylthynesse: whereas the holy ghost do the claynte to him
self alone the office of making holy. Finally that by way of granting the
same thing, is conveyed to us that proprely belongs to God, is plain by the
words of Ihon: i. (...). v.xviij.
Whosoever is of God, saves him self. The aduauncers of freewyll take hold
of this sayeinge, as if we were saved partelye by the power of God, partly by
our own: as though we had not from heaven the very same safe keeping, whereof
the Apostle makes mention. For which cause, Ioh. x^ij.xv.
Christ also prays his Father to save us from evil, and we know that the
godly, while they war against Satan, do get the victory by no other army and
weapons, but by the armure and weapons of God. i. Pet. i.xxij.
Wherefore when Peter commanded us, to purify our souls in the obedience of
truth, he by and by adds as by way of correction, (by the holy ghost.)
Finally, how all man's strength are of no ^orce in the spiritual battle, i.
Ioh. iij.ix. 1. John. v.iiij.
John briefly shows, when he says, that they which are begotten of God, can
not sin, because the sede of God abides in them. And in an other place, he
randreth a reason why: for that our faith is the victory that ouercometh the
world.

Deuteronomy. xxx.xj.
For after the publishing of the law, he protests unto the people in this
manner. The commandment that I commau^de thee this day, is not hid from thee,
neither far of: It is not in heaven, but hard by thee, it is in thy mouth and
in thy heart, thou should do it.

Truly if this be taken to be spoken of the bare commandments, I grant
they be of no small weight to this present matter. For though it were easy to
mock it out with saying, that here is spoken not of the easiness and
readiness of observation, but of knowledge: yet even so, peradventure it would
also leave some doubt. But the Apostle which is no doubtful expositour,
takes away all doubt from us, which affirms that Moses here spoke of the
doctrine of ye Gospel. But if any obstinate man will say, To. x.viij.
that Paul violently wrested those words, that they might be drawn to the
Gospel: although his boldness so to say shall not be without impiety, yet
is there sufficient matter beside the authority of the Apostle to convince him
withal. For if Moses spoke of the commandments only, then he puffed up the
people with a most vain confidence. For what should they else have done, but
thrown them selves down hedlonge, if they had taken upon them the keeping of
the law by their own strength, as a thing not heard for them? Where is the^
that so ready easiness to keep the law, where there is no access unto it,
but by a hedlong fall to destruction? Wherefore there is nothing more certain,
than that Moses in these words did mean the covenant of mercy, which he had
publyshed together with the straight requiring of the law. Deuteronomy. xxx.viij.
For in a few verses before he had taught, that our hearts must be
circumcised by the hand of God, that we may love him. Therefore he placed ye
easiness, whereof he streightway after speaks, not in the strength of man,
but in the help and succor of the holy ghost, which performs his work
mightily in our weakness. Albeit the place is not simply to be understood
of the commandments, but rather of the promises of the Gospel, which are
so far from stablyshing a power in us to obtain righteousness, that they
utterly overthrow it. Paul considering that same, proves by this testimony,
that salvation is offered us in the Gospel, not under that hard and impossible
condition, wherewith the law deals with us, that is, that they only shall
atteyne it which have fulfilled all the commandments, but under a condition
that is easy, ready, and plain to come unto. Therefore this testimony makes
nothing to challenge freedom to the will of man.

There are also certain other places wont to be objected, whereby Osee.
v*xiiij.
as is that place in Osee: I will go to my place till they put it in their
heart and seek my face. It were a fond thing (say they) if the Lord should
consider whether Israel would seek his face, unless their minds were p^^able
that they might after their own will incline themselves to the one side or the
other. As though this were not a thing commonly used with God in the
Prophets, to make a show as if he did despise and cast away his people,
till they have amended their life. But what will the adversaries gather out of
such threateninges? If they mean to gather, that the people being forsaken of
God, may purpose their own salvation: all the Scripture shall cry out
against them in so doing. If they confess that the grace of God is necessary
to conversion, why ^^ryue they with us? But they so grant it necessary, that
still they will have man's power preserved unto him. How prove they that?
truly not by this place, nor any like to it. For it one thing, to depart
aside from manne, and to look what he will do being given over and left to
him self, and an other thing to help his little strength after the measure of
his weakness. What then (will some manne say) do these manners of speaking
mean? I answer that they are as much in effect, as if God had said: For
as much as I prevail nothing with this stubborn people by admonishyng,
exhorting and rebukynge, I will withdraw my self a while: and sit^e still
and suffer them to be afflicted: I will see if at length, after long^ miseries,
they will begin to remember me, to seek my face. The Lords going far
away, signifies the taking away of Prophecy: his lookyng what men will
do, signifies that he keeping silence, and as it were hidynge him self,
does for a time exercise them with diverse afflictions. Both these things he
does to humble us the more. For we should sooner be dulled than amended, with
the scourges of adversity, unless he did frame us to that tractablenesse by
his Spirit. Now whereas the Lord being offended, and in a manner weried with
our obstinate stubbornness, does not for a time leave us (that is by taking
away his word in which he is wont to give us a certain presence of him
self) and does make a proof what we would do in his absence, it is falsely
gathered hereof that there is any strength of freewill that he should behold
and try, for as much as he does it to no other end, but to drive us to
acknowledge our own being nothing.

They bring also for their defense the continual manner of speaking, we do
those things, to the doing whereof being unable of our own motion, we are
moved by God like sto^es. Therefore though we give the chief part to the
grace of God, yet these ma^ners of speaking do show that our endeavor has
also yet a second part. If that thing only were still enforced, that good
works are called ours, I would obiecte again, Math. vi.
that the bread is called ours, which we pray to have given us of God. What
will they get by the title of possession, but that by the bountifulness and
free gift of God, the same thing becomes ours, which otherwise is not due
unto us? Therefore either let them laugh at the same absurdity in the Lords
prayer, or let them not reckon this to be laughed at, that good works are
called ours, in which we have no property, but by the liberality of God. But
this is somewhat stronger, that the Scripture oftentimes affirms that we our
selves do worship God, obey the law, and apply good works. Sith these are
the duties properly belongyng to the mind and will: how could it agree that
these things are both referred to the holy ghost, and also attributed to us,
unless there were a certain communicating of our endeavor with the power of
God? Out of these snares we shall easily unwind our selves, if we well consider
the manner how the spirit of the Lord works in the holy ones. The similitude
wherewith they enuiously press us is from the purpose, for who is so fond to
think that the moving of man differs nothing from the casting of a stone?
Neither does any such thing follow of our doctrine. We reckon among the natural
powers of man, to allow and refuse, to will and not will, to endeavor and to
resist, that is, to allow vanity and to refuse perfect goodness, to will
evil and to be unwilling to good, to endeavor our selves to wickedness and to
resist righteousness. What does the Lord herein? If it be his will to use that
perverseness as an instrument of his wrath, he directs and appoints it to
what end he will, that he by an evil hand may execute his good work. Shall
we then compare a wicked manne that so serves the power of God, when he
laboreth only to obey his own lust, to a stone that being throwe^ by the
violence of an other, is carried neither with moving nor sense nor will of his
own? We see how much difference there is. But what does he in good things, of
which is our principal question? When he erecteth his kingdom in them, he by
his spirit restrayneth man's will, that it be not carried up and down with
wanderyng lusts, according to the inclination of nature: and that it may be
bent to holiness and righteousness, he boweth, frames, fashioneth and
directs it to the rule of his righteousness: and that it should not stomble
or fall, he does stablish and confirm it with the strength of his spirit. For
which reason Augustine says: Thou will say unto me: then we are wrought, and
work not. Yea thou both workest and art wrought, and thou workest well when
thou art wrought of that which is good. The spirit of God that works thee,
helps them that work, and gives him self the name of a helper, for that
thou also workest somewhat. In the first part he teaches, that man's workyng
is not taken away by the mouyng of the holy ghost, because will is of nature,
which is ruled to aspire to goodness. But where he by and by adds, that by
the name of help, may be gathered that we also do work somewhat, we ought not
so to take it, as if he did give any thing severally to us: but because he
would not cherish slothfulness in us, he so matcheth the working of God with
ours, that to will may be of nature, and to will well of grace. Therefore he
said a little before, Unless God help us, we shall not be able to overcome, no
nor yet to fight at all.

Hereby appears, that the grace of God (as the word is taken when we speak of
regeneration) is the rule of the spirit, to direct and govern the will of man. And it can not govern it, unless it correct it, reform it, and renew
it (from whense we say that the beginning of regeneration is, that that which
ours might be destroyed) and unless it move it, stir it, drive it forward,
carry it and hold it. Whereupon we do truly say, that all the doings that
proceed from it, are wholly the only work of the same grace. In the mean time
we deny not that it is very true that Augustine teaches, that will is not
destroyed by grace, but rather repaired. For both these things do stand very
well together: that men's will be said to be restored, when the faultiness and
perverseness thereof being reformed, it is directed to the true rule of
justice: and also that a new will be said to be created in manne, for as much
as it is so defiled and corrupted, that it needs utterly to put on a new
nature. Now is there no cause to the contrary, but that we may well be said
to do the same thing that the spirit of God does in us, although our own will
do of it self give us toward it nothing at all, that may be severed from his
grace. And therefore we must keep that in mind, which we have else where
alleged out of Augustine, that some do in vain travail to find in the will
of man some good thing that is proprely her own. For what so ever mixture
men study to bring from the strength of free will to the grace of God, it is
nothing but a corruptyng of it, as if a man would delay wine with dirty and
bitter water. But although what so ever good is in the will of man, it
proceeds from the mere instincte of the holy ghost, yet because it is
naturally planted in us to will, it is not whythout cause said, that we do
those things whereof God chalengeth the praise to him self. First, because
it is ours what so ever by his goodness he works in us, so that we
understand it to be not of our selves: and then because the mind is ours, the
will is ours, the endeavor is ours, which are by him directed to good.

Those other testimonies biside these, that they scrape together here Genesis
ii^^, (...).
Thine appetite shall be under thee, and thou shall bear rule over it. Which
they expound of sin, as if the Lord did promise to Cain, that the force of
sin should not get the upper hand in his mind, if he would labor in
subduyng of it. But we say that it better agrees with the order of the text,
that this be taken to be spoken of Abel. For there Gods purpose was to reprove
the wickedness of the envy that Cain had conceived against his brother. And
that he does two ways. One, that in vain he imagined mischief to excel his
brother in Gods sight, before whom no honor is given but unto righteousness:
the other, that he was to much unthankful for the benefit of God which he had
already received, which could not abide his brother, although he had him subject
under his authority. But lest we should seem therefore to embrace this
exposition, because the other is against us:let us admit that God spoke of
sin. If it be so, then God either promises or commands that which he
there declares. If he commands, then have we already showed that thereby
follows no proof of the power of man. If he promises, where is the
fulfillyng of the promise? for Cain became subject to sin, over which he
should have had dominion. They will say, that in the promise was included a
secret condition, as if it had been said, that he should have the victory if
he would strive for it. But who will receive these crooked compasses? For if
this dominion be meante of sin, then no man can doubt that it is spoken by
way of co^mmaundement, wherein is not determined what we are able to do, but
what we ought to do, yea though it be above our power. Albeit both the matter
it self and the order of Grammar do require, that there be a comparison made
of Cain and Abel, because the elder brother should not have been set behind the
younger, unless he had become worse by his own wicked doing.

To. ix.xvi.
nor of him that runs, but of God that has mercy. Whereby they gather that
there is somewhat in man's will and endeavor, which of it self, though it be
weak, being helped by the mercy of God, is not without prosperous success.
But if they did soberly weye what matter Paul there entreteth of, they would
not so unadvisedly abuse this sentence. I know that they may bring forth Origin
and Hierome for mainteiners of their exposition: Lib. 7. in (...). ad Romans
Hiero. dial. in P^la.
and I could on the other side set Augustine against the^. But what they have
thought, it makes no matter to us, if we know what Paul meante, There he
teaches that salvation is prepared only for the^, to who^ the lord vouchsaueth
to grant his mercy: and that ruin and destruction is prepared for all those
that he has not chosen. He had under the example of Pharao declared the state
of the reprobrate, and had also confirmed the assuredness of free election by
the testimony of Moses, I will have mercy upon whom I will have mercy. Now
he concludes, that it is not of him thath wills, or him that runs, but of
God that has mercy. If it be thus understood, that will or endeavor are not
sufficient, because they are to weak for so great a weight, that which Paul
says, had not ben aptly spoken: Therefore away with these suttelties, to say:
It is not of him that wills, nor of him that runs, therefore there is some
will, there is some running. For Paul's meaning is more simply, thus: It is not
will, it is not runnyng that get us the way to salvation, herein is only the
mercy of God. For he speaks no otherwise in this place than he does to
Titus, Tit. iij.iiij.
where he writes, that the goodness and kindness of God appereh not by the
works of righteousness, which we have done, but for his infinite mercy.
They themselves yt make this argument, that Paul meant that there is some will
and some running, because he said, that is not of him yt wills nor of him
that runs, would not give me leave to reason after the same fashion, that we
have done some good works, because Paul says, that we have not atteined the
goodness of God by the good works that we have done. If they see a fault in
this argument, let them open their eyes, and they shall perceive that their own
is not without the like deceit, Epist. 107 ad Vitale*
For that is a sure reason that Augustine rests upon, If it were therefore
said that it is not of him that wills, nor of him that runs, because
neither the will nor the runnyng is sufficient. Then it may be turned on the
contrary part that it is not of the mercy of God, because it alone works
not. Sith this second is an absurdity, Augustine does rightfully conclude,
that this is spoken to this meaning, that there is no good will of man, unless
it be prepared of the Lord, not but that we ought both to will and to run,
but because God works both in us. No less unaptly do some wreste that
saying of Paul: i. Cor. ii^.ix
We are the workers with God, which out of doubt ought to be restrained only
to the ministers; and that they are called workers with him, not that they
bring any thing of themselves, but because God uses their service, after that
he has made them mete and furnished with necessary gifts.

They bring forth Ecclesiasticus, who, as it is not unknown, is a Eccl. xv,
xiiii.
that man so sone as he was created, was left in the hand of his own
counsel: that commandments were given him, which if he observed, he should
again be preserved by them: that before manne was set life and death, good and
evil: that what so ever he would, should be given him. Be it, that manne
received from his creation power to obtain either life or death. What if on
the other side we answer that he lost it? Truly my mind is not, to speak
against Solomon, which affirms that man at the beginning was create upright,
Eccl. vi^.xxx.
and he forged unto himself many inventions. But because manne in swaruyng,
lost as it were by shipwrecke both him self and all his good things, it
follows not by and by, that all that is given to his first creation belongs
to his nature being corrupted and degenerate. Therefore I answer, not to them
only, but also to Ecclesiasticus him self what so ever he be. If thou mean
to instruct man, to seek within him self power to atteine salvation, thy
authority is not of so great force with us, that it may be any prejudice, be
it never so small, against the undoubted word of God. But if thou only study
to restrain the malice of the flesh, which in layeng the blame of her own
euels upon God, uses to seek a vain defense for it self, and therefore thou
answerest that uprightness was given unto men, whereby it may appear that him
self was cause of his own destruction, I willingly agree unto it; so that
again thou agree in this with me, that now by his own fault he is spoiled
of those ornaments, wherewith God had clothed him at the beginning; and that
so we confess together, that now he more needs a Physician than a defender.

Yet they have nothing oftener in their mouth than the parable of Christ of the
way faryng man, whom thieves laid abroad half dead in the way. ^
I know that it is common almost with all writers, that the calamity of
mankind is represented under the figure of that wayfaryng man. Thereupo^ do
our adversaries gather an argument, that man is not so maimed with the robbery
of sin and the Deuell, but that he keeps still remaining the leauinges of
his former good things, for as much as it is said, that he was le^t half alive.
For where is that half life, unless some portion both of right reason and will
remained? First if I would not give place to their allegory, I beseech you,
what would they do? For there is no doubt that it was devised by the fathers
biside the natural sense of the Lords words. Allegories ought to go no
further than they have the rule of Scripture going before them: so far is it
of, that they be by themselves sufficient to ground any doctrines. And there
want not resons, whereby I can, if I list, overthrow this devise, for the
word of God leaves not ^o man half a life, but teaches that he is utterly
dead, for so much as concerns blessed life. Ephesians. ii.v.
And Paul when he speaks of our redemption, does not say that we were
healed, when we were half dead and half alive, but that we were raised up
again when we were dead. He calls not upon them that are half alive to
receive the light of Christ, but them that sleep and are buried. And in like
manner speaks the Lord him self, when he says, Ioh. v.xxv
that the hour is come when the dead shall rise again at his voice. With what
face would they set this light allusio^ against so many plain sentences? But
let this allegory have the force of a certain testimony, yet what shall they
wrynge out of us thereby? Manne is half alive, therefore he has somewhat left
safe. I grant: he has a wit capable of understanding, although it pearce
not to the heavenly and spiritual wisdom: he has true judgment of
honesty: he has some felyng of the godhed, howebeit that he atteine not the
true knoweledge of God. But to what purpose come all these things? Truly they
bring not to pass that the same saying of Augustine be taken from us, which
is also approved by common consent of the Schools: that after man's fall the
freely given good things, whereupon salvation hangs, are taken away from
him, and that his natural gifts are corrupted and defiled. Let therefore this
truth remain with us undoubted, which can be shaken by no engines, that the
mind of man is so estranged from the righteousness of God, that it
conceiueth, coueteth, and enterpriseth all wickedness, filthiness,
uncleanness, and mischief: that his heart is so thoroughly soked in poison of
sin, that it can breath out nothing but corrupt stink: But if at any time
they do utter any goodness^ in show, yet still the mind remains always
wrapped in hypocrisy and deceitefull crokednesse, and the heart entangled with
inward perverseness.

The sixte Chapter. That manne being lost, must seek for redemption in Christ.
not men defiled and corrupted with sin to be his work. Therefore sith we
are fallen from life into death, all that knowledge of God the creator whereof
we have entreated, were unprofitable, unless there followed also faith setting
forth God a father unto us in Christ. Truly this was the natural order that
the frame of the world should be a School unto us to learn godliness, from
whense might be made a passage for us to eternal life and perfect felicite:
but sins our falling away, whether so ever we turn our eyes, upward and
downward, the curse of God still presents it self unto our sight, which
while it possesses and enwrappeth innocent creatures by our fault, must
needs ouerwhelme our own souls with desperation. For although Gods will is
that his fatherly favor toward us do still many ways appear: yet by beholding
of the world we cannot gather that he is our Father when our conscience
inwardly pricketh us, and shows that there is in sin just cause of
forsaking, why God should not account or reckon us for his children. Byside
that there is in us both slothfulness and unthankfulness: because both our
minds, as they be blinded, do not see the truth, and also as all our senses
be perverse, we maliciously defraude God of his glory. Therefore we must come
to that saying of Paul: i. Cor. i.xx^.
because in the wisdom of God, the world knew not God by wisdom, it
pleased God by the foolishness of preaching to save them that believe. The
wisdom of God he calls this honorable stage of heaven and earth, furnished
with innumerable miracles, by beholding whereof we ought wisely to have known
God. But bicuase we so ill profited therein, he calls us back to the faith
of Christ, which for that it seems foolish, the unbelievers do disdain.
Wherefore although the preaching of the cross do not agree with ma^s wit, yet
ought we humbly to embrace it, if we desire to return to God our creator and
maker, that he may begin again to be our father. Truly sins the fall of
the first manne, no knoweledge of God auayled to salvation, Ioh. xvii.iii.
without the Mediator. For Christ speaks not of his own age only, but
comprehends all ages, when he says that this is the eternal life, to know
the father the one true God, and him whom he has sent Jesus Christ. And so
much the fowler is their sluggishnesse, which take upon them to set open heaven
to all profane and unbelieving men, without his grace who^, the Scripture each
where teaches to be the only gate whereby we enter into salvation. But if any
will restrain that saying of Christ only to the publishing of the Gospel, we
have in readiness wherewith to confute him. For this has been a common sentence
in all ages and among al nations, that without reconciliatio^ they that are
enstranged from God and prononced, accursed and the children of wrath, can not
please God. And here may be also alleged yt which Christ answered to the woman
of Samaria: John. ^iii.xx^.
Ye worship what ye know not, but we worship that which we know: because the
salvation is from the Jews. In which words he both conde^neth of falshod all
the religions of the Gentiles, and also assigns a reason why, for that the
Redemer was promised under the law to the only chosen people. Whereupon it
follows, that no worship ever pleased God, Ehp. i^.x^i
but that which had respect unto Christ. For which cause also Paul affirms
yt all the nations of the Gentiles were without God, and void of the hope of
life. Now whereas John teaches, that life was from the beginning in Christ,
and that all the world fell from it, we must needs return to the same
fountain Christ. And therefore Christ, in so much as he is the reconciler,
affirms him self to be the life. And truly the inheritance of heaven
belongs to none, but to the children of God. But it is not mete that they be
accounted in the place and degree of children, that are not grafted into the
body of the only begotten son. And John plainly testifies, that they which
believe in his name, are made the children of God. But because it is not
directly my purpose yet to discourse of faith in Christ, therefore it shall for
this time be sufficient to have touched it by the way.

Gal. iii.xvi.
that Christ is proprely that seed in whom all nations were to be blessed,
for as much as we know that not all they were reckened his seed that were
begotten of him according to the flesh. For (to speak nothing of Ismael and
other) how came it to pass that of the two sons of Isaac, that is Esau and
Jacob, brethren borne at one birth, while they were yet together in their
mothers womb, the one was chosen, the other refused? Yea how came it to
pass, that the elder was rejected and the yo^ger only took place? And how
also came it to pass, that the greater part should be forsaken? It apppereth
therefore, that the seed of Abraham was principally reckened in one person,
and that the promised salvation did never stand sure till it came to Christ,
whose office is to gather together the things that were scattred abroad.
Therefore the first adoption of the chosen people did hang upon the grace of
the Mediator. Which though it be not in so plain words expressed by Moses,
yet it sufficiently appears that it was commonly known to all the godly. For
before that there was any king create among the people, Hanna the mother of
Samuel entreating of the felicity of the godly, i. Sam. ^^.x.
even then said thus in her song: God shall give strength to his king, and
shall exalt the horn of his anointed. In which words the means that God
shall bless his church. Wherewith also agrees the oracle that is within a
little after adjoined: The Priest whom I shall apoint shall walk before mine
anointed. Neither is it to be doubted, but that the will of the heavenly father
was to have the lively image of Christ to be seen in David and his posterity.
Ps. i^.x^^.
Therefore meaning to exhort the godly to the fear of God, he bids them to
kiss the Son. John. v.xxi^.
Wherewith this saying of the Gospel also agrees: He that honoreth not the
son, honoreth not the father. Therefore although by falling away of ten
tribes the kingdom decayed: yet it behooved the covenant to stand which God
had made in David and his successors: i. Reg. xi.^.xi^.xxii^^.
as also he said by the Prophets: I will not altogether cut of the kingdom,
for David my servants sake, and for Hierusalems sake, whom I have chosen:
but there shall remain one tribe to thy son Where the same thing is repeted
the second and third time. It is also expressly added. i. Kings xi.xxxix. i.
Kings. xv iii^. i. Kings. xi xxxiiij.
I will afflict the seed of David, but not for ever. Within a little space of
time after, it is said. For David his servants sake God has given a light in
Jerusalem, to raise up a son and to keep Jerusalem in sauetie. Now when the
state grew toward destruction, it was said again: God would not scatter Judah
for David his servants sake, because he had spoken that he would give a light
to him and his sons for ever. Finally this is the sum, that all other being
passed over, only David was chosen, upon whom the good pleasure of God should
rest. Ps. lxxviij lx.lxvij.
As in an other place it is said: He has refused the tabernacle of Silo, and
the tabernacle of Joseph, and he has not chosen the tribe of Ephraim, but he
has chosen the tribe of Judah, the mount Sion which he has loved. He has
chosen his servant David to feed Jacob his people, and Israel his inheritance.
To conclude, it pleased God so to save his church, that the safety and
preservation thereof should hang upon that one head, and therefore David cries
out, The Lord the strength of his people, the strength of the saluations of his
Christ. And by and by he adds a prayer: Save thy people and bless thine
inheritance: meaning that the state of the church is with inseperable knot
joined to the government of Christ. And in ye same meaning in an other place:
Psa. xx.x.
Lord save us: Let the king hear us in the day that we shall call upon him.
In which words he plainly teaches, that the faithful did upon none other
confidence flee to the help of God, but because they were hidden under the
succor of the king. Ps. c. xviij.xxv.xxvi.
Which is gathered by an other Psalm. Lord save us: Blessed is he that comes
in the name of the Lord. Where it is plain enough, that the faithful are
called back unto Christ, that they may hope that they shall be saved by the
hand of God. The same respect has the other prayer, where all the Church
calls upon the mercy of God. Psalm. lxxx.xviii.
Let thy hand be upon the man of thy right hand, upon the son of man, whom
thou have preserved (or appointed, to thy self. For though the author of the
Psalm bewaileth the scattring abroad of the whole people, yet he prays for
their restitutio^ in the head alone. Where, when the people was led away into
exile, the land wasted, and all things to man's seruyng destroyed, Lament. 4.20
Hieremie lamenteth the overthrow of the Church, he does principally complain
that by destruction of the kingdom al hope was cut of from the faithful.
Christ (says he) the spirit of our mouth is taken in our sins, to whom we
said, In thy shadow we shall live among the nations. Herby now it sufficiently
appears, that because God can not be merciful to mankind without the
Mediator, therefore Christ was always set before the holy fathers in time of
the law, to whom they might direct their faith.

Now, where comfort is promised in affliction, specially where the Hab.
ii^.xii^.
says Habacuc. And so often as the Prophets make mention of the restoryng of
the Church, they call back the people to the promise made to David, concerning
the everlasting continuance of the kingdom. And no marvel. For otherwise
there had been no assurance of the covenant. For which purpose serves that
notable answer of Esaye. For when he saw that the unbelieving king Achaz
refused that which he had declared to him of the raising of the siege of
Jerusalem and of present safety, as it were suddenly, he passed over to
Messiah. Esa. vij.xiiij.
Behold a virgin shall conceive and bring forth a Son, meaning indirectly
that though the king and his people by their frowardenesse refused the promise
offered unto them, as though they did of purpose bend themselves to discredit
the truth of God, yet the covenant should not be void, but that the Redemer
should come at his appointed time. Finally it was the care of all the
Prophets, to the end they might show that God would be merci^ull, always to
set out that kingedome of David, whereupon hanged the redemption and
everlasting salvation. Esa. lv.iij.
So Esaie says: I will make a covenant with you, the faithful mercies of
David. Behold I have given him for a witness unto nations, that is, because
the faithful when their state is at the worste, could not otherwise have any
hope, but by the means of him being witness, that God would be appeasable
toward them. Hier. xxix.vi.
Likewise Hieremie, to raise them up being in despeire, says: Behold the
days come, wherein I will raise up unto David a righteous branche, and then
shall Judah be saved, Eze. xxxiiij xxiij.
and Israel shall dwell in safety. And Ezechiel says, I will raise up one
shepeherd over my sheep, even David my servant. I the Lord will be a God to
them, and my servant David for a shepeherd. And I will make a covenant of
peace with them. Also man other place, Eze. xxxvij xxv.
after he had entreated of the incredible reneweyng, he says: my servant
David shall be their King, and there shall be one shepeherd over all, and I will
make an everlasting covenant of peace with them. I gather here and there a
few places out of many, because I only mean to have the reders put in mind,
that the hope of all the godly has always ben reposed no where else but in
Christ. And all the other Prophets also speak agreably hereunto, as it is
said in Osee. Osee. i.xij.
The children of Judah and the children of Israel shall be gathered together, and
shall apoynt to themselves one head. Which he afterward more plainly
expounds, Ose. iij.v.
The children of Israel shall return, and shall seek for the Lord their God and
David their king. And Michee speaking of the return of the people expressly
says, The king shall go before them, and the Lord in their head. So Amos
meaning to praise the renewyng of the people, Amos. ix.xi.
says: I will in that day raise up the tabernacle of David that is fallen
down, and I will hedge up the gappes, and raise up the places overthrown,
even because that was the only standard of salvation, to have the royal glory
to rise up again on hie in the stock of David, which is fulfilled in Christ.
Zac. ix.ix.
Therefore Zachary, as his age was nerer to the appering of Christ, so does
he more plainly cry out: be glad thou daughter of Sion, rejoice thou daughter
of Jerusalem. Behold thy king comes, righteous and saved. Which agrees with
the place of the Psalm before alleged. The lord the strength of the saluations
of his anointed, and save us. Where salvation is derived from the head to the
whole body.

It was Gods will to have the Jews so instructed with these prophecies, Mat.
xxi, ix.
Hosianna to the son of David. For it appears that it was commonly known
and spoken of, and according to common use that they song, that the only
pledge of Gods mercy remained unto them, in the coming of the Redemer. For his
cause Christ him self, Ioh. xiiij.i
to make his disciples plainly and perfectly believe in God, bids them to
believe on him self, Believe ye in God, (says he) then believe also in me. For
though (to speak properly) faith climeth up from Christ to the father, yet he
means that the same faith, albeit it rest upon God, does by little and little
vanish away, unless he become a mean to hold it in assured steadfastness.
Otherwise the majesty of God is to hie for mortal men, which crepe upon
the ground like worms, to atteine unto it. Wherefore I allow that common
saying, that God is the obiecte of faith, but in such sort that it needs
correction. Because Christ is not in vain called the invisible Image of God,
Colo, i.xv.
but by this title we are put in mind, that if we find not God in Christ,
salvation can not be known unto us. For although among the Jews, the Scribes
and Pharisees had darkened with false inventions, that which the Prophets had
spoken concerning the Redemer: yet Christ took it for a thing confessed as
received by common consent, that there was none other remedy, despered case,
and no other mean of deliueryng the church, but by geuyng the Mediator. In
deed that was not commonly known among the people as it ought to have been,
To, x, iiij,
which Paul teaches, that Christ is the end of the law. But how true and
assured it is, does plainly appear by the law and the Prophets. I speak not
yet of faith, because there shall be else where a more convenient place for it.
Only let the reders hold this as fast stablished, that the first degree of
godliness be, to acknoweledge God to be a Father unto us, to defend, govern
and cherishe us, till he gather us together into the everlasting inheritance
of his kingedome: and that hereby it plainly appears which we said even
now, that the knowledge of God which brings salvation, stands not without
Christ, and that therefore from the beginning he has been set forth unto all the
elect, that they should look upon him, and that in him should rest al their
affiance. According to this meaning writes Ireneus, that the Father which is
unmeasurable, is in his Son measured, because he has applied him self to the
measure of our capacity, least he should drown our minds with the
unmeasurableness of his glory. Which thing the phrentike men not considering,
do wrest a profitable sentence to a wicked fantasy, as though there were in
Christ but a portion of the godhed derived from the whole perfection: i. John.
ij, xxxi,
whereas it means nothing else, but that God is co^prehe^ded in Christ alone.
That sayeug of John has always ben true: He that has not the Son, neither
has he the father. For though in old time many did boste that they worshipped
the sovereign God, the maker of heaven and earth: yet because they had no
Mediator, it was impossible that they should truly taste of the mercy of
God, and so be persuaded that he was their father. Therefore because they knew
not the head that is Christ, ye knowledge of God was but vain among them:
whereby also it came to pass, that at length falling into gross and filthy
superstitions, they bewrayed their own ignorance. As at this day the Turks,
although they report with full mouth, that the creator of heaven and earth is
their God, yet do they thrust an idol in place of the true God, while they
swerve from Christ.

The seventh Chapter. That the law was given, not to hold still the people in
it, but to nourish the hope of salvation in Christ until his coming.
BY this continual process that we have rehearsed, may be gathered, that the
law was added about four hundred years after the death of Abraham, not for
this intent to lead away the chosen people from Christ: but rather to keep
their minds in expectation until his coming, to kindle a desire of him, and
to confirm them in loking for him, that they should not wax faint with long
tarriance. I mean by this word Law, not only the ten commandments, which
prescribe a rule how to live godlyly and righteously, but also the form of
religion delivered by the hand of Moses. For Moses was not made a lawgeuer to
abolish the blessyng promised to the kindred of Abraham: but rather we see how
every where he puts the Jews in remembrance of that free covenant made with
their fathers whose heirs they were, as if he had been sent to renew the same.
That was most plainly set forth by the ceremonies. For what were more vain
and fond, than for me^ to offer up lothesome stink of the fat of cattle, to
reconcile themselves to God thereby? to flee to the sprinkling of water or
blood to wash away their filthiness? Finally, all the service of God appointed
in the law (if it be considered by it self, and do not contain shadows and
figures, which the truth should answer unto) shall be but a very morkerie.
Wherefore not without a cause both in Stephens sermon, Act. v.^^iiij
and in the Epistle to the Hebrews is that place so diligently weyed, Hebr.
viij.v. Exodus xxv.xl.
where God commands Moses to make all things perteinyng to the tabernacle,
according to the pattern that had been showed him in the mount. For if there had
not ben some spiritual thing appointed that they should tend unto, the Jews
should no less have fondly spent their labor in them, than the Gentiles did in
their trifles. Profane men that never earnestly applied the study of
godliness, cannot without loathsome tediousness abide to here so many sundry
fashions of vsages: and they not only marvel why God wearied his people with
such a heap of ceremonies, but also they despise them and scorn them as
childrens plays. And the cause is, for that they consider not the end, from
which if the figures of the law be severed, they must needs be condemned of
vanity. But that same figure shows, that God did not therefore command
sacrifices, because he would occupy them that worshipped him with earthly
exercises, but rather to raise up their minds hier. Which may also plainly
appear by his nature: for as he is spiritual, so he is delited with no other
worshipping but spiritual. This do the sayenges of the Prophets testify,
wherein they rebuke the Jews of sluggishnesse, for that they thought that any
sacrifices were of any value with God. Is that because their purpose is to
derogate any thing from the law? No, but according as they were true
expositours of the law, so they would by this mean have men's eyes directed to
the mark from which the common people strayed. Now by the grace offered to the
Jews it is certainly gathered, Exo. x.v^*
that the law was not void of Christ. For Moses did set forth unto them this
end of the adoption, that they should become a prestly kingdom to God. Which
they could not obieine, unless there were had for the mean thereof a greater
and more excellent reco^ciliation, than by the blood of beasts. For what is
less likely than Adams children, which by inheritably descendyng infection are
al borne the bondslaues of sin, to be advanced to royal dignity, and so to
become partakers of the glory of God, unless that so excellent a benefit
should come unto them from else where than from themselves? Also how could the
right of priesthode remain in force among them, who by filthiness of sins
were abominable to God, unless they had been consecrate in a holy head*
Wherefore Peter does very aptly turn that saying of Moses, where he teaches,
that the fullness of grace, the taste whereof the Jews had taken under the
law, i. Pet. ij.i^
was given in Christ: Ye are (says he) a chosen kindred, a kingly priesthode.
For to this end tends that turnynge of the words to show that they, to
whom Christ appeared by the Gospel, have obtained more than their fathers,
because they are all endued both with priestly and kingly honor, that
trustyng upon their mediator, they may freely be bold to come forth into the
sight of God.

And here by the way it is to be noted, that the kingdom which Gal. iii,
xxiii^,
that the Jews were holden as under the keeping of a Scholemaister, til the
sede came for whose sake the promise was given. For, because Christ was not yet
familiarly known, they were like unto children, whose weakness could not yet
bear a full knowledge of heavenly things, but how they were by ceremonies as
it were led by the hand to Christ, is before spoken, and may be better
understand by many testimonies of the Prophets. For although it was commanded
them, to come daily with new sacrifices to appease God: yet Esaye promises
that al their sins shall be cleansed with one only sacrifice. Esa. liij.
Wherewith Daniel agreably says: Daniel. ix.
The priests appointed of the tribe of Leui, did enter into the Sanctuary: but
of ye only priest it was ones said, yt by an oath he was chosen of God to be a
priest for ever, Ps. c.x.iiij
according to the order of Melchisedech. At that time ye anointing with oil
was visible: but Daniel by his vision pronou^ceth that there shall be an other
manner of anointyng. And, because I will not tarry upon many examples, the
author of the Epistle to the Hebrews eue^ from the.iiij. chapter to the xi.
does largely and plainly enough show, that the ceremonies are nothing worth
and vain til we come to Christ. As concerning the ten commandments: Romans
x.iiij
that lesson of Paul is likewise to be kept in mind that Christ is the end
of the law unto salvation, to every one that believes: ij. Cor. iij.vi.
And an other lesson, that Christ is the Spirit that quickens the letter
which of it self slays. For in the first of these two, he means that
righteousness is vainly taught by commandments, until Christ do give it
both by free imputation and by the spirit of regeneration. Wherefore he
worthyly calls Christ the fulfilling or end of the law. Because it should
nothing profit us to know what God requires of us, unless he did succor us
faynting and oppressed under the yoke and intolerable burden. In an other place
he teaches that the law was made for transgressions, Gal. i^j.xix.
that is to bring men to humility being proved gilty of their own
damnation. And, because this is the true and only preparation to seek Christ,
what so ever he teaches in diverse words, do al very well agree together. But
because he then was in contention with perverse teachers, which fained that we
do deserve righteousness by the works of the law, to confute their error, he
was compelled sometime to speak precisely of the bare law, which yet
otherwise is clothed with the covenant of free adoption.

Deuteronomy. xxx.xix.
Wherefore Moses, when he had published ye law, doubted not to protest before
heaven and earth, that he had set before Israel life and death good and evil.
And we may not deny, but that the reward of eternal salvation belongs to
the upright obedience of the law, as the lord has promised it. Again, yet it
is good to examine, whether we perform that obedience, upon desert whereof we
may conceive a trust of that reward. For to what small purpose is it, to see
the reward of eternal life set in keeping of the law, unless we further
know whether we may by that way attain to eternal life? But herein the
weakness of the law does show it self. For because that keeping of the law
is found in none of us al, we are excluded from the promises of life, and do
fall into curse only. I do not now tell what does come to pass, but what
needs must so come to pass. For where as the doctrine of the law is far
above the power of man, he may in deed a far of, look at the promises, but
yet not gather any fruit of them. Therefore this one thing remains, that by
the goodness of them he may the better weye his own misery, while he
considers, that all hope of salvation being cut of, death does certainly
ha^g over him. Do the other side do press us terrible penal laws, which do
hold enta^gled and fast bound not only a few of us, but every one without
exception: they press us, I say, and do pursue us, with unappeasable rigor,
so that we may se most present death in the law.

Therefore if we look only upon the law, we can do nothing but be

Whereas we said that it is impossible to keep the law, that is in few i Reg.
vii^ xl^i Ps. c.xliij.
Solomon said, there is not a righteous man upon the earth that sins not.
And David said: every living manne shall not be justified in thy sight. Job in
many places affirms ye same. But Paul most plainly of all: Gal. (...)
that the flesh lusts against the spirit, and the Spirit against the flesh.
And by no other reason he proves that all that are under the law, are subject
to the curse. But because it is written, D^a. xx^^ xxvi.
that cursed are al they that do not abide in all the commandments thereof:
meaning, or rather taking it as a thing confessed, that no man can abide in
them. And what soever is forespoke by the Scriptures, that must be holden for
perpetual, yea and necessary. With such sutteltie did the Pelagians trouble
Augustine, saying that there is wrong done to God, to say that he does command
more tha^ the faithful are able by his grace to perform. Augustine, to avoid
their cauillation confessed, Lib. de ^^^tu and gra^^^.
that the lord might in deed, if he would, aduau^ce a mortal man to the
pureness of Angels: but that he neither has done so at any time, nor will do,
because he has otherwise affirmed in the Scriptures. And yt do I also not
deny. But I add further, that it is inco^uenie^t to dispute of his power
against his truth, and that therefore this sentence is not subject to
cauillations if a man should say, that that thing is impossible to be, whereof
the Scriptures do pronounce that it shall not be. But if they dispute of the
word: when the Disciples asked ye lord, Mat. xix.xiv. (...). de se^ritu and
litera.
who may be saved, he answered: with men in deed it is impossible, but with
God al things are possible. Also Augustine with a most strong reason stiffly
defends, that in this flesh we never yield to God the due love that we owe
him. Love (says he) so follows knowledge, that no man can perfectly love God,
but he that has first fully known his goodness. We, while we wa^der in this
world, see by a glass and in a dark speech: it follows therefore, that our
love is imperfect. Let this therefore remain out of controversy, that in this
flesh it is impossible to fulfill the law, To. viij. ^^.
if we behold the weakness of our own nature, as it shall yet also in an
other place be proved by Paul.

he flows full of infinite vices, whereof before he seemed clean. For the
euels of lust are hidden in so deep and crooked privy corners, that they
easily deceive the sight of man. Romans lxj.vij.
And not without cause the Apostle says, yt he knew not lust, except ye law
had said: Thou shalt not lust: because except it be by the law disclosed
out of her lurking holes, it destroys miserable manne so secretly, that he
feels not the deadly darte thereof.

So the law is like a certain lookinge glass wherein we behold, Romans
xij.x^^j.
For this purpose makes the saying of the Apostle, that by the law is the
knoweledge of sin. For there he speaks only of the first office of the
law, the proof whereof is in sinners not yet regenerate. And like to this are
these two sayenges, that the law entered that sin might abound, and
therefore that it is the ministration of death that works wrath and
slays. Romans v.xx ii. Cor. in. Romans iiij.xv.
For without doubt so much more grows iniquity, with how much more
understanding of sin the conscience is stricken, because unto breach of law
is added obstinacy against the maker of the law. It follows therefore that
the law armeth the wrath of God to the destruction of the sinner, because of
it self it can do nothing but accuse, condemn and destroy. De corre. and
gratiae Vide Ambros. cap. 1. de iae. and uita beata. cap. 6.
And as Augustine writes, if the spirit of grace be absente, the law is
present with us, only to this end, to accuse us and kill us. And yet when
this is said, neither is the law dishonored thereby, nor any thing taken
from the excellence thereof. Truly, if our will were wholly framed and
disposed to the obedience of the law, then plainly the only knoweledge of it
were sufficient to salvation. But for as much as our fleshely and corrupt
nature fights, as an enemy with the spiritual law of God, and is nothing
amended with ye dyscipline thereof, this follows that the law which was given
for salvation, (if it had found fit hearers) tourneth to the occasion of
sin and death. For sith we are all proved transgressors of it, the more
plainly yt it opens the righteousness of God, so much the more on ye other
side it discloseth our iniquity: ye more surely ye it confirms the reward
of life and salvation laid up for righteousness, so much the more assured it
makes the destruction of the wicked. So far is it of therefore that these
sayings should be to the dishonor of the law, that they much avail to
the more glorious commendations of Gods bounty. For truly it herby appears
that we are hindered by our own wickedness, and perverseness, that we
enjoy not the blessedness of life set openly abroad for us by the law.
Whereby the grace of God that helps us without ye succoure of ye law, is made
so much the sweter, and the mercy more lovely that gives it unto us, whereby
we learn that he is never wearied with often doing us good and heapinge new
gifts upon us.

And whereas the iniquity and condemnation of us all is sealed by the
testimony of the law, it is not done for this purpose (if at least we well
profit in it) to make us fall down with despere, or with discouraged minds
to tumble down hedlong. In deed the reprobate are amassed after that manner,
butte that is by reason of their obstinatie, but with the children of God,
there behooves to be an other end of instruction. I grant, Romans iij.xx.
the Apostle testifyeth that we are all condemned by judgment of the law,
that every mouth may be stopped, and that all the woorlde may become bound
unto God: but yet the same Apostle in an other place teaches, Romans xi.xxxij.
that God has concluded all under unbelief, not to destroy all, or to suffer
all to perish, butte that he might have mercy of all, that leuinge the
foolish opinion of their own strength, they might understand, that they
stand and are vpholden by the only hand of God: that they being naked and
emptye, may flee to his mercy, that they may rest them selves wholly upon
it, hyde them selves wholly in it, take hold of yt alone in steed of
righteousness and merits, which is laid open in Christ for all men, who
soever they be that with true faith do desire and look for yt. For God in
the commandments of the law appears butte a rewarder of perfect
righteousness, whereof we all are destitute, and on the other side a rygorous
judge of evil doings. But in Christ his face shyneth full of grace and
lenitye, even toward the wreatched and unworthy sinners.

Epist. 200.
as when he writes to Hylarie, The law commands that endeuorynge to do
the things commanded, and being wearyed with our weakness under the law,
we should learn to ask the help of grace. Epist. 200.
Again to Aselius. The profit of the law is to convince manne of his own
weakness, and compel him to crave the Physycke of grace that is in Christ.
Epist. 95.
Again to Innocente of Rome, The law commands, and Grace mynystreth
strength to do. Again to Ualentine: Libro de corre. and gratia. In Psalm. 70
In psalm. 118
God commands those things that we can not do, that we may learn to
know what to ask of him. Again: The law was given to accuse you, that
being accused you should fear, that fearinge you should crave pardon, and
not presume of your own strengthes. Again: The law was given for this
purpose, of great to make little, to show that thou haste no strength of
thine own to righteousness, that thou as poor, unworthy and needye,
should flee unto grace. Sermon. 27.
After, he tourneth his speech to God and says: Do so Lord, do so
merciful Lord, command that which can not be fullfylled: yea, command
that which can not but by thy grace be fullfylled, that when men can
not fullfyll yt by their own strength, every mouth may be stopped, and no man may think him self great. Let all be little ones, and let all the
woorlde be gyltye before thee. But I am not wise to heap up so many
testimonies, sithe that holly manne has written a book proprely of that
matter, which he has entitled, Of the Spirit and Letter. The second
profytynge he does not so lively descrybe, either because he knew that yt
did hang upon the former, or because he did not so well understand it, or
because he wanted words where with dystinctely and plainly to express his
meaning of it, which yet he rightly conceived: but this first office of the
law is not idle even in the reprobate also. For though they go not thus
far forward with the children of God, that after the throwinge down of
their flesh they be renewed and florishe again in the inward man, but amassed
with the first terroure do lie still in desperation: yet it serves to show
fourth the equytie of Gods judgment, that their consciences be tossed with
such ways. For they ever wyllingely desire to make shyfte against the
judgment of God. Now while the same is not yet opened, they yet so
astonyshed with the testimony of the law and their conscience do bewraie in
them selves what they have deserved.

The second office of the law, is that they which are touched with i. Tim.
i.ix
when he says that the law was not set for the ryghteous manne, butte for
the unrighteous and dysobedient, wicked and sinners, evil doers and profane
men, slaiers of their parents, and murderers, fornicators, Sodomites, robbers
of children, liars and perjured men, and what soever else is against sound
doctrine. For he says, that it is a stay to the wild outragynge lusts of
the flesh, that else would straye abroad without measure.

Gal. iii. xx^iii
that the law was to the Jews a Schoolemayster to Christ, for there are two
sorts of men, whom with her schoolynge she leads by the hand to
Christ. The one sort, of whom we first spoke, because they are to full of
affyance of their own strength or righteousness, are not meet to receive
the grace of Christ, unless they be first emptyed, therefore the law
brings them down to humility by knoweledge of them selves, that so they
may be prepared to desire that which before they thought they wanted not.
The other sort need a bridle to be holden back, least they so give loose
the remes to the wantonness of their flesh, that they fall of altogether
from all study of righteousness. For where the spyryte of God does not yet
govern, there sometime lusts do so boil, yt it is in great perille least
they throw down the soul that is subject to them into the forgetfullnesse
and despisinge of God: and so would it come to pass if God did not with this
remedy provide for it. Therefore those whom he has appointed to the
inheritance of his kyngedome, if he do not by and by regenerate them, he
keeps then by the works of the law under fear, until the time of his
visitation, not that chaste and pure fear such as ought to be in children, but
yet a profitable fear for this that they may according to their capacity be
taught by introduction to true godliness. Of this we have so many proves, that
it needs not example. For who soever have any time continued in not knowing
of God, will confess that this happened unto them, that they were holden by
the bridle of the law in some fear and obedience of God, until the time that
being regenerate by his spirit, they began hartelye to love him.

the often meditation thereof stirred up to obedience, to be strenghthened in
it, to be holden back from the slyppery way of offendinge. For after this
manner, must these holly ones drive forward them selves, which with how
great cherefullnesse so ever they travail to Godwarde according to the
spirit, yet they are always laden with the sluggyshnesse of ye flesh, that
they proceed not with such full readiness as they ought. To this flesh is the
law given as a whyppe, that like a slow and dull Ass yt may be prycked
forward to work, yea to the spiritual manne, because he is not yet
dyspatched of the burden of the flesh, yt shall be a continual prick that
suffcreth him not to stand still. Psalm. xix.vi^.
Even to this use David had respect, when he did set fourth the law with
those notable praises: The law of the Lord is undefiled, converting souls:
the justices of the Lord are vpryghte, and chearynge hearts: the
commandment of the Lord is bryghte, that gives light to the eyes. etc.
Again: A launterne to my feet is thy word, and a light unto my paths* and
innumerable other that he reherseth in all that Psalm. Neither are these
things against the sayings of Paul, Psalm. C. xix. c. v.
wherein us showed, not what use the law mynystreth to the regenerate, butte
what yt is able to give to manne of yt self. Butte here the Prophet reports
with how great profit the Lord doothe instruct them by reading of his
law, to whom he inwardely inspyreth a readynesse to obey. And he takes
hold not of the commandments only, butte also the promise of grace annexed
to the things, which only makes the bytternesse to ware sweet. For what
were less ameable than the law, if yt should only with requyringe and
threateninge trouble souls carefully with fear, and vex them with terroure?
Butte specially David shows, that he in the law conceived the Mediatoure,
without whom there is no delight or sweetness.

Which while some vnskyllfull men can not discern, they Deuteronomy. xxxi vi.
he openly said to the people: Lay your hearts upon all the words that I
do testyfye to you this day, that ye may commytte them to your children,
that ye may teach them to keep, to do, and to fullfyll all the things that
are written in the volume of this law, because they are not vaynely commanded
you, butte that every one should live in them: butte if no man can deny
that there appears in yt an absolute pattern of righteousness, then either
we must have no rule at all to live justly and vpryghtely, or else yt is not
lawefull for us to depart from yt. For there are not many butte one rule of
life which is perpetual and can not be bowed. Therefore, whereas David
makes the life of a ryghteous manne continually busied in the meditation of
the law, let us not refer that to one age only, Psalm. i.^.
because it is most meet for all ages to the cude of the woorlde: and let
us not therefore be frayed away, or flee from being instructed by it, because
yt appoynteth a much more exact holiness than we shall perform, whyl^ we
shall carry about the parson of our body. For now yt executes not against us
the office of a rygorous exacter that will not be satysfyed, but with his full
task performed: butte in this perfection where unto it exhorts us, it
shows us a mark, toward which in all our life to endeavor, is no less
profitable for us, than agreeable with our duty. In which endeavor if we
fa^le not, it is well. For all this life is a race, the space whereof being
run cute, the Lord will grant us to atteine to that mark, toward which
our endeuoures do travail a far of.

Mat. v.xvi^.
unless it had been commonly received among the Jews. Butte forasmuch as
it could not rise causelessly and without any color, it is lykely that it
grew upon false understanding of his doctrine, as in a manner all erroures
are wont to take occasion of truth, but least we should also stumble at the
same stone, let us dylygently make distinction, what is abrogate in the law,
and what remains yet in force. Where the Lord protests that he came not do
destroy the law, butte to fulfill yt: and that till heaven and earth pass
away, no one jot of the law should pass away, butte that all should be
fullfylled: he sufficiently confyuneth that by his coming nothing should be
taken away from the out keepinge of the law. And for good cause: sith he
came rather for this end, to heal offenses. Wherefore the doctrine of the
law remains for all Christians, inviolable, which by teaching admonyshynge,
rebukynge and correctynge may frame and prepare us to every good work.

^al. iij.x. D^. xxvij.xxvj.
For this cause the Apostle says, that all they that are of the works of the
law, are subject to the curse. because it is written: Cursed is every one,
that fullfylleth not all. And he says, that they be under the works of the
law, that do not set righteousness in the forgiveness of sins, by which
we are loosed from the rigor of the law. He teaches therefore that we must
be loosed from the bonds of the law, unless we will miserablye peryshe
under them. But from what bonds? the bonds of that rigerous and sharp
exactinge, that releaseth nothing of the extremity of the law, and suffers
not any offense unpunished. From this curse (I say) that Christ might
redeem us, he was made a curse for us. For it is written: Cursed is every one
that hangs upon the tree. Ga. iij.^iij and iiiii.iiii. Deuteronomy. xxi.xxii^.
In the capter folowinge in deed he says, that Christ was made subject to
the law, to redeem them that were under the law: but all in one meaning,
for he by and by adds, that by adoption we might receive the right of
children. What is that? that we should not be oppressed with perpetual
bondage, that should hold our conscience fast strained with anguishe of
death. In the mean time this always remains unshaken, that there is nothing
withdrawn of the authority of the law, but that it ought still to be
received of us with the same reverence and obedience.

Of ceremonies it is otherwise, which were abrogate not in effect, Colos.
ii.xvii.
We see therefore how in the abolishinge of them, the truth shyneth better
than if they did still a far of, and as it were, with a veil spread before
show a figure of Christ that has already playnelye appeared. Mat. xxv^ ii.
(...) therefore the veil of the Temple at the death of Christ was torn in
two pieces and fell down: because now the true and express image of the
heavenly good things was come to light, which before had been but
imperfectly begone with dark rude draughtes, as the authore of the Epistle to
the Hebrews says. Heb. x.i. Luc. xvi.xxvi.
Hereunto serves the saying of Christ, that the law and the Prophets were
unto the time of Ihon, and that from that tune forward, the Kingdom of God
began to be ioyefully preached: not meaning that the holy fathers were
without the preaching that conteyneth the hope of salvation, and of eternal
life, but because a far of, and under shadows only they did behold that
which we at this day see in the full light. But why it behooved that the
Church of God should clymbe up hyer from those first instructions, Ihon the
Baptist declares: for that the law is given by Moses, Iho^. i.xv.
but grace and truth began by Jesus Chirste. For although the purginge of
sins were truly promised in the old sacrifices, and the Arc of the
covenant was a sure pledge of the fatherly favor of God, yet all this had
been but a shadow, if it had not ben grounded upon the grace of Christ,
wherein is sound perfect and eternal steadfastness. Let this then remain sure,
yt although ye ceremonial vsages of ye law have cessed to be observed, yet by
ye end of them it is yt better known, how great was ye profit of them before
Christ's coming, with in taking away the use of them has sealed the force
and effect of them with his death.

Coloss. ii.xii.
when ye were dead by sins, and the uncircumcision of your flesh,
forgeuinge you of all your offenses, blotting out the handwriting that remained
in ye decrees against us, which was contrary unto us, and he has taken it
away, fastninge it to the cross etc. For he seems to stretche the
abolyshinge of the law so^what further, that now we have nothing to do with
the decrees thereof. For they err that expond it only of the law moral,
whose vnappeassable rigor rather then doctrine thereof they think to be
taken away. Some more deeply weying the words of Paul, do epsy that it is
proprely spoken of the law ceremonial, and do show that this word Devil,
does more than ones so signify in Paul. For to the Ephesians he says thus:
He is our peace, Ep. ^i.xiiij
that makes both to be one, yt makes void the law of commandments
consistinge in ye decrees, yt he might make two in himself into one new man.
It is no doubt that he speaks there of the ceremonies, for he calls it the
partition wherewith the Jews were severed from the Gentiles: wherefore I grant
that those first expositors are rightfully reproved by these: but yet me
thinks that these do not sufficientlye well set fourth the mind of the
Apostle. For I like not at all, to have these two places compared together in
all points, when his purpose was to advertise the Ephesians of their adoption
into the fellowship of Israel, he teaches yt the stop is taken away, whereby
they were before time kept asunder, that was in ceremonies. For the vsages of
washinges and sacrifices, wherewith the Jews were made holy unto the Lord,
did sever them from the Gentiles. But in the epistle to the Colossians, who
sees not that (...) ^oucheth a hyer mystery? In deed the point of the
disputation there, is of Mosaicall observations, whereunto the false Apostles did
labor to drive the Christian people. But, as in the Epistle to the Galatians
he fetches that controversy further of, and as it were brings it back to the
first head thereof, so does he also in this place. For if in ye ceremonies you
consider nothing else but a necessity of yt use of them, to what purpose was
it, to call it a handwriting against us? moreover to set the whole sum in a
manner of our redemption in this, that it should be ca^celled? Wherefore the
matter it self tries out, that here is some more secret thing to be
considered. And I trust that I have atteined the natural understanding of
it, if at least this be granted me to be true, which in one place is most
truli written by Augustine, yea that he has taken out of the plain words of
the Apostle, that in the Jewish ceremonies was rather a confession than a
cleansinge of sins. Heb. vii. and ix.^^x.
For what did they else by sacrifices, but confess the^ selves in their
conscience gylty of death, that did put cleansinges in their place? What did
they with their cleansinges, but testify them selves to be unclean? And so
was the handwriting of their sin, and uncleanness often renewed by them, but
there was no discharge in that testifying thereof. For which cause the Apostle
writes that at length by mean of the death of Christ, Heb. ix.xv
was performed the redemption of the offenses that remained under the old
Testamente. Therefore the Apostle does woorthyly call the Handwritinges
against those that observe them: for as much as by them there did openly s^ale
to their own damnation and uncleanness. And it hinders not, that they were
also partakers of the same grace with us. For this they obtained in Christ,
not in the ceremonies, which there the Apostle does sever from Christ,
because being at that time used, they did obscure the glory of Christ. Thus
learn we, that the ceremonies, if they be considered by them selves, are well
and fittly called handwrytynges against the salvation of men, because they
were as solemn instruments that testified their being bound. When the false
Apostles went about to bind the Christian Church to them again, Paul did
not without cause admonyshe the Coloss^aus, by fetchinge their signification
of them further of, to what point they should fall back again, if they
suffered them selves in such sort to be yoked by them. For there withal was
the benefit of Christ wrested away from them, in as much as he having ones
performed the eternal cleansing, has utterly abolyshed these daily
observations, which were only of force to seal sins, but could do nothing
to the puttinge away of them.

The eyghte Chapter. An exposition of the Moral law.
HEre I think it shall not be from the purpose, to enterlace does after a
certain manner inform us of the same things that are to be learned of the
two tables. For our conscience does not suffer us to stepe a perpetual sleep
without feelynge, but that it inwardly is a witness and admonysher of those
things that we owe to God, and lays before us the difference of good and
evil, and so accuses us when we swerve from our duty. But manne being
wrapped in such darkness of erroures as he is, scarce even sclenderly tastes
by that law of nature, what worship pleases God: but truly he is very far
distante from the right knoweledge thereof. Byside that, he is so swollen
with arrogancy and ambition, and so blinded with selfeloue, yt he can not yet
look upon, and as it were, descend into himself to learn to submit and
humble himself, and confess his own myserie. Therefore (as it was necessary
both for our dullness and stubbornness) the Lord has set us a law
written, which should both more certainly testify that which in the law
natural was to obscure, and also should shake away our drousenesse and more
lively touch our mind and remembrance.



Hervpon follows both a distruste of our own strength, and a care and
fearefullnesse of mind. For conscience can not bear the burden of
iniquity, but that by and by the judgment of God is present before it: and
the judgment of God can not be felt, butte that it stryketh into us a
dreadefull horroure of death. And likewise being constrained with proves of
her own weakness, it can not choose butte by and by fall into despere of
her own strength. Both these affections do engendre humility and abatemente
of courage. So at length it comes to pass, that man made afraid with
felinge of eternal death, which he sees to hang over him by the deserving
of his own unrighteousness, turns him self to the only mercy of God, as to
the only haven of salvation: that feelynge that it is not in his power to pay
that he owes unto the law, desperinge in him self, he may take breathe
again and begin to crave and look for help from else where.

Butte the Lord not contented to have procured a reverence of his Leu. xvi^^ v.
shall live in them:) and also the threatenynge that answers it, (the soul
that synneth, the same shall dye) do without doubt belong to the
immortality or death that is to come, Eze. xviij.iiii. and xx.
and shall never be ended. All be it, wheresoever is mentioned the good will or
wrath of God, under the one is contained eternity of life, under the other
eternal destruction. Of present blessings and curses there is a long
regyster rehearsed in the law. Leu. xxvi*iiii. D^. xxvii^.i.
And in the penal ordinances appears the sovereign cleanness of God, that
can suffer no iniquity: but in his promises, byside his great love of
righteousness, (which he can not find in his heart to defraude of her
reward) there is also proved his merueilous bountifullnesse. For whereas we and
all ours are indetted unto his majesty, by good right whatsoever he requires
of us, he demands it as due det, but the payment of det is not worthy of
reward. Therefore he departs with his own right, when he offers reward to
our obediences, which we do not yield of our selves as things yt were not
due: but what those promises do bring unto us, is partly said already, and
partly shall appear more plainly in place fit for it. It suffices for this
present, if we remember and consider, that there is in the promysses of the
law, no small commendation of, righteousness, that it may the more
certainly appear how much the keepynge thereof pleases God: that the
penal ordinances are set forth more detestation of unrighteousness, least
the sinner, delited with the sweet flatteringes of vices, should forget that
the judgment of the lawemaker is prepared for him.

Deuteronomy. x^^.viij.
when after the publyshynge of the law he spoke thus to the people: Give
heed, and hear all the things that I command thee, that it may be well to
thee and to thy chldren after thee for ever, when thou shalt do that which
is good and pleasant before thy God. What I command thee, that only do:
add not unto it, nor dymynyshe yt. And before, when he had protested, that
this was his wisdom and understanding before other nations that he had
received judgments, righteousness and ceremonies of the Lord, he said
futher, ^eut. ^iij.ix.
Keep therefore thy self and thy soul carefully, that thowe forgette not the
words which thine eyes have seen, and that at no time they fall out of thy
heart. For, bycuase God did foresee, that the Israelites would not rest,
butte that after they had received the law, they would beside it travail
in bringing fourth new righteousness, if they were not severely holden
back: therefore he pronounces that herein is contained the perfection of
ryghteos^nesse, which should have been the strongest stay to hold them
back, and yet they did cesse from that boldness so much forbidden them.
Butte what of us? we are surely comprehended within the same charge: for it is
no doubt that that continues still whereby the Lord has challenged to his
law the absolute doctrine of righteousness, yet we not contented therewyth,
do monsterouslye travail with forgynge and coyninge of new good works one
upon an other. For the healinge of this fault, the best remedy shall be, if
this thought shall be stedfastely settled in us, that the law is given us
from God to teach us a perfect righteousness: yt therein is taught no
righteousness, butte the same that is examined, by the appointed rule of Gods
will: that therefore new fourmes of works are vaynely attempted to win the
favor of God, whose true worshype stands in only obedience: butte rather
that such study of good works as wandereth out of the law of God, is an
intolerable defylynge of Gods righteousness and of the true righteousness.
Augustine also says most truly, Lib. 4. de c^^i. De^. ^. 12 de bo^o
coniugali contra aduer. Legis and proph. ^
which calls the obedyence that is done to God, sometime the mother and
keeper, sometime the original of all virtues.

But when we have expounded the law of the Lord, then more fitely and with
more pofite shall that be confirmed which I have before spoken of the office
and use of the law. But before that I begin to discuss every several
commandment by it self, it shall be good now to give such lessons as
serve to the universal knoweledg thereof. First let us hold for determined,
that the life of man is instructed in the law, not only to outewarde
honestye, but also to inward and spiritual righteousness. Which thing
whereas no man can deny, yet there be few that rightly mark it. That comes
to pass, because they look not upon the lawemaker, by whose nature the nature
of the law also ought to be weied. If any king do by proclamation forbid to
commit fornication, to kill, or to steal: in this case I grant that if a
man do only conceive in his mind a lust to commit fornication to sin,
or to steal, and do not comitte any of these things in deed, he is out of
the compass of this prohibition. And the reason is, for that, because the
foresighte of a mortal lawemaker, could not extend but to outward
civility: his commandments are not broken, but when the outewarde offenses
are committed. But God (whose eye nothing escapes, and which regards not
so much the outewarde show as the cleanness of the heart) under the
forbiddinge of fornication, manslaughter and theft, forbids lust, wrath,
hatred, co^etynge of an other manns, guyle, and what soever is like to these.
For insomuche as he is a spiritual lawemaker, he speaks no less to the
soul than to the body. Butte the manslaughter of the soul, are wrath and
hatred: the theft of the soul, is evil desire and couetousenesse: the
fornycation of the soul, is lust. Butte man's laws also (will some man say)
have regard to ententes and wylles, and not to successes of fortune. I
grant, but yet they are such ententes and wylles, as have outewardely broken
out. They weye with what entente every outewarde act has been done, butte
they search not the secret thoughts. Therefore they are satysfyed when a man only wythholdeth his hands from offendynge. On the other side, because
the heavenly law is made for our minds, therefore the restraynte of minds is
pryncypally needful to the keepinge thereof. Butte the common sort of men,
even when they mightylie dissemble there contempt of the law, do frame their
eyes, their feet, their hands, and all the parts of their body to some
observation of the law, in the mean time they hold their heart most far
of from all obidience, and think them selves well dyscharged, if they keep
close from men that which they do in the sight of God. They hear yt said:
Thou shalt not kill: Thou shalt not commit adultery: Thou shalt not
steal: they draw not out their sword to kil^ they join not their bodies
with harlotes: they lay not their hands upon other menns goods. All this is
well hitherto. Butte in their whole hearts they breathe out murders, they
boil in lust, they cast their eyes aside at all men's goods, and devour them
with couetinge. now wants that which was the chief point of the law.
Whense, I pray you, comes so gross dullness, but that leauinge the
lawemaker, they rather measure righteousness by their own witie? Against these
does Paul mightily cry out, Romans vij x^^^*
affirminge that the law is spiritual: whereby he means, that it not only
demaunndeth an obedience of the soul, mind and will, but also requires an
Angelike pureness, which having all ye fylthynesse of ye flesh clean wyped
away, may sauoure nothing but of the spirit.

(...)
that he perfourmeth the law that has with outewarde work committed
nothing against the law, he reproved this most perilous error, and
pronounced that unchaste lookinge at a woman is fornication: he protested that
they are mansleyers that hate their brother, for he makes them gyltye of
judgment that have but conceived wrath in their mind, and them gylty of the
counsel that in murmuringe or grudginge have uttered any token of a displeased
mind: and them gyltye of Hell fire, that with tauntes and raylynge break
fourth into open anger. They that have not espied these things, have famed
Christ to be an other Moses, the geuer of the law of the Gospel, which
supplied the imperfection of the law of Moses. Whereupon comes that common
pryncyple of the perfection of the law of the Gospel, which far passes
the oulde law, which is a most pernicious opinion. For hereafter, where we
shall gather a sum of the commandments, it shall appear by Moses himself,
how reprochefully they dishonor the law of God. Truly it shows that all
the holiness of the fathers did not much dyffer from hypocrisye, and it
leads us away from that only and perfect rule of righteousness. But it
is very easy to confute that error: for that they thought that Christ did
add unto the law, whereas he did but restore the law to her integrity,
while he made it free, and cleansed yt being obscured with lies, and defiled
with leven of the Pharisees.

therefore, that sober exposition does pass beyond the words: but how
far, that remains hard to judge, unless there be some measure appointed:
wherefore I think this to be the best measure, that if it be directed to the
entente of the commandment, that is, that in every commandment be weyed,
why it was given us. As for example: Every commandment is either by way of
bidding, or of forbidding: the truth of both sorts shall fourthwith be
found, if we consider the intent or the end thereof. As the end of the fifte
conmaundement is, that honor is to be given to them to whom God appoynteth
it. This therefore is the sum of the commandment, that it is right and
pleases God, that we honor them to whom he has given any excellence, and
that he abhors contempt and stabbournnesse against them. The entente of
the first commandment is, that God alone be honored. The sum therefore of
the commandment shallbe, that true godliness, that is to say, true worship
of his majesty pleases God, and that he abhors ungodliness. So in every
commandment we must look, upon what matter yt treats: then must we
search out the end, till we find what the lawemaker does testify therein
proprely to please or displease him: and last of all must we draw an
argument from the same to the contrary, after this manner: If this pleases
God, then the contrary displeases him: if this displease him, then the
contrary pleases him: if he command this, then he forbids the
contrary: if he forbid this, the^ he commands the contrary.

That which is now somewhat darkely touched, shall in expounding

But why God, in such as it were half commandments has by figures rather
secretli signified, than expressed what his will was, where as there are wont to
be many reasons rendered thereof, this one reason pleases me above ye rest.
Because ye flesh always endeuoreth to extenuate the fylthinesse of sin, and to
color it with fair pretenses, sauinge where it is even palpable for
grossness, he has set forth for an example in every kind of offense that
which was most wicked and abominable, at the hearing whereof our very
senses might be moved with horroure, thereby to emprinte in our minds a more
heinous detesting of every sort of sin. This many times deceives us in
weyinge of vices, yt if they be any thing secret, we make them seem small.
These deceites the Lord does disclose, when he accustometh us to refer all the whole multitude of vices to these principal heads, which do best of all
show, how much every kind is abominable. As for example, wrath and hatred
are not thought so heinous euells, when they are called by their own names,
but when they are forbidden us under the name of man slaughter, we better
understand how abominable they are before God, by whose word they are set in
the degree of so horrible an offense: and we moved by his judgment, do
accustom our selves better to weye the haynousenesse of those faults that
before seemed but light unto us.

the judge of right and wrong. Wherefore in the first table he instructs us
to godliness and the propre duties of religion, wherewith his majesty is to be
worshipped: in the other he prescribes home for the fears sake of his name,
we ought to behave our selves in the fellowship of men. Matt. xxij xxxvij. Luke.
x.xxvij.
And for this reason our Lord (as the Eua^gelistes rehearse it) did in a sum
gather the whole law into two principal points, the one that we should love
God with all our heart, with all our soul, with all our strength: the other,
that we love our neighbor as our selves. Thus thou see how of the two parts
wherein he concludes the whole law, he directs the one toward God, and
apointeth the other toward men.

But although the whole law be contained in two principal points, Lib. ^. qu.
^et. Test.
which in rehersyng them keeps this order: that God only be served with
obedience of religion, that no idol be worshipped, that the name of the Lord
be not taken in vain, when he had before severally spoken of the shadowish
commandment of the Sabbot. In an other place in deed that first division
pleases him, but for to sclender a cause, that is, because in the number of
three, if the first table consist of three commandments, the mystery of the
trinity more plainly appears. Albeit in the same place he sticks not to
confess that otherwise he rather likes our division. Byside these, the
author of ye Unperfect work upon Matthew is of our side. Josephus, undoubtedly
according to the common consent of his time, assigns to either table five
commandments. Which is both against reason, because it confou^deth the
distinction of religion and charity and also is confuted by the authority of
the Lord himself, which in Matthew reckeneth the commandment of honoring our
pare^tes, Matt. xix.xix.
in the number of the second table. Now let us hear God himself, speaking in
his own words.

The first Commandment.
I am the Lord thy God, which have brought thee out of the land of Egypt,
out of the house of bondage. Thou shall have no strange Gods before my face.
Romans xi.xxxvi.
as Paul says. Therefore we are with this word alone sufficiently brought
under the yoke of Gods majesty, because it were mo^struous for us to seek to
withdraw our selves from under his government, out of whom we can not be.

Ier. xxx^.xxxiij. Mat. xxij.xxxij.
which is contained in the promise: I will be to them a God, and they shall be
to me a people. Whereupon Christ proves that Abraham, Isaac and Jacob have
immortal life, by this that God testified that he is their God. Wherefore it
is as much in effect, as if he should say thus: I have chosen you to be my
people, not only to do you good in this present life, but also to give you the
blessedness of the life to come. But to what end this tends, it is noted in
diverse places in ye law. For when ye Lord does vouch save to deal thus
mercifully with us, De^. vij.vi and. ^^^ij.ij. and. x^v^. xviij
to call us into the company of his people, he choseth us (says Moses) yt we
should be a peculiar people unto him self, a holy people, and should keep his
commandments. From whense also comes this exhortion: Leu. xix.^^
Be ye holy, for I am holy. Now out of these two is derived that protestation
that is in the Prophet: The son honoreth the father, Mal. i.vi.
and the servant honoreth his Lord. If I be a lord, where is my fear? If I be
a father, where is my love?

Now follows the rehearsal of his benefit, which ought to be of so Exo.
iij.vi. Amos. i.ij. Habac. ii.xxviii. Ps. lxxx.ii. and. xxix.i. Es. xxxvii.xvi.
or the God of Israel, when he is set in the temple of Jerusalem among the
Cherebins, these and like forms of speech do not bind him to one place or to
one people, but are set only for this purpose, to stay the thoughts of the
godly in y^ God, which by his covenant, that he has made with Israel, has
so represented himself, that it is no way lawefull to vary from such a
pattern. But let this remain steadfastly emprinted, that there is mention made
of the deliverance to this end, that the Jews might the more cherefully give
themselves to the God that does by right claim them unto him. And we (least we
should think that the same nothing belongs to us,) ought to consider, that
the bondage of Egypt is a figure of the spiritual captivity, wherein we are al
holden bound, until our heavenly deliverer do make us free by the power of his
arm, and convey us into the kingdom of liberty. As therefore, when in the
old time he minded to gather together the Israelites that were scattered
abroad, to the worshipping of his name, he delivered them out of the
intolerable dominion of Pharao, wherewith they were oppressed: so al those to
who^ at this day he professes him self a God, he does now deliver from the
deadly power of the Deuell, which was in a shadow signified by that corp^ral
bondage. Wherefore there is no man, but his mind ought to be inflamed to
harken to the law which he hears to have proceeded from the sovereign king.
From whom as al things take their beginnynge, so is it mete that they have
also their end appointed and directed to him. There is no man (I say) but
he ought to be ravished to embrace the lawemaker, to the keeping of whose
commandments, he is taught that he is peculiarly chosen: from whose bounty
he looks both for flowynge store of all good things, and also the glory of
immortal life: by whose marvelous power and mercy, he knows himself to be
delivered out of the jaws of death.

That we have no strau^g Gods before him. The end of this commandment is,
that God will only have preeminencie, and wholly enjoy his own authority among
his people. And yt it may so be, he commands that there be far from us
all ungodliness and superstition whereby the glory of his godhed is either
diminished or obscured: and by the same reason he commands, that we worship
and honor him with true endeavor of godliness. And the very simplicity of
the words themselves do in a manner express the same. For we can not have
God, but we must also comprehended therein al things that properly belong to
him. Whereas therefore he forbids us to have other Gods, he means thereby,
that we should not give away else where that which is propre to him. For
although the things that we owe unto God be innumerable, yet not unfitly they
may be brought unto four principal points: Adoration, whereunto as a thing
hanging upon it, is adjoined spiritual obedience of conscience: Affiance,
Invocation, and Thankesgeuing. Adoration I call the reverence and worship which
every one of us yeldeth unto him, when he submits himself unto his
greatness: wherefore I do not without cause make this a part thereof, that we
yield our consciences in subjection to his law. Affiance, is an assuredness of
restyng in him by reknowleging of his powers, when reposing al wisdom,
righteousness, power, truth and goodness in him, we think our selves
blessed with only partakyng of him. Invocation, is a resortyng of our mind to
his faith and help as to our only succor, so often as any necessity presses
us. Thankesgeuyng, is a certain thankfulness whereby the praise of all good
things is given unto him. Of these, as God suffers nothing to be conveyed
away else where, so he commanded all to be wholly given to him self. Neither
shall if be enough to absteyme from having any strange God, unless thou
restrain thy self in this, that many wicked contemners ar wont, which think
the rediest way, to scorn all religions: but true religion must go before,
whereby our minds may be directed to the living God, with knowledge whereof
they being endued, may aspire to reverence, fear and worship his majesty, to
embrace the communicatyng of all his good things, every where to seek for his
help, to reknowledge and advance with confession of praise the magnificence
of his works, as to the only mark in all the doings of our life. Then, that
we beware of perverse superstition, whereby our minds swaruyng from the true
God, are drawn hither and thither as it were unto diverse gods. Wherefore, if
we be contented with one God, let us call to remembrance that which is
beforesayd, that all forged gods are to be driven far away, and that the
worship is not to be torn in sonder, which he alone claymeth to himself. For
it is not lawful to take away any thing from his glory, be it never so
little, but that all things that belong to him may wholly remain with him. The
percell of sentence that follows (Before my face) increases the heinousness,
for that God is provoked to ialousie, so often as we thrust our own inue^tions
in his place, as if an unchaste wonlan by bringyng in an adulterer openly
before her husbands eyes should the more vex his mind. Therefore when God
testified that with his present power and grace he looked upon the people that
he had chosen, the more to fray them from the wicked act of falling from him,
he gives them warnyng that there can be no new gods brought in, but that he is
witness and beholder of their sacrilege. For this boldness is increased with
much wickedness, that man thinks that in his fleynges away he can begile the
eyes of God. On the other side, God cries out that what so ever we purpose,
what so ever we go about, what so ever we practice, it comes in his sight.
Let therefore our conscience be clean even from the most secret thoughts of
swaruyng from him, if we will have our religion to please the Lord. For he
requires to have the glory of his godhed whole and uncorrupted, not only in
outward confession, but also in his eyes, which do behold the most secret
corners of hearts.

The Second Commandment.
Thou shall not make to thee any graven image, nor any similitude of those
things that are in heaven above, or in earth beneth, or in the waters under
the earth. Thou shall not worship them, nor serve them.
As in the first commandment he pronounced that he is the one God byside whom
there are no others gods to be devised or had* so now he more openly declares
what manner of God he is, and with what kind of worship he is to be honored:
that we may not presume to forge any carnal thing for him. The end therefore
of this commandment is, yt he will not have the lawefull worship of him, to
be profaned with superstitious vsages. Wherefore in sum, he calls and
draws us away from the carnal observations, which our foolish mind is wont
to invent, when it conceiueth God according to her own grosnesse. And
therefore he frames us to the lawful worship of him, that is the spiritual
worship, and which is appointed by him. He speaks of the grossest fault that
is in this offense, namely outward idolatry. And there be two parts of this
commandment, The first restrayneth our liberty, that we do not presume to
make subject to our senses or by any form to represent God, which is
incomprehensible. The second part forbids us to honor any images for
religious sake. Morouer he shortly recites al ye forms wherewith he was wont
to be expressed in shape by the profane and superstitious nations. By those
things that are in heaven, he means the Sun, the Moon, and other Stars,
and paraduenture also birds, as expressyng his meaning in the fourth of
Deuteronomie he means as well birds as stars. Deuteronomy. iiij.xv.
Which note I would not have spoken of but that I saw some unskillfully to
apply it to Angeles. Therefore I omit the other parts, because they are
sufficiently known of themselves. And we have already in the first book taught
plainly enough, that what so ever visible forms of God man does invent, they
are directly contrary to his nature, and that therefore so sone as images come
sorth, true religion is corrupted and defiled.

Iere. iij. Osee. ij.
so the lord that has wedded us unto himself in truth, testifies that has a
most fervently burning ialousie, so often as neglecting the pureness of his
holly marriage we are defiled with wicked lusts, but specially then when we
tra^sferre to any other, or do in^ectt with any superstition the worship of his
name, which ought to be most uncorrupted: For as much as by this mean we do
not only break the faith given in wedlock, but also do defile the very
weddyng bed with bryngyng into it adulterers.

the equity of gods justice, to punish y^ innocent for an others offense. God
him self also says, Eze. xviij.xx.
that he will not make the son to bear the wickedness of the father. But
this sentence is more than ones repeted, of prolongyng the punnishmente of the
sins of the auncelters upon the generations to come. Number. xiiij viij.
For so does Moses oftentimes speak unto him: Lord, lord* that rendrest the
iniquity of the fathers to the children, unto the third and fourth generation.
Likewise Jeremy: Ier. xxxii, xviii.
Thou that show mercy in thousands, that rendrest the iniquity of the
fathers into the bosom of the children after them. Many, while they travail
much in losyng this knot, think that it is to be understood only of
temporal punishments, which if the children suffer for the parents faults,
it is no absurdity, for as much as they are oftentimes laid upon the^ for
their salvation, Esa. xxxix, vij.
which is in deed true. For Elaye declared to Ezechias, yt his sons should be
spoiled of the kingdom, and carried into exile for the sin yt he had
committed. The houses of Pharao and Abimelech were plaged for offending
Abraham. Genesis xii.xvii. and xx, iii,
But when yt is alleged for assoiling of this question, it is rather a shift
than a true exposition. For here and in like places he threteneth a more
grievous revenge than that it may be limited within the bounds of this present
life. It is therefore thus to be taken: yt the just curse of the Lord, lies not
only upon the head of the wicked man himself, but also upon his whole family:
when the curse ones lies upon them, what is else to be looked for but yt the
father being destitute of the spirit of God, live most wickedly, and the son
likewise forsaken of the lord for the fathers fault, do follow the same way of
destruction: and finally, the childs child, and the child of the childs
child, yt cursed seed of detestable me^ do fall hedlong after the^?

First let us see, whether such revenge be unseemly for the justice of Eze.
xviii, xx,
they began to use ^or a Proverb, yt their fathers had eaten a sower grape,
wherewith ye childrens teeth were set on edge: whereby they meant, that their
fathers had committed sins, whereof they, being otherwise righteous, and not
deserving it, did suffer y^ punishment, rather by ^ vnappea^able wrathfulnesse
of God, tha^ by a moderate severity. The Prophet pronounces unto the^ yt it
is not so: because they are punished for their own offenses, and yt it
stands not with the justice of God, yt the righteous son should suffer
punishment for the noughtinesse of ye wicked father, Which thing also is not
contained in this present ordinance. For in the Uisityng, whereof mention is
now made, be ^ul^illed when ye lord takes away from the house of the wicked
his grace, the light of his (...) and other helps of salvation: in this that
the children being blinded and forsaken of him, do go on in the steps of
their fathers, they sustain curses for their fathers offenses. But in as much
as they are put to te^porall miseries, and at last to eternal destruction,
herein they are punished by the just judgment of God, not for the sins of
other, but for their own iniquity.

Genesis xvij.vij. Prou. xx.vij.
and is set in the solemn covenant of the church: I will be thy God, and of
thy seed after thee. Which thing Solomon having respect unto, writes that
the children of the righteous shall be blessed after their death not only by
reason of holy bringing up, which also not a little avails thereunto, but also
for yt blessing promised in the covenant, that the grace of God shall rest
eternally in the houses of the godly. Herupon grows great comfort to the
faithful great terror to the wicked. For if even after death, the remembrance
both of righteousness and wickedness be of so great force with God, that the
cursing of the one, and the blessyng of the other redoundeth unto posterity,
much more shall it light and rest upon the heads of the doers themselves. But it
makes nothing against us, that the issue of the wicked many times comes to
good proof, and the issue of the faithful swarueth out of kind: because the
lawmaker meante not here to stablish such a perpetual rule as should derogate
his free election. For it suffices for the comfort of the righteous and for
the terror of the sinner, that the penalty is not vain or of no effect,
although it do not always take place. For as the temporal punishments that
are laid upon a few wickedmen, are testimonies of the wrath of God against
sins, and of the judgment that shall one day be given upon all sinners,
although many escape unpunished even to the end of their life: so when God
gives one example of this blessing to show mercy and bou^tifulnesse to the
son for the fathers sake, he gives a proof of his constant and perpetual
favor to them that worship him: and when he ones pursues the wickedness of
ye father in the son, he shows what judgment is prepared for all the
reprobate for their own offenses. Which assuredness he had in this place
principally respect unto. And by the way he commends unto us the largeness
of his mercy, which he extends unto a thousand generations, whereas he
assigned but only four generations to vengeance.


Thou shall not take the name of the Lord thy God in vain.
The end of this commandment is, yt his will is to have the majesty of his
name to be holy among us. Therefore the sum shall be, that we do not defile it
with contemptuously and irreuerently using it. With which prohibition the
commandment hangs orderly together, that we take study and care godlily to
reverence it. Therefore we ought so to order our selves both in our minds and
our tongues, that we neither think nor speak any thing of God himself or his
mysteries, but reverently and with much sobriety: that in weyeng his works,
we conceive nothing but honorable toward him. These three things I say, it
behooves us not negligently to mark, that what so ever our mind conceiueth of
him, what so ever our tongue utters, it may savor of his excellency, and may
agree with the holy highness of his name: and finally may serve to aduau^ce
his magnificence. That we do not rashly or disorderly abuse his holy word and
reverend mysteries either to ambition, or to covetousness, or to our own
triflinges: but that as they bear the dignity of his name emprinted in the^,
so they may keep their honor and estimation among us. Last of al, that we do
not carp against or speak euel of his works, as these wretched men are wont
to babble reprochefully against them: but that what so ever we rehearse done by
him, we report it with words of praise of his wisdom, righteousness and
goodness. That is to sanctify the name of God. Where otherwise is done, it is
defiled with vain and perverse abuse, because it is violently carried from the
right use whereunto only it was appointed: and though there be no other hurt
done, yet it is spoiled of his dignity, and by little and little brought to
contempt. Now, if there be so much euel in this rash readiness to use the name
of God out of season, much more mischief is in this, if it be employed to evil
uses, as they do that make it to serve the superstitions of Necromancie, cruel
execrations, unlawful co^iurations, and other wicked enchauntementes. But
swearyng is chiefly mentioned in the commandment, as the thing wherein the
perverse abuse of Gods name is most detestable, that thereby we may be the
better altogether frayed away from all defilyng thereof. But that here is
commandment given of the worship of God, and of the reverence of his name,
and not of the truth and equity that is to be kept among men, appears by
that that he afterward in the second table condemns perjury and false
witness, whereby hurt is done to the fellowship of me^: but it were in vain to
repete it again, if this commandment, entreated of the duty of charity.
And also the division of the law itself requires it, because as it is said,
God did not in vain apoint two tables for his law, whereby is gathered yt in
this commandment he chalengeth his own right to himself, and defends the
holiness of his name, and teaches not what men owe to men.

First is to be learned what is an oath. It is a taking of God to Esa.
xix.xviij.
As when Esaye prophecieth of the calling of the Assyrians and Egyptians into
fellowship of the covenant with Israel, They shall speak (says he) in the tongue of
Chanaan, and shall swear in the name of the Lord. That is to say, in sweryng by
the name of the Lord, Esa. lxv.xvi.
they shall yield a confession of his religion. Again when he speaks of the
enlargeme^t of his kingdom, he says: Whosoever shall bless himself, shall
bless in the God of the faithful: and he that shall swear in the land, shall
swear in the true God. Hieremie says, Iere. xij.xvi.
If they shall teach ye people to swear in my name as they have taught the^ to
swear by Baal, they shall be builded up in the mids of my house. And for good
cause it is said, that when we call upon the name of the Lord to witness, we
do witness our religion toward him. For so we confess that he is the
eternal and unchangeable truth, whom we call upon, not only as a most
substantial witness of truth above all other but also as the only defense
thereof, which is able to bring forth hidden things into light, and then as
the knowet of hearts. For where testimonies of men do ^ayle, there we f^ee
to God for witness, specially where any thing is to be proved that lies
secret in conscience. For which cause the Lord is bitterly angry with them
that swear by strange gods, and he judges that manner of swearyng to be a
manifest of manifest falling from his allegiance: Ier. v.vij.
Thy sons have forsaken me, and do swear by them that are no gods. And he
declares the haynousnesse of this offense by threatenyng of punishment: Soph.
i.v.
I will destroy them that swear by the name of the Lord, and swear by Melchan.

Leu^. xix.xij.
Profanation. For what is left to the Lord when he is spoiled of his truth?
he shall then cease to be God. But truly he is spoiled thereof, when he is
made an affirmer and approuer of falshod. Iosue. vij.xix.
Wherefore, when Joshua minded to drive Alchan to confess the truth, he said:
My Son, give glory to the Lord of Israel. meaning thereby, that the Lord
is grievously dishonored if a man swear falsely by him. And no marvel. For we
do as much as in us lies, in a manner, to stayne his holy name with a lie.
And that this manner of speech was used among the Jews so often as any was
called to take an oath, appears by the like protestation, that the Pharisees
use in the Gospel of John. John. ix.xxiiii. i. Sa. xiiii ii. Reg. vi xxxi. ii.
Cor. i.xiiii.
To this heedefulnesse the forms of oaths that are used in the Scriptures do
instruct us: The Lord lives, The Lord do these things unto me, and add
these things, The Lord be witness upon my soul. Which do prove, that we
can not call God for witness of our sayenges, but that we also wish him to
take vengeance of our perjury, if we speak deceyptfully.

name of God is defiled in trifling talks, and yt is not thought that they do
euel, because by long suffered and unpunished boldness, they are come to rest
as it were in possession of so great wickedne^^e. But the co^manndement of the
Lord remains in ^orce, the penalty abides in strength, and shall one day
have his effect, whereby there is a certain special revenge proclaimed
against them that use his name in vain. This commandment is also
transgressed in an other point, that in our oaths we put the holy servants of
God in the place of God, with manifest ungodliness, for so we tra^sferre the
glory of his godhed to them. Deuteronomy. vi.xiii. and x.xx. Exodus xxiii xiii.
Neither is it without cause, that the Lord has given special commandment
to swear by his name, and by special prohibition forbidden, that we should not
be heard swear by any strange gods. And the Apostle evidently testifies the
same, when he writes, that men in swearyng do call upon a hier than
themselves, and that God which had none greater than his own glory to swear
by, did swear by himself.

The Anabaptists not contented with this moderation of swearyng, Malt. v. Iac.
v.
I say unto ye, swear not at all, but let your tale be yea yea, and nay nay,
what so ever is more than this, is of evil. But by this mean, they do without
consideration stumble against Christ: while they make him aduersarye to his
father, and as if he had come down from heaven to repeal his fathers decrees.
For the eternal God does in the law not only permit swearyng as a thing
lawful, Exodus xxii.xi. John. vii.xvi.
which were enough: but also in necessity does command it. But Christ
affirms that he is all one with his father: that he brings no other thing,
but that which his father commanded him, that his doctrine is not of himself,
etc. What then? will they make God contrary to himself, which shall afterward
forbid and condemn the same thing ^n men's behauiours, which he has before
allowed by commanding it? But because there is some difficulty in the words
of Christ, let us a little weye them. But herein we shall never atteyne the
truth, unless we bend our eyes unto the intent of Christ, and take heed
unto the purpose that he there goes about. His purpose is not either to
release or restreyne the law, but to reduce it to the true and natural
understanding, which had been very much depraved by the false gloses of the
Scribes and Pharisees. This ^^ we hold in mind, we shall not think that
Christ did utterly condemn oaths, but only those oaths which do transgress
the rule of the law. Thereby it appears, that the people at that time did
forbear no manner of swearyng but periuries, whereas the law does not only
forbid periuries, but also all idle and superstitous oaths. The Lord
therefore the most sure expositour of the law, Matthew. v.xxxiiii.
does admonish them, that it is not only evil to forswere, but also to swear.
But how to swear? in vain. But as for these oaths that are commended in the
law, he leaves them safe and at liberty. They seem to fight somewhat more
strongly when they take earnest hold of this word At all, which yet is not
referred to the word Swear, but to the forms of swearyng that are after
rehearsed. For this was also part of their error, that when they did swear by
heaven and earth, they thought that they did not touch the name of God.
Therefore after the principal kind of offense against this commandment, the
lord does also cut of from them all bye shifts, that they should not think
that they have escaped, if not speaking of the name of God they call heaven and
earth to witness. For here by the way it is also to be noted, that although
the name of God be not expressed, yet men by indirect forms do swear by him,
as if they swear by the lively light, by the bread that they eat, by their
Baptism, or other tokens of gods liberality toward them. Neither does Christ
in that place where he forbids them to swear by heaven and earth and
Jerusalem, speak it to correct superstition, as some men falsely think, but
he rather confuteth their sophistical sutt^ltie, which thought it no fault
babblingly to throw our indirect oaths, as though they spared the holy name of
God, which is engraven in all his benefits. But otherwise it is, where either
a mortal man, or a dead man, or an Angel, is put in the place of God: as among
the profane nations flattery devised that stinkyng form of sweryng by the
life or soul of the King: for then the false making of gods does obscure and
minish y^ glory of the one only God. But when we mean only, to procure credit
to our sayenges by the holy name of God, although the same be indirectly done,
yet in all such triflyng oaths his majesty is offended. Christ takes from this
licentiousness, all pretense of excuse, in this that he forbids to swear
at al. Iac. v.xii.
And James tends to the same purpose, recityng the same words of Christ
which I have before alleged, because that same rash boldness has always ben
in the world, which is a profane misuse of the name of God. For if ye refer
this word. At all, to the substance, as it without any exception it were
altogether unlawful to swear: wherefore serves that exposition which is
added afterward: Neither by heaven nor by earth, etc? Whereby it sufficiently
appears that those cauillatio^s are met withal, by which the Jews thought
their fault to be excused.

Hebr. vi.xvi.
as are in Paul to confirm ye dignity of y^ gospel, for as much as y^
Apostles in their office are not private me^ but public ministers of god. And
truly I deny not yt those are y^ safest oaths, because they ar defended with
sou^dest testimonies of scripture. The magistrate is commanded in a doubtful
case to drive the witness to an oath. and he ot^ the other side to answer by
oath: and the Apostle says, that men's controversies are by this mean ended.
In this commandment both these have a perfect allowance of their offices.
Yea and we may note, that among the old heathen men, the public and solemn
oath was had in great reverence, but common oaths that were usually spoken
without consideration, were either nothing or very little regarded, because they
thought that in these they had not to do with the majesty of God at al. But
yet it were to much dangerous to condemn private oaths, that are in necessary
cases soberly, holyly, and reverently taken, which are maintained both by
reason and examples. For if it be lawful for private men in a weighty and
earnest matter to appele to God as judge between them, much more is it lawefull
to call him to witness. Put the case: thy brother will accuse thee of false
breach of faith, thou endeuorest to purge thy self according to the duty of
charity, and he by no means will suffer himself to be satisfied. If thy good
name come in peril by his obstinate maliciousness, thou shall without offense
appele to the judgment of God, that it will please him in time to make thine
innocence known. Now if the weight of the words be considered, it is a less
matter to call him to witness. Therefore I see not why in this case we should
affirm, that the calling him to witness is unlawful. And we are not without
many examples thereof. For though the oath of Abraham and Isaac with Abimelech
be said not to serve for our purpose, Genesis xxi.xxiiij. and* xxvi.xxxi. ^
xxxi.liij. Ruth. iij.xiij. i. Re. xviii, x.
because it was made in the name of a public company, yet Jacob and Laban
were private me^, which stablished a covenant with mutual oath between
themselves. Booz was a private man, which by the same mean confirmed his
promise of marriage to Ruth. Abdias was a private man, a just manne and fearyng
God, which affirmed unto Elias by oath, the thing that he meant to persuade
him. Therefore I have no better rule, but that oaths be so tempered, that they
be not unadvised, that they be not common without regard, that they be not used
of ragyng lust, nor triflyng, but that they serve just necessity, as where
the Lords glory is to be mainteyned, or the edification of our brother
furthered, to which end the commandment of the law tends.

The fourth Commandment.
Remember that thou keep holy the Sabbat day. Six days shall thou work and
do all thy works. But on the seventh day is the Sabbat of the Lord thy God. In
it thou shall do no work. etc.
The end of this commandment is, that we being dead to our own affections
and works, should be busied in meditation of the kingdom of God, and to the
same meditation should be exercised, by such means as he has ordained. But
because this commandment has a peculiar and several consideration from the
rest, therefore it must have also a several manner of exposition. The old
writers use to call it a shadowish commandment, for yt it conteyneth the
outward observation of the day, which by the coming of Christ was taken away
with the other figures. Wherein I grant they say truly, but they touch but
half the matter. Wherefore we must fetch the exposition of it farther of. And
(as I think) I have marked y^ there are three causes to be considered, whereupon
this commandment consists. For first the heavenly lawmaker meant under the
rest of the seventh day, to set out in figure to the people of Israel the
spiritual rest, whereby the faithful ought to ^esse from their own works,
that they might suffer God to work in them. Secondarily, his will was to have
one appointed day, wherein they should mere together to hear the law, and
execute the ceremonies, or at leest bestow it peculiarly to the meditation of
his works: that by such calling to remembrance, they might be exercised to
godliness. Thirdly, he thought good to have a day of rest granted to
servants, and such as lived under the government of other, wherein the^ might
have some cessyng from their labor.

Number. xiii.xxii. Ezec. xx.xxi. and. xxiii.xxxviii. Ier. xvii.xii. and. xxvii.
Exodus xxxi xiii. and. xxxv.ii. Nehe. ix.xiiij.
was the principal point in the Sabbat. For y^ Lord required the keeping of no
commandment in a manner more severely, than this: when his meaning is in the
Prophets to declare that al religion is overthrown, then he co^plaineth that
his Sabbates are polluted, defiled, not kept, not sanctified: as though that
piece of service being omitted, there remained no more wherein he might be
honored. He did set forth the observing thereof with hie praises. For which
cause the faithful did among other oracles maruelously esteem the reuelyng of
the Sabbat. For in Nehemiah thus spoke the Levites in a solemn co^uocation,
Thou have showed to our fathers thy holy Sabbat, and have given them the
commandments and the ceremonies, and the law by the hand of Moses. You see
how it is had in singular estimation among all the commandments of the law.
All which things do serve to set forth the dignity of the mystery, which is
very well expressed by Moses and Ezechiel. Thus you have in Exodus. See yt ye
keep my Sabbat day, because it is a token between me and you in your
generations: that you may know that I am the Lord that sanctify you: keep my
Sabbat, for it is holy unto you. Let the children of Israel keep the Sabbat
and celebrate it in their generations, it is an everlasting covenant between me
and the children of Israel, and a perpetual token. Yet Ezechiel speaks more
at large. Ezec. xx.xij.
But the sum thereof comes to this effect, that it is for a token whereby
Israel should know that God is their sanctifier. If our sanctification be the
mortifiyng of our own will, then appears a most apt relation of the outward
sign with the inward thing it self: we must altogether rest, that God may
work in us: we must depart from our own will, we must resign up our heart, we
must banish all lusts of the ^^esh. Hebr. iij.xiii. and. iiii.ix.
Finally, we must cesse from all the doings of our own wit, that we may
have God workyng in us, that we may rest in him, as the Apostle also teaches.

search for a secret signification in the number of seven: For as much as that
number is in the Scripture the number of perfection, it was not without cause
chosen to signify everlasting continuance. Wherewith this also agrees that
Moses in the day that he declared that the Lord did rest from his works,
makes an end of describyng the succeding of days and nights. There may be
also brought an other probable note of the number that the Lord thereby meant
to show that the Sabbat should never (...) perfectly ended, til it came to the
last day. For in it we begin our blessed rest, in it we do daily proceed in
profityng more and more. But because we have still a continual war with the
flesh, it shall not be ended until that saying of Esaye be fulfilled, Esa.
lxvi.x^iij.
concerning the continuyng of new Moon with new moon, of Sabbat with
Sabbat, i. Cor. xv.xxviij.
even the^ when God shall be all in all. It may seem therefore yt the Lord has by
the.vij. day set forth to his people the perfection to come of his Sabbat at
the last day, that our whole lite might by continual meditation of the
Sabbat, aspire to this perfection.

If any man mislyke this observation of the number as a matter to Esa. ^viii,
xiii.
If thou turn away thy ^oote from the Sabbat, that thou do not thine own
will in my holy day, and shall call the Sabbat delicate and holy of the
glorious Lord, and shall glorify him while thou do not thine own ways,
and sek^st not thine own will to speak the word, then shall thou be de^^ted
in the Lord, etc. But it is no doubt, that by the coming of our Lord Christ,
so much as was ceremonial herein, was abrugate. For he is the truth, by
whose presence all figures do vanish away: he is the body of sight, whereof
the shadows are leite. He, I s^ye, is the ^rue fulfillyng of the Sabbat, To.
vi.iiii
we being buried with him by ^^pti^me, are grafted into the fellowship of his
death, that we being made partakers of the resurrection, we may walk in
newness o^ life. Therefore in an other place the Apostle writes, that the
Sabbat was a shadow of a thing to come: and that the true body, that is to
say, the perfect substance of truth is in Christ, Coloss. ii.xvi. and. xvii,
which in the same place he has well declared. That is not contained in one
day, but in the whole course of our life, until that we being utterly dead to
our selves, be filled with the life of God. Therefore superstitious observing
of days ought to be far from Christians.

^
that thy man servant and thy maid servant may rest as well as thou:
remember that thou thy self did serve in Egypt. ^
Again in Exodus: that thy Ox and thy Ass may rest, and the son of thy
bo^d^woman may take breath. Who can deny that both these things do serve
for us as well as for the Jews? Me^^^ges at the church, are commanded us by
the word of God* and the necessity of them is susficiently known in the very
experience of life. (...) they be certainly appointed and have their ordinary
days, (...) can they be kept? ^ ^or. xiiij.xl.
All things by the sentence of the Apostle are to be done comely and in order
among us. But so far is it of, that co^^^^esse and order can be kept without
this policy and moderation, that there is at hand present trouble and ruin of
the church, if it be dissolved. Now if the same necessity be among us, for
relete whereof the Lord appointed the Sabbat to the Jews: let no man say that
it belongs nothing unto us. For our most provident and tender father, willed
no less to provide for our necessity than for the Jews. ^ut thou will say,
why do we not rather daily mete together, that the difference of days may be
taken away? I would to God, that were granted, and truly spiritual wisdom
was a thing worthy to have daily a piece of the time cut out for it. But if it
can not be obtained of the weakness of many to have daily metinges, and the
rule of charity does not suffer us to exact more of them, why should we not
(...) the order which we see laid upon us by the will of God?

Coloss. ij.^iii.
But Paul teaches that in keeping thereof they are not to be judged Christians,
because it is a shadow of a thing to come. Therefore he feared that he had
labored in vain among the Galathians because they did still observe days.
Gal. iiij.^^.
And to the Romans he a^^^^meth that it is superstition if any man do make
difference between day and day. ^
But who, sa^yng these mad men only does not see, of what obseruyng the
Apostle means? For they had no regard to this political end and the order
of the church, but whereas they kept them still as shadows of spiritual
things, they did even so much darken the glory of Christ and the light of the
Gospel. They did not therefore cesse from handy works, because they were
things that did call them away from holy studies and meditations, but for a
certain religion, that in cessinge from work they did dream that they still
kept their mysteries of old time delivered them. The Apostle, I say, inueyeth
against this disordered difference of days, and not against the lawefull
choice of days that serves for the quietness of Christian feloweship, for in
the Churches that he himself did ordeine, the Sabbat was kept to this use. For
he appoynteth the Corynthians the same day, i. Cor. xvj ij.
wherein they should gather the collection to releue the brothren at
Jerusalem. If they fear superstition, there was more danger thereof in the
feast days of the Jews, than in the Sundays that the Christians now have.
For, so as was expediente for the ouerthrowinge of superstition, the day that
the Jews religiouslye observed is taken away: and, so as was necessary for
keepinge of comclinesse, order, and quiet in the Church, an other day was
appointed for the same use.

Albeit the old fathers have not without reason of their choice, put Hist.
trip. lib. 9. c. 38
then that every man privately so often as he has leisure, should diligently
exercise himself in godly calling to mind the works of God, and also that we
al should keep the lawefull order of the Church appointed, for the hearing
of the word, for the ministration of the Sacraments and for public prayer:
thirdely that we should not ungently oppress them that be under us. And so
do the trifelynges of the false prophets vanish away that in the ages paste
have infected the people with a Iewyshe opinion, that so much as was
ceremonial in this commanudement is take away, which they in their tongue
call the appoyntinge of the seventh day, but that so much as is moral
remains, which is the keeping of one day in the weke. But that is nothing
else in effect, than for reproach of the Jews to change the day, and to keep
still the same holiness in their mind. For there still remains with us the
like signification of mystery in the days as was among the Jews. And truly
we see what good they have done by such doctrine. For they that cleave to their
constitutions, do by these as much as exceed the Jews in gross and carnal
superstition of Sabbat: so that the rebukinge that are readde in Isaie, Esa.
i.xiii. and lviij.xiij.
do no less fittly serve for them at these days, than for those that the
Prophet reproved in his time. Butte this general doctrine is principally to
be kept, that least religion should fall away or wax faint among us, holy
meetinges are to be diligently kept, and those outward helps are to be used
that are profitable for to nourishe the worshippinge of God.

The fifte Commandment.

The end of this commandment is, that because the Lord delyteth in the
preservation of his order, therefore he wills that those degrees of
preeminence which he has ordained be not broken, the sum therefore shall be
that we reverence those whom the Lord has set over us, that we yield to them
honor, obedience and thankefullnesse. Whereupon follows that it is forbidden
us, to withdraw any thing from their dignity, either by contempt or
obstinate or unthankfulness. For so does the word Honor, in the Scripture
signifies very largely: as when the Apostle says, i. Tim. xv.
that the elders which rule well are worthy of doble honor, he means not
oneli yt reverence is due unto them, but also such recompense as their
ministry deserves. And because this commandment of subjection, does most of
all disagree with the perverseness of man's nature, which as it swells with
greediness of climbing hie, so it hardly abides to be brought low:
therefore he has set that kind of superiority for example, which by nature
is most amiable and lest envious: because he might the easelyer meken and
reclaim o^re minds to the use of submission. Therefore the Lord does by little
and little train us to all lawefull subjection by that which is most easy to
bear, for as much as the rule of all is alike. For to whom he gives any
preeminence, he does communicate his own name with them, so far as is
necessary to preserve the same preeminence: The name of Father, God, and
Lord, do so belong unto him alone, that so often as we hear one of them named,
our mind must needs be touched with a feeling of his majesty. Therefore whom
he makes partakers of these things, he makes to glister with a certain
spark of his brightness, that they may be honorable every one according to
his degree. Therefore in him that is our father we have to consider somewhat of
ye nature of God, because he bears not the name of God without cause. He that
is our Prince or our Lord, has some partakinge of honor with God.

Exodus xxi. Leuit. xx.ix.
to which reverence very nature ought in a manner to instruct us. For they
are monsters and not men, that break the authorite of parents with dishonore
or stubbornness. Therefore the Lord commanded all the disobedient to their
parents, Leu. x.ix. Pro. x.x. Deu. xxi.xviij. Mat. xv.iiij. Ephesians. v.i. Coloss.
iij.xx.
to be slain, as men unworthy to enjoy the benefit of light, that do not
reknowledge by whose means they came into it. And by many additions of the
law it appears to be true that we have noted, that there are three parts
of honor that he here speaks of, Reverence, Obedience, and Thankfulness.
The first of these the Lord estabelysheth when he commands him to be
killed that curses his Father or his Mother, for there he punishes the
contempt and dishonor of them. The second he confirms when he appoints
the punishment of death for ye disobedient and rebellious children. To the
third belongs that saying of Christ in the fyftene of Matthew, that it is
the commandment of God that we do good to our parents. And so often as Paul
makes mention of a commandment, he expounds that therein obedience is
required.

There is annexed a promise for a commendation, which does the

Moreover, when the Lord promises the blessinge of this present life to the
children that honor their parents with such reverence as vengeance on them
by one mean or other. For we see how great a number of that sort of men
are slain in battles and in fraies, and some other tourmented in strange
unaccustomed fashions, and they all in a manner are a proof that this
threatninge is not vain. Butte if any escape to old age, sith in this life
being deprived of the blessinge of God, they do nothing butte miserably
languyshe and are reserved for greater pains hereafter, they are far from
being partakers of the blessyng promised to the Godly children. Butte this is
also by the way to be noted, that we are not commanded to obey them butte
in the Lord. And that is evident by the foundation before laid: ^or they
sit on hye in that place whereunto the Lord has advanced them, by
communicatinge with them a portion of his honor. Therefore the submission
that is used toward them, ought to be a step toward the honouringe of
that sovereign Father. Wherefore, if they move us to transgress the law,
then are they woorthyly not to be accounted parents, butte strangers that
labor to wythdrawe us from obedience to the true Father. And so is to be
thought of Princes, Lords and all sorts of superioures. For it is shameful
and against conuenience of reason, that their preeminence should prevail to
press down his highness, sith theyres as it hangs wholye upon it, so
ought only to guide us unto it.

The sixte Commandment.

The end of this commandment is, that for as much as God has bound
together all mankind with a certain unity, that every man ought to regard
the safety of all men, as a thing given him in charge. In sum therefore, all
violence and wrong, yea and all harm doing, whereby our neighbors body
may be hurt, is forbidden us. And therefore we are commanded, if there be
any power of succore in our travail to defend the life of our neighbors,
that we faithfully imploye the same, that we procure those things that may
make for their quiet, that we watch to keep them from hurt, and if they be
in any danger, that we give them our helping hand. If thou consider that it
is God the lawmaker that so says, then think withal that his meaning is by
this rule also to govern thy soul. For yt mere a fond thing to think, that
he which espieth the thoughts of the heart, and principally rests upon
them, should instruct nothing but the body to true righteousness. Therefore
the manslaughter of the heart is also forbidden in this law, and an inward
affection to preserve our brothers life is here given in commandment. The
hand in deed brings fourth ye manslaughter, but the mind conceiueth it,
when it is infected with wrath and hatred. Look whether thou can be angry
with thy brother without burning in desire to do him hurt. If thou can not be
angry with him, then can thou not hate him, for as much as hatred is nothing
butte an old rooted anger. Although thou dissemble and go about to wind
out thy self by vain circumstances: yet where anger or hatred is, there is
an effection to hurt. i. Iho^. v.
If thou will still dallye out with shyftes to defend it, it is already
pronounced by the mouth of the holy Ghooste, that he is a mansleyer that
hatethe his brother in his heart. It is pronounced by the mouth of the Lord
Christ, that he is gyltye of judgment that is angry with his brother: Mat.
v.xxv.
that he is gyltye of the counsel that says Racha: that he is gyltye of
Hell fire, that says unto him, Fool.

The Scripture notes two points of equity, upon which this

The seventh Commandment.
Thou shalt not commit
The end of the commandment is, that, because God loves charity and
cleanness, therefore all uncleanness ought to depart far away from us.
The sum therefore shall be, that we be defiled with no uncleanness or
lustful intemperance of the flesh: Whereunto answers the affyrmatiue
commandment, yt we chastely and continently order all the parts of our
life. Butte fornication he forbids by name, to which all unchaste lust
tends, that the fylthynesse of that which is more gross and sensible, for
somuche as it also defyleth the body, he might bring us to abhor all
filthy lust. Sith manne was created in this estate, not to live a solitary
life, butte to use a helper joined unto him: and sins that by the curse of
sin he is driven the more to this necessity, the Lord has in this behalf
provided help for him so much as was sufficient, when he ordained marryage,
when he sanctified with his blessing ye feloweship begone by his authority.
Whereby follows, that all other feloweship of man and woman out of marriage,
is accursed before him, and that the fellowship of marriage it self, was
ordained for remedy of necessity, that we should not run out into
unbridled lust. Therefore let us not flatter our selves, since we hear that
man can not be coupled with woman out of marriage, without the curse of God.

Psalm. xx.i and xiiij.
For the help of God is present only with those, that walk in his ways,
that in their vocation from which they do all wythdrawe them selves, which
forsakynge the helps of God, do travail to overcome and master their
necessities with vain rash boldness. The Lord affyrmeth that continence is
a singular gift of God, and of that sort that are not given generally, nor
universally to the whole body of the Church, but to a few members thereof.
For first he says, that there is a certain kind of men, that have gelded
them selves for the kyngedome of Heaven, that is, that they might the more
loosely and freely apply them selves to the affairs of the heavenly
kyngedome. But, that no man should think that such geldinge is in the power
of man, he showed a little before, that all men are not able to receive it,
butte they to whom it is peculiarlye given from heaven, Mat. xix.xij. Cor.
vij.vij
whereupon he concludes: He that can take it, let him take it. Butte Paul
yet affyrmeth it more plainly, where he writes, that every manne has his
propre gift of God, one thus, and an other thus.

and prepared to all duties of Godliness. And for as much as this benefit is
given to many but for a time, let every man so long absteyne from marriage as
he shall be meet to live to keep single estate. If strength fail him to tame
his lust, let him learn that the Lord has now laid upon him a necessity
to marry. i. Cor. vii^ ij. and ix.
This the Apostle shows when he commands that to avoid fornication every
man have his own wife, and every woman have her own husband, that he that
can not live continently, should marry in the Lord. First he declares, that
the most part of men are subject to the vice of incontinence: and then of
those that be subject unto it, he excepteth none, but commands all to that
only remedy, wherewith unchastity is resisted. Therefore if they that be
incontinent do neglect to help their infirmity by this mean, they sin even
in this that they obey not the commandment of the Apostle. Neither let him
flatter himself that touches not a woman as though he could not be
rebuked to unchastity, while in the mean season his mind burns inwardly
with lust. For Paul defines chastity to be a cleanness of the mind, j.
Cor. vi. xxiiii.
joined with chastity of the body. A woman unmarried (says he) thinks
upon those things that are of the Lord, for as much as she is holy both in
body and in spirit. Therefore when he byngeth a reason to confirm that
former commandment, he does not only say, that it is better for a man to
take a wife, than to defile him self with company of a harlote, but he
says, that it is better to marry than to burn.

Now if married folks do confess that their fellowship together is Am. lib. dc
phil.
This, awantonnesse Ambrose rereproued with a saying very sore in deed, but
not vnfyte for it, when he calls the housbande, the adulterer of his own
wife, which in bse of wedlock has no care of shamefastness or honesty.
Last of all, let us consider what lawemaker does here condemn fornication,
even he which sith of his own right he ought to possess us wholly,
requires pureness of the soul, spirit and body. Therefore when he
forbyddeth to commit fornication, he also forbids with wanton attire of
body, with uncleanly gestures, and with fylthy talk to lay wait to trappe
an others chastity. For that saying is not without good reason, which
Archelaus spoke to a yongma^ above measure wantonly an deintely clothed, that
it made no matter in what part he were filthilye unchaste: if we have regard
unto God that abhors all filthiness in what so ever part either of our
soul or body it appears. And to put thee out of doubt, remember that the
Lord here commends chastity. If the Lord require chastity* of us, then he
condemns all that ever is against it. Therefore if thou covet to show
obedience, neither let thy mind burn inwardly with evil lust, nor let
thine eyes run wantonly into corrupt affections, nor let thy body be
trimmed up for alluremente, nor let thy tongue with filthy talk entise thy
mind to like thoughts, nor let thy gluttonous belly inflame thee with
intemperance. For all these vices are, as it were, certain blottes, wherewyth
the pureness of chastity is be spotted.

The eyghte Commandment.

The end of this commandment is, because God abhors unrighteousness, yt
every man may have his own renred unto him. The sum therefore shall be,
that we are forbidden to gape for other men's goods, and that therefore we are
commanded every man to employ his faithful travail to preserve to each manne
his own goods. For thus we ought to think, that what every man possesses is
not happened unto him by chance of fortune, but by the distribution of the
sovereign Lord of all things, and therefore no man's goods can be gotten from
him by evil means, but y^ wrong be done to the disposition of God. But of
theftes there be many kinds: one stands in Uiolence, when the goods of an
other are by any manner of force and robbing licenciousnesse bereued. The other
kind consists in malicious deceit, where they are guylefully conveyed
away. An other sort there is that stands in a more hidden sutteltie, when
they are wroonge from the owner by color of law. An other sort in flattery,
where they are sucked away by pretense of gift. But, least we should tarry
to long upon rentinge of all the several kinds of theft, let us know,
that all crafty means whereby the possessions and money of our neighbors
are conveyed unto us, when they ones go by crooked ways from syncerenesse of
heart, to a desire to beguile, or by any mean to do hurt, are to be
accounted for theftes. Although by pleadinge the law, they may prevail, yet
God does not otherwise way the^. For he sees ye long captious suttleties,
wherewith ye guilefulman begins to entangle the simpler mind, till at length
he draw him into his nets. He seethe the hard and ungentle laws, wherewyth
the myghtier oppresses and throws down the weaker. He sees yt
allurementes, wherewith as with baiteth hooks, yt crastier takes thee unware.
All which things are hidden from the judgment of man, and come not in his
knoweledge. And this manner of wrong is not only in money, in wares, or in
lands, but in every man's right. For we defraude our neighbor of his goods,
if we deny him those duties which we are bound to do for him. If any idle
factore o^ baylye do devour his masters substance, and is not heedefull to the
care of this thrifte, if he either do wrongfully spoil, or do ryoutously
waste the substance committed unto him, if a servant do mock his master, if he
disclose his secrets by any means, if he betraye his life and his goods:
again if the Lord do cruelty oppress his householde, they are before God
gylty of theft. For he both withholdeth and conueieth an other man's goods,
which perfourmeth not that which by the office of his calling he owes to
other.

We shall therefore ryghtly obey this commandment, if being contented and
place he owes to his neighbors, and let him pay that he owes. Moreover
our mind ought always to have respect to the lawemaker, that we may
know that this law is made as well for our minds, as for our hands, that
men should study to defend and further the commodities and profit of other.

The nynthe Commandment.
Thou shalt not be a lyeng witness against
The end of this commandment is, that because God which is truth abhors
lyinge, we ought to observe truth without deceitful color. The sum
therefore shall be, that we neither hurt any man's name either with slanders
or false reports, nor hinder him in his goods by lyeng: finally that we
offend no man, by lust to speak evil, or to be busy: with which
prohibition is joined a commandment, that so far as we may, we employe
our faithful endeavor for every man in affyrminge the truth, to defend the
safety both of his name and goods. It seems that the Lord purposed to
expound the meaning of his commandment in the three and twenty Chapter of
Exodus in these words. Exodus xxiij i. Leuit. xix xv.
Thou shalt not use the voice of lyeng, nor shalt join thy hand to speak
false witness for the wicked. Again, Thou shalt flee lyeng. Also in an other
place he does not only call us away from lyeng in this point that we be no
accusers, or whysperers in the people, but also that no man deceive his
brother, for he forbids them both in several commandments. Truly it
is no doubt, but that as in the commandments before, he has forbidden
cruelty, unchastity and covetousness, so in this he restrains falshoode.
Whereof there are two parts as we have noted before. For either we offend
the good name of our neighbors by maliciousness and froward mind to
backbite, or in lyeng and sometime in evil speakinge we hinder their
commodities. There is no dyfference whether in this place be understood
solemn and judicial testimony, or common testimony that is used in private
talks. For we must always have recourse to this prynciple, that of all the
general kinds of vices one special sort is set for an exaumple, whereunto
the rest may be referred, and that that is cheefely chosen, wherein the
fylthynesse of the fault is most apparent. All be it, it were convenient to
extend it more generally, to slanders and sinister backebytinges, where with
our neighbors are wrongefully grieved, for that falshoode of witnessing
which is used in judicial courts, is never without perjury. But periuries
in so much as they do prophaine and defile the name of God, are already
sufficiently met withal in the third commandment. Wherefore the right
use of this commandment is, that our tongue in affirminge the truth to serve
both the good name and profit of our neighbors. The equity thereof is more
than manifest. For if a good name be more precious than any treasures, what so
ever they be: then is it no less hurt to a man to be spoiled of the
goodness of his name than of his goods. And in learning his substance,
sometime false witness does as much as vyolence of hands. And yet yt is
marvelous with how neglygent carelessnesse men do commonly offend in this
point, so that there are found very few that are not notably sick of this
desease: we are so much delyted with a certain poisoned sweetness both in
searchynge out and in dyscolynge the euells of other. And let us not think
that it is a sufficient excuse, if oftentimes we lie not. For he that
forbyddeth thy brothers name to be defiled with lyenge, wylleth also that it
be pre^erued untouched so far as the truth will suffer. For howesoeuer he
takes head to him self only, so that he tell no lie, yet in the same he
secretly confesses that he has some charge of him. Butte this ought to
suffice us to keep safe our neighbors good name, that God has care of yt.
Wherefore without doubt all evil speakinge is utterly condemned. Butte we
mean not by evil speaking, that rebukynge which is used for chastismente:
nor accusation, or judicial process, whereby remedy is sought for an evil,
nor publyke reprehension which tends to put other sinners in fear, nor
bewrayinge of faults to them for whose safety it behooved that they should
be forewarened least they should been in danger by ignorance: butte we
mean only hateful accusynge, which aryseth of malyciousnesse and of a wanton
will to backebyte. Also this commandment is extended to this point, that we
covet not to use a scoffinge kind of plesauntnesse, but myngeled with bitter
tauntes, thereby bytyngely to touch other men's faults under pretense of
pastime, as many do that seek praise of merry conceytes with other menes
shame yea and grief, also when by such wanton raylynge many times our
neighbors are not a little reproched. Now if we bend our eyes to the
lawemaker, which must according to his ryghtefull authority bear rule no
less over the ears and mind than over the tongue: truly we shall find yt
greedynesse to hear backebytynges, and a hasty readynesse to evil judgments
are no less forbidden. For it were very fond if a man should think that
God hates the fault of evil speaking in the tongue, and does not disalowe
the fault of evil maliciousness in the heart. Wherefore if there be in us a
true fear and love of God, let us endeavor so far as we may and as is
expedient, and as charity bears, that we give neither our tongue, nor our
ears to evil speakinges, and bitter iestynges, least we rashely without
cause yield our minds to indirecte suspicions. But being indifferent
expositors of all men's sayings and doings, let us both in judgment ears
and tongue gently preserve their honor safe.

The tenthe Commandment.
Thou shalt not covet thy neighbors house. etc.
The end of this commandment is, yt because ye lords will is ye our soul be
wholi possessed with ye affection of love: al lust is to be shaken out of our
mind that is contrary to charity. The sum therefore shall be, that noe
thought creep into us, which may move our minds with a concupiscens
hurtefull and tourninge toward an others loss: wherewyth on the other side
agrees the commandment, that whatsoever we conceive, purpose, will or study
upon, be joined with the benifite and commodity of our neighbors. But
here, as it seems, arises a hard and combersome dyfficultie. For if it be
truly said of us before that under the names of fornication and theft are
contained the lust of fornication, and the purpose to hurt and deceive, it
may seem superfluously spoken, that the coveting of other men's goods
should afterward be severally forbidden us. Butte the distinction between
purpose and coveting, will easylye loose us this knotte. For purpose (as we
have meante in speakinge of yt in the other commandments before) is
delyberate consent of will, when lust has subdued the mind: butte coveting
may be without any such either aduisment or assent, when the mind is only
prycked and tyckled with vain and perverse obiectes. As therefore the Lord
has heretofore commanded, that the rule of charity should govern our
wylles, studyes and works: so he now commands the co^ceptions of our
maynde to be directed to the same rule, that there be none of them crooked
and wrythen, that may provoke our mind an other way. As he has forbidden
our mind to be bowed and led into wrath, hatred, fornication, robbery,
and lyinge: so he does now forbid us to be moved thereunto.

commonly do deceive us with a false image of delyghte: because he would
learn nothing to concupiscence when he draws yt from these things, upon
the which yt most of all rages and triumphs. Lo, here is the second
Table of the law, wherein we are taught sufficiently what we owe to men for
Gods sake, upon consideration whereof hangs the whole rule of charity.
Wherefore you shall but vaynely call upon those duetyes that are contained in
this Table, unless your doctrine do stay upon the fear and reverence of
God, as upon her foundation. As for them which seek for two commandments
in the prohibition of couetinge, the wise reader, though I say nothing, will
judge that by wrong division, they tear in sunder that which was butte one.
And it makes nothing against us, that this word, Thou shall not covet, is
the second time repeted, for after that he had first set the house, then
he renteth the parts thereof, beginning at the wife: whereby it plainly
appears, that (as the Hebrews do very well) it ought to be read in one
whole sentence, and that God in effect commands, that all that every man
possesses, should remain safe and untouched, not only from wrong and lust
to defraude them, but also from the very least desire that may move our
minds.

But now to what end the whole law tends, it shall not be hard Deu. x.xij
And now Israel, what does the Lord thy God ask of thee, butte that thou
fear the Lord, and walk in his ways? love him and serve him in all thy
heart, and in all thy soul, and keep his commandments? And he cessed not
still to sing the same song again unto them, so often as he purposed to show
the end of the law. The doctrine of the law has such respect hereunto,
De. vi.v. and xj.xiv.
that it joins man, or as Moses in an other place terms it, makes manne to
stick fast to his God in holiness of life. Now the perfection of that
holiness consists in the two principal points already rehearsed, That we
love the Lord God withal our heart, all our soul, and all our strength,
Mat. xxij.
and our neighbor as our selves. And the first in deed is, that our
soul be in all parts filled with the love of God. From that by and by of it
self fourth flows the love of our neighbor. Which thing the Apostle
shows when he writes, i. Tim. i.^v.
that the end of the law is Love out of a pure conscience, and a farthe not
fained. You see how, as it were, in the head is set conscience and faith
unfeigned, that is to say in one word true Godliness, and that from thense is
charity deceived. Therefore he is deceived, whosoever thinks that in the
law are taught only certain rudimentes and first Introductions of
righteousness, wherewyth men became to be taught their first schoolynge,
butte not yet dyrected to the true mark of good works: whereas beyond that
sentence of Moses and this of Paul, you can desire nothing as wantynge of
the hygheste perfection. For how far, I pray you, will he proceed that
will not be contented with this institution, whereby manne is instructed to
the fear of God, to spiritual worshypynge, to obeinge of the commandments,
to follow the uprightness of the way of the Lord: finally to pureness of
conscience, sincere faith and love? Whereby is confirmed that exposition of
the law, which searches for and finds out in the commandments thereof
all the duties of Godliness and love. For they that follow only the dry and
bare principles, as if it taught but the one half of Gods will, know not the
end thereof, as the Apostle witnesses.

Mat. v.xiij.
For Christ speaks of those works wherewith man ought to prove him self
righteous. This reason if we note, we will also cesse to marvel why, when a
young man asked him what be the commandments by kepinge whereof we enter into
life: he answered these things only: Thou shalt not kill. Thou shall not
commit adultery. Mat. xix.xxviij.
Thou shalt not steal. Thou shalt bear no false witness. Honor thy
Father and thy Mother. Love thy neighbor as thy self. For the obeying of the
first Table consisted in manner all either in the affection of the heart, or
in ceremonies: the affection of the heart appeared not, and as for the
ceremonies the hypocrites did continually use. But the works of charity are
such, as by them we may declare a perfect righteousness. But this comes
each where so often in the prophets, that it must needs be familiar to a
reader but meanly exercised in them. For in a manner always when they echorte
to repentance, they leave out the first Table, and only call upon Faith,
Judgment, Mercy and Equity. And thus they do not ouerskippe ye fear of God,
but they require the earnest proof thereof by the tokens of yt. This is well
known, that when they speak of the keepinge of the law, they do for the most
part rest upon the second Table, because therein the study of righteousness
and uprightness is most openly seen. It is needless to rehearse the places,
because every man will of himself easyly mark that which I say.

Psalm. xvj.
therefore he requires not our duties to him self, but does exercise us in
good works toward our neighbor. Therefore not without cause ye Apostle sets
ye whole perfection of ye holy ones in charity. Ephesians. i.v. Colos. iii.xiiij.
Romans xiij
And not inconuenientlye in an other place he calls ye same the fullfillinge
of the law: adding that he has performed the law that loves his
neighbor. Again, That all the law is comprehended in one word, Love thy
neighbor as thy self. For he teaches no other thing but the same which
Christ does when he says: Matt. vij.xij.
Whatsoever ye will that men do to you, do ye the same to them. For this is the
law and the Prophets. It is certain, that in the law and the Prophets,
Faith and all that belongs to the true worship of God, holds the principal
place, and that Love is beneth it in a lower degree: but the Lords meaning is,
yt in the law is only prescribed unto us an observation of right and equity,
wherein we be exercised to testify our Godly fear of him, if there be any in
us.

Here therefore let us stick fast, that then our life shall be best framed
Aug. lib. 1. de doctrine. Chri. c. 23.
that was naturally of it self, to much beyond measure. Whereby it plainly
appears, that not the love of our selves, but the love of God and of our
neighbor is the keeping of the commandments, and that he lives best and
most holyly, that (so nere as may be) lives and trauileth least for him
self, and that no man lives worse and more wyckedly than he that lives and
trauileth for himself and only thinks upon and seeks for things of his
own. And the Lord, the more to express with how great ernestnes we ought to
be led to the love of our neighbors, appointed it to be measured by the love
of our selves as by a rule, because he had no other more vehement or stronger
affection to measure it by. And the force of the manner of speaking is
diligently to be weyed. For he does not, as certain Sophisters have foolishly
dreamed, give the first degree to ye love of our selves, and the second to
charity, but rather that affection of love which we do all naturally draw to
our selves, he gives away unto other, wherevpo^ the Apostle says, i. Cor.
xiij v.
yt Charity seeks not her own. And their reason is not to be esteemed worth a
hear yt ye thing ruled is ever inferiore to his Rule. For God does not make ye
love of our selves a rule whereunto charity toward other should be subject, but
whereas by perverseness of nature, ye affection of love was wont to rest in our
selves, he shows that now it ought to be else where spread abroad, yt we should
with no less cherefulnesse, feruentnesse, and carfulness be ready to do good
to our neighbor than to our selves.

Now since Christ has showed in the parable of the Samaritane ye Luc. x.xxxvi.
there is no cause whi we should restrain ye commandment of love within ye
bonds of our own frendshippes and acquaintances. I deny not yt the nerer yt
any man is unto us, ye more familiarli he is to be helped with our endeavors to
do him good. For so the ordie of huma^itie req^ireth, ye so many more duties of
friendship men should communicate together, as they are bound together with
streighter bonds of ky^red, familiarity or neighebourehoode, and that without
any offense of God, by whose providence we are in a manner driven thereunto. But
I say that al mankind without exception is to be embraced with one affection
of charity: and that in this behalf is no dyfference of Barbarous or Grecian,
of worthy or unworthy, of friend or foe, because they are to be considered
in God and not in them selves: from which consideration when we turn away,
it is no marvel if we be entangled with many erroures. Wherefore if we will
keep the true trade of louinge, we must not turn our eyes unto man, the
sight of whom would ofter enforce us to hate than to love, but unto God
which commands that the love which we offer him, be poured abroad among all
men: that this be a perpetual foundation, that whatsoever the man be, yet he
ought to be loved because God is loved.

Pro. xxv.xxi. Exodus xxiij iiij.
to set into the right way his Oxen or Asses strayinge out of the way, or to
ease them when they faint under their burden? Shall we do good to his beasts
for his sake without any good will to him self? What? is not the word of the
Lord everlasting: Deu. xxxi^ ix^v. Leu. xix.xviiii.
Leave vengeance to me, and I will requite it? Which also is spoken more
plainly at large in an other place. Seek not vengeance, neither be mindful
of the injury of thy Citizens. Either let them blot these things out of the
law, or let them acknoweledge yt the Lord was a lawemaker, and not lieingly
feign that he was a council geuer.

Matt. v.xliiij.
Love your enemies, do good to them that hate you, pray for them that
persecute you, bless them that curse you, that ye may be the children of
your father which is in heaven. Lib. de com punctione cordis.
Who can not hear reason with Chrysostom, that by so necessary a cause it
plainly appears that they are no exhortations but commandments? What
remains more when we be blotted out of the number of the children of God? But
by their opinion, only Monks shall be the children of the heavenly father,
they only shall be bold to call upon God their Father: what shall the Church
do in the mean season? it shall by like right be sent away to the Gentiles
and Publicans. Mat. v.xlvi.
For Christ says: If ye be freindely to your friends, what favor look you
for thereby? do not the gentiles and publicans the same? But we shall be in
good case forsooth, if the title of Christians be left unto us, and the
inheritance of the kingdom of heaven taken away from us. Lib. de doctri,
Ch^^stia. c. 30.
And no less strong is Augustines argument. When (says he) the Lord
forbids to commit fornication, he no less forbids to touch the wife of
thine enemy than of thy friend. When he forbids theft, he gives leave to
steal nothing at all, either from thy friend or from thine enemy. But these
two, not to steal, and not to commit fornication, ^a. xiij.^^
Paul brings within the compass of the rule of love, yea and teaches that
they are contained under this commandment, Thou shall love thy neighbor as
thy self. Therefore, either Paul must have been a false expositour of the
law, or it necessarily follows hereby, that our enemies ought also to be
loved, even by commandment, like as our friends. Therefore they do truly
bewraye themselves to be the children of Satan, that do so licentiously shake
of the common yoke of the children of God. It is to be doubted, whether they
have published this doctrine with more gross dullness or shamelessness. For
there are none of the old writers that do not pronounce as of a thing
certain, that these are mere commandments. And that even in Gregory's age
it was not doubted of, appears by his own affirmation, for he without
controversy takes them for commandments. And how foolishly do they reason?
They say that they are to weighty a burden for Christians. As though there
could be devised any thing more weighty, than to love God with all our heart,
with all our soul, with all our strength. In comparison of this law any thing
may be compted easy, whether it be to love our enemy, or to lay away all
desire of revenge out of our mind. In deed all things are hye and hard to
our weakness, even the least tittle of the law. It is the Lord in whom we
use strength. Let him give what he commands, and command what he will.
Christian men to be under the law of grace, is not vnbrydledly to wander
without law, but to be graffed in Christ, by whose grace they are free from the
curse of the law, and by whose spirit they have a law written in their
hearts. This grace Paul vnproprely called a law, alludyng to the law of
God, against which he did set it in comparison. But these men do in the name of
the law, dispute upon a matter of nothing.

Of like sort it is, that they called Ueniall sin, both secret
ungodliness from the obedience of the law. Because the enemies that do
therein arise against his kingdom, and interrupt his decrees, do prove that
God has not his throne well stablished in our conscience. As for the last
commandment, we have already showed that it properly belongs hereunto. Has
any desire of mind pricked us? we are already gilty of couetyng, and
therewithal are made transgressors of the law. Because the Lord does forbid
us, not only to purpose and practice any thing that may be to an others loss,
but also to be pricked and swell with couetyng it. But the curse of God does
always hang over the transgression of the law. We can not therefore prove
even the very least desires free from judgment of death. In weyeng of sins
(says Augustine) let us not bring false balances to weye what we list and
how we list at our own pleasure, Lib. 2. de (...) Donatist. cap. 6.
saying: this is heavy, and this is light. But let us bring Gods balance out of
the holy Scriptures, as out of the Lords tresorie, and let us therein weye
what is heavy: rather let us not weye, but reknowledge things already weyed by
the Lord. But what says the Scripture? Truly when Paul says that the
reward of sin is death, he shows that he knew not this stinkyng
distinction. Sith we are to much inclined to hypocrisy, this cherishement
thereof ought not to have been added to fla^ter our slothful consciences.

Matthew. v.xix.
He that transgresses one of the least of these commandments, and teaches
men so, shall be compted none in the kingdom of heaven. Are not they of that
sort, when they dare so extenuate the tra^sgression of the law, as if it were
not worthy of death? but they ought to have considered, not only what is
commanded, but what he is that commands, because his authority is
diminished in every transgression, how little so ever it be, of the law that he
has given in commandment. Is it a small matter with them, that Gods majesty
be offended in any thing? Moreover if God has declared his will in the law,
what so ever is contrary to the law, displeases him. Will they imagine the
wrath of God to be so disarmed, that punishment of death shall not forthwith
follow upon them? And he himself has pronounced it plainly, if they would
rather find in their hearts to hear his voice, than to trouble the clear
truth with their unsavory suttelties of argument. Eze. xviij.xx. Romans
vi.xxiij.
The soul (says he) yt sins, the same shall die. Again, which I even
now alleged: The reward of sin is death. But albeit they grant it to be a
sin, because they can not deny it: yet they stand stiff in this, that it
is no deadly sin. But sith they have hitherto to much borne with their own
madness, let them yet at length learn to wax wiser. But if they continue in
dotage, we will bid them farewell: and let the children of God learn this, that
al sin is deadly, because it is a rebellion against the will of God, which
of necessity provoke his wrath, because it is a breach of the law, upon
which the judgment of God is pronounced without exception: and that the
sins of the holyones are venial or pardonable, not of their own nature, but
because they obtain pardon by the mercy of God.

The. ix. Chapter. That Christ, although he was known to the Jews under the
law, yet was delivered only by the Gospel.
Because it pleased God in the old time not vainly by expiations Mal. iiii.ii.
after that he had bidden ye Jews to take heed to the law of Moses, and to
continue in study thereof, (because after his death there should come a
certain interruption of the office of the Prophets) did forthwith declare,
that there should arise a son of righteousness. In which words he teaches,
that the law avails to this purpose to hold the godly in expectation of
Christ to come: but yet that there was much more light to be hoped for, when
he should be come in deed. i. Pet. i.xii.
For this reason does Peter say, that the Prophets did make search, and
diligently enquire, of the salvation that is now opened by the Gospel: and
that it was reveled unto them, that they should minister, not to themselves,
nor to their own age but unto us, those things that are declared by the
Gospel. Not that their doctrine was unprofitable to the people in old time, or
nothing auailed themselves: but because they enjoyed not the treasure which God
sent unto us by their hand. For at this day the grace whereof they testified, is
familiarly set before our eyes. And whereas they did but a little sippe of it,
there is offered unto us a more plentiful enioyeng thereof. Therefore Christ
himself, which affirms yt he had witness borne him by Moses, yet extolleth
the mesure of grace whereby we excel the Jews. For speaking to the Disciples,
John. v.xlvi. Mat. xiii.xvi. Luc. x.xxiij.
he said: Blessed are the eyes that see that which ye see, and blessed are the
ears that here athat which ye hear. For many kings and Prophets have
wished it, and have not obtained it. This is no small commendation of the
reuelyng of the gospel, that God preferred us before the holy fathers that
excelled in rare godliness. With which sentence that other place disagreeth
not, where it is said, John. vi^^ lvi.
that Abraham saw the day of Christ, and reioysed. For though the sight of a
thing far distant was somewhat dark, yet he wanted nothing to the assurance
of good hope. And thense came that joy which accompanied the holy Prophet,
even to his death. And that saying of John Baptist, John. i* xviij.
No man has seen God at any time, the only begotten that is in the bosom of
the father, has declared him unto us, does not exclude the godly which had been dead before him, from the ^elowship of the understanding and light that
shines in the person of Christ. But co^paryng their estate with ours, he
teaches yt those mysteries, which they saw but darkly under shadows, are
manifest to us: as the author of the episte to y^ Hebrews does well set out,
saying, that: God diversely and many ways spoke in old time by the Prophets,
Hebr. i.^*
but now by his beloved Son. Although therefore that only begotten one, which
is at this day to us the brightness of the glory, and the point of the
substance of God the father, was in old time known to the Jews, as we have
in an other place alleged out of Paul, that he was the guide of the old
deliverance: yet is it true, which the same Paul else where teaches, ii. Cor.
iiii vi.
that God which commanded the light to shine out of darkness, has now
shined upon our hearts to set forth the knowledge of the glory of God in the
face of Jesus Christ: because when he appeared in this his image, he did in a
manner make himself visible, in comparison of the dark and shadowish form that
had been of him before. And so much the more foul and detestable is their
unthankfulness and perverseness, that are here so blind at midde day. And
therefore Paul says, that their minds are darkened by Satan, that they
should not see the glory of Christ shining in the gospel, though there be no
veil set between them and it.

i. Tim. iiii.vi.
I grant truly, that in that respect that Paul calls the gospel the
doctrine of faith, all the promises that we here and there find in the law,
concerning the free forgiveness of sins, whereby God reconcileth men to
himself, are accounted parts thereof. For he co^pareth faith against these
terrors, wherewith the conscience should be troubled and vexed, if salvation
were to be sought by works. Whereupon follows that in taking the name of the
gospel largely, there are contained under it all the testimonies that God in
old time gave to the fathers, of his mercy and fatherly favor. But in the
more excellent signification of it, I say it is applied to the publishyng of
the grace given in Christ. And that meaning is not only received by common use,
but also hangs upon the authority of Christ and the Apostles. Whereupon this
is proprely ascribed unto him, Mat. iiii.ix. Mar. i.i.
that he preached the Gospel of the kingdom. And Mark makes his preface in
this manner, The beginning of the Gospel of Jesus Christ. And there is no need
to gather places to prove a thing sufficiently known. Christ therefore by his
coming has made clear the life and immortality by the Gospel. ii. Tim. i.x.
By which words Paul means, not that the fathers were drowned in darkness
of death, until the son of God did put on flesh: but clayming this
prerogative of honor to ye gospel, he teaches that it is a new and unwonted
kind of message, whereby God performed those things that he had promised,
that the truth of his promises should be fulfilled in the person of the Son.
For although the faithful have always found by experience, that same saying of
Paul to be true, that in Christ are all the promises, yea and Amen, because
they were sealed in their hearts: yet because he has accomplished al parts
of our salvation in ^his flesh, therefore that self lively deliueryng of the
things rightfully obtained a new and singular title of praise. Ioh. i.li.
Whereupon comes that saying of Christ: Hereafter ye shall see the heavens
open, and the Angels of God ascendyng and descendyng upon the son of man.
For though he seem to have relation unto the ladder showed in a vision to the
Patriarch Jacob: yet he sets out the excellency of his coming by this
mark, that he opened the gate of heaven to all men, that the entry thereof
may be stand familiarly open to all men.

to extol the greatness of the grace of Christ, utterly abolissheth the
promises, as if they were ended together with the law. He lays for him, that
by the faith of the Gospel there is brought unto us the accomplishment of all
the promises: as though there were no difference between us and Christ. I did
in deed even now declare that Christ left nothing unperformed of the whole
sum of our salvation: but it is wrongfully gathered thereupon, that we do
already enjoy the benefits purchaced by him, as though that saying of Paul
were false, that our salvation is hid in hope. I grant in deed, that we by
beleuyng in Christ, do also pass from death to life: But in the mean season
we must hold this saying of John, that although we know we be the children
of God, yet it has not as yet appeared, till we shall be like unto him: that is,
till we shall see him such as he is. Therefore although Christ offer unto us
in his Gospel present fullness of spiritual good things, yet the enioyeng
thereof lies still hid under the keeping of hope, till being unclothed of the
corruptible flesh, we be transfigured into the glory of him that goes before
us. In the mean time the holy ghost bids us to rest upon the promises,
whose authority ought with us to put to silence all the barkinges of that
filthy dog. i. Tim. iii^ viii. ii. Tim. i. ii. Cor. vii.
For as Paul witnesses, godliness has a promise as well of the life to
come, as of ye life present. For which reason he boasts that he is an Apostle
of Christ, according to the promise of life that is in him. And in an other
place he puts us in mind, that we have the same promises, which in the
old time were given to the holy men. Finally, he sets this for the sum of
felicity, that we are sealed up with the holy spirit of promise, but yet we do
no otherwise enjoy Christ, but so far as we embrace him clothed with his
promises. Whereby it comes to pass, that he in deed dwells in our hearts,
and yet we wander in yourney abroad from him: because we walk by faith and not
by sight. And these two things do not ill agree together: that we possess in
Christ all that pertains to the perfection of the heavenly life: and yet that
faith is a beholding of good things that are not seen. Only there is a
difference to be noted in the nature or quality of the promises: because the
Gospel shows with her finger that thing, which the law did shadow under
figures.

And hereby also is their error convinced, which do never otherwise and to
join the body to the shadows. For when Christ says, that the law and the
Prophets were until John: he makes not the fathers subject to the curse,
which the bound servants of the law can not escape: but rather only that
they were instructed with certain ^udimentes, so as they stayed a great way
beneath the heygheth of the doctrine of the Gospel. To. l.xvi.
Therefore Paul calling the Gospel the power of God, to salvation to every
beleuer, by and by adds, that it has witness of the law and the Prophets.
But in the end of the same Epistle, although he show that the little of praise
of Jesus Christ is the revelation of the mystery kept secret in everlasting
times: yet he does qualifye that saying, with adding an exposition, teaching
that he is openly showed by the writings of the Prophets. Whereupon we gather,
that when we are to entreat of the whole law, the Gospel differs from the
law only in respect of the plain disclosyng thereof. But yet for the
inestimable flowyng store of grace, which has been laid open for us in
Christ, it is not without cause said, that at his coming the heavenly
kingdom of God was erected in earth.

Matt. xi.xi.
For so do those words of his mean: y^ though John excel among the sons
of women, yet he that is least in the kingdom of heaven, is greater than he.
Because he does not there commend the persons of men, but after he had
preferred John before all the Prophets, he auaunceth the preaching of the
Gospel to the hiest degree: which preaching we see in an other place
signified by the kingdom of heaven. Ioh. i.xxiii
But whereas John himself does answer that he is but a voice, as though he
were inferior to the prophets, he does not that for feigned humilities sake,
but means to teach that the propre office of the Ambassador was not
committed to him, but that he only executes the office of an apparitor: as it
was forespoken by Malachie: Mal. iiii.v.
Behold, I send Elias the prophet, before that the great and terrible day of
the Lord do come. And truly he did nothing else in the whole course of his
ministry, but endeavor to get disciples to Christ: as also Esaye proves,
that this was enjoined him from God. And in this sense Christ is called a
candell burning and shinyng, John. v.xxiv.
because the broad day had not yet appeared. And yet this is no let, but that
he may be reckened among the publishers of the Gospel, like as he used the
same Baptism, which was afterward delivered to the Apostles. But that which
he began, was not fulfilled but by the Apostles, with free procedynge, after
that Christ was taken up from them into the heavenly glory.

The. x. Chapter. Of the likeness of the old and new Testamen^.
BY the things aforesaid it may now appear evidently, that

And both these points may be made plain with one word. The to the Lord,
was vpholden not by any merits of theires, but by the only mercy of God that
called them. Thirdly, that they both had and knew Christ the mediator, by
whom they should both be joined to God and enyoye his promises. Of which
points, because the second paraduenture is not yet sufficiently known, it
shall in place appointed for it be declared at large. For we shall confirm by
many and clear testimonies of the Prophets, that it was of his own mere
goodness and tender favor, what so ever good the Lord at any time did, and
promised to the people of Israel. The third also has already had here and
there some plain declaratio^s of it, and we have not left the first altogether
untouched.

Romans i.ij.
when he says, that God the Father long before by the Prophets in the holy
Scriptures promised the Gospel, which he afterward published according to
the time appointed. To. iij.^xi.
Again, that the righteousness of faith which is caught by the Gospel it
self, has witness of the law and the Prophets. For the gospel does not
hold the hearts of men in the joy of this present life, but lifts them up
to the hope of immortality: does not fasten them to earthly delites, but
preaching to the^ a hope laid up in heaven, does in a manner transport them
thither. For thus he defines in an other place. Ephesians. i.xiij
Sins that ye believed the Gospel, ye are sealed up with the holy Spirit of
prymise, which is the earnest of our inheritance, for the redemption of the
possession purchaced. Again, we have heard of your faith in Christ Jesus, Col.
i.iiii.
and of your charity toward the holy ones, for the hopes sake that is laid up
for you in heaven, whereof ye have heard by the true speech of the gospel.
Again: He has called us by the gospel to the partakynge of the glory of our
lord Jesus Christ. 1 Thessalonians. ii xiiii.
Wherefore it is called, both the word of salvation, and the power of God to
save the faithful, and the kingdom of heaven. Now if the doctrine of the
gospel be spiritual, and opens the entry to the possession of an
incorruptible life: let us not think that, they to whom it was promised and
declared, did pass over and neglect the care of their soul, and lie dully
like beasts in sekyng pleasures of the body. Neither let any man here cavil
that the promises which are sealed in the law and the Prophets, concerning
the gospel, were ordained for the new people. For within a little after that
which he spoke of the Gospel promised in the law, he adds, that all the
things that the law contains, are without doubt properly directed to them
that are under the law. I grant in deed it is in an other argument. But he
was not so forgetful, that when he had ones said that all the things which
the law contains belong to the Jews, To. iii.xix.
he did not remember what in a few verses before he had affirmed of the
gospel promised in the law. Wherefore the Apostle shows most plainly, that
the old Testament chiefly tended to the life to come, when he says, that under
it are contained the promises of the gospel.

By the same reason follows, both that it stood upon the free Ioh. viii.lvi.
we have a notable sentence of the Lord. Abraham reioysed that he might see my
day, he saw it and was glad. And the same thing which Christ there testifies
of Abraham, the Apostle shows that it was universal in the faithful people,
Heb. xiii.viii.
when he says, that Christ abides, yesterday, this day, and for ever. For he
speaks not there only of the eternal godhed of Christ, but also of his
power, which was continually opened to the faithful. Wherefore both the
blessed Uirgin and Zachary in their songs, Luc. i.liiix and lxxii.
do say, that the salvation reveled in Christ, is the performance of the
promises, which God in old time had made to Abraham and the Patriarchs. If
the Lord in geuyng his Christ, discharged his old oath, it can not be said but
that the end thereof was always in Christ, and everlasting life.

Yea and the Apostle does make the Israelites egall with us, not i. Cor. x.i.
and xi.
that they should not run into the like offenses, he begins with this
preface, that there is no cause why we should challenge any prerogative unto our
selves, to deliver us from the vengeance of God which they sustained, for
as much as the Lord did not only grant unto them the same benefits, but he
has gloriously set forth his grace among them with the same tokens: As if he
should have said: If ye trust that ye be out of peril, because both Baptism
wherewith ye be marked, and the Supper which ye daily receive, have excellent
promises, and in the mean time despisyng the goodness of God, ye are
lice^tiously wanton: Know ye, that the Jews also were not without such
sacraments, against whom yet the Lord did most severely put his judgments in
execution. They were Baptized in passing over the Sea, and in the cloud
wherewith they were defended from the burning heat of the son. They say,
that that same passage was a carnal Baptism, which after a certain
proportion answers to our spiritual Baptism. But if that were allowed true,
the Apostles argument could not proceed, which means here to have this taken
away from the Christians, that they think that they excel the Jews by the
prerogative of Baptism. Neither is that which by and by after follows,
subject to this cauillation: that they did eat the same spiritual meat that
we eat, and drunk the same spiritual drink, which he expounds to be
Christ.

To overthrow this sentence of Paul, they obiecte that which John. vi.
Your fathers did eat Manna in the wilderness, and are dead: he that eats
my flesh, shall not dye for ever. Which two places are very easily made to
agree together. The Lord, because he then talked to hearers that sought only
to be filled with food of their belly, but cared not for the meat of the
soul, tempered his talk somewhat to their capacity, but specially he frames
the comparison of Manna and of his body according to their sense. They
required that he, to get himself some credit, would approve his power with
doing some such miracle, as Moses did in the wilderness, when he ob^eyned
Manna from Heaven. But in Manna they conceived nothing but the remedy of
carnal hunger, wherewith the people was then vexed: but they pierced not to
that hyer mystery which Paul has respect unto: Christ therefore, to show
how much greater a benefit they ought to look for at his hand, than that
which they reported that Moses did bestow upon their fathers, frames this
comparison: If it were a great miracle in your opinion, and worthy to be
remembered, that the Lord by Moses ministered fond from Heaven to his people,
to sustain them for a small time, that they should not perish for hunger in
the wilderness: gather hereby how much more excellent is the meat that
gives immortality. We see why the Lord passed over that thing which was
principal in Manna, and spoke only of the bacest profit of it: even because
the Jews as it were of purpose to reproach him, did cast Moses in his teeth,
which succored the necessity of the people with remedy of Manna: he answered
that he is the minister of a much hyer grace, in comparison whereof, the
carnal fedynge of the people, which alone they so much esteemed, ought of
right to be nothing regarded. But Paul, because he knew that the Lord when
he rayned Manna from heaven, did not only pour it down for the seding of
their belly, but also did distribute it for a spiritual mystery, to be a
figure of the spi^ituall quickenynge that is had in Christ, did not neglecte
that part that was most worthy of consideration. Wherefore it certainly and
clearly follows, that the same promises of eternal and heavenly life, which
now the Lord vouchesaueth to grant unto us, were not only communicated unto
the Jews, but also sealed with very spiritual Sacraments. Of which matter
Augustine disputes largely against Faustus the Manichee.

1. Pet. i.xxiij.
it quickens their souls. For this saying Peter has always ben of force,
that it is the incorruptible seed which abides for ever, Esa. xi.i^
as he also gathers out of the words of Esaye. Now sith God in the old time
bound the Jews unto him with this holy bound, it is no doubt that he did also
sever them into the hope of eternal life. For when I say they embraced the
word, which should join them ^^yer to God, I take it for the manner of
co^municatyng it: not that general manner, which is poured abroad throughout
the heaven and earth and all the creatures of the world, which although it do
quicke^ all things, every one after the proportion of their nature, yet it
does not deliver them from necessity of corruption: but I speak of this
special manner, whereby the souls of the godly are both lightened unto the
knowledge of God, and in a manner coupled to him. By this enlightenyng of the
word, sith Adam Abel, Noe, Abraham, and the other fathers cleaued unto God, I
say that it is not doubtful that they had an entry into the immortal
kingdom of God. For it was a sound partakyng of God, which can not be without
the benefit of eternal life.

But if this seem somewhat entangled: go to, let us come to the Leu. xxvi.xij.
I will be to you a God, and ye shall be to me a people. In which words the
Prophets themselves are wont to expound, that both life and salvation, and the
whole sum of blessedness is comprehended. For David does not without cause
often pronounce, Ps. c.xliii^ xv. Ps. xxxiii.xij.
that blessed is the people, whose God is the lord: blessed is the nation,
which he has chosen to be his inheritance: and that not for earthly felicities
sake, but because he delivers them from death, he preserves them for ever,
and continually shows them eternal mercy, whom he has taken to his people:
Abac. i.x^^ Esa. xxxiii.xxi. Deu. xxxii^ xxix.
as it is in the other Prophets, Thou art our God, we shall not die: The Lord
is our king, our lawmaker, he shall save us. Blessed art thou, O Israel,
because thou art saved in the lord God. But, not to labor overmuch in a thing
needelesse, this admonition is sound each where in the Prophets, that we shall
want nothing toward all abundance of good things, and assurance of salvation,
so that the Lord be our God. And rightfully: For if his face so sone as it
begins to shine, is a most present pledge of salvation, to what man shall he
openly show himself for his God, but that he will also open to him his
treasure of salvation? Leu xxvi.xij.
For he is our God with this condition, to dwell in the midst of us: as he
testified by Moses. But such presence can not be obtained, but that life must
be also together had in possession with it. And although there were no more
expressed, yet had they a promise of spiritual life plain enough in these
words: I am your God. Exodus vi.vij.
For he did not declare that he would be a God unto their bodies alone, but
principally to their souls. But souls, unless they be joined to God by
righteousness, remain estranged from him in death. But on the other side, let
that joining be present, it shall bring everlasting salvation with it.

Byside that, he did not only testify that he was to them their God, And many
sayenges do show, that the speaking in the future time meant so much, as where
the faithful not only in present euels, but also for the time to come, do
comfort themselves with this, that God will never fail them. Now as
concerning the second part of the promise, he yet more plainly assured them
of the blessyng of God to be prolonged unto them beyond the bounds of this
life, in saying: I will be the God of your seed after you. Genesis xvij.vij.
For if he minded to declare his good will toward them being dead, in doing
good to their posterity, much more would his favor not fail toward
themselves. For God is not like unto men, which do therefore carry their
love to their friends children, because their power is interrupted by death, so
that they can not employe their frendely doings upon them to whom they did
bear good will. But God, whose bountifulness is not hyndered by death, takes
not away from the very dead the fruit of his mercy, which for their sakes he
pours out into a thousand generations. Therefore the Lords will was by a
notable proof to set forth unto them the greatness and flowyng ple^tie of his
goodness which they should feel after death, Exo. xx.vi
when he described it to be such as should slow over into all their
posterity. And the truth of this promise the Lord did then seal, and as it
were brought forth the fulfillyng of it, when he named himself the God of
Abraham, Exo. iij.vi
Isaac and Jacob, long after their death. For, what? had it not ben a fond
naming, if they had utterly perished? For then had it ben all one, as if he had
said, I am the God of them that are not. Mat. xxij.xxi^. Luc. xx.xxxi^. Deu.
xxxiij iij.
Wherefore the Evangelists rehearse, that with this one argument the Sadduces
were so driven to a straight, that they could not deny that Moses did testify
the resurrection of the dead, for that they had learned by Moses, that all the
Saints were in his hand. Whereupon it was easy to gather, that they are not
destroyed by death, whom he that is the judge of life and death had received
into his sauegard, custody, and protection.

Genesis iij.xvij.
if their happiness were only in this life. Adam, most unhappy, even with only
remembrance of the happiness that he had lost, did with painful labors
hardly sustain his nedynesse, and that he should not be pressed with the curse
of God, in the only labors of his hands, even there received he extreme
sorrow of that which remained for him to be his comfort. Of his two sons,
the one was taken away by the wicked slaughter of his brother: the other he
had left alive, Genesis iiii.viii.
whose sight he worthily detested and abhorred. Abel cruelly murdered in the
very flower of his age, became an example of the wretchedness of men. Genesis
vi.xxii.
Noe, while the whole world carelessly lived in pleasure, spent a good part of
his age with great werinesse in bildyng the Arc. This that he escaped death,
came to pass by his greater troubles, Genesis i^.^^^iii.
than if he should have died a hundred deaths. For byside that the Arc was to
him as a grave for x. months, there is nothing more unpleasant than to be
holden so long in manner drowned in dong of beasts. When he had passed over
so great difficulties, he fell into new matter of grefe, he saw him self
scorned of his own son, and was compelled with his own mouth to curse him,
whom by the great benefit of God he had received safe from the general flood.

Abraham in deed may be one alone to be compared with a hundred Genesis xii, iiii.
if we consider his faith, which is set for^^ unto us for y^ best rule of
believing, of whose kindred we must be accounted, that we may be the children of
God. But what more absurdity is there* than Abraham to be the father of all
the faithful, and not to possess so much as the smalest corner among the^?
but he can not be thrown down out of the number, no not from the most
honorable degree, but that the whole church must be destroyed. Now as
touching the experiences of his life: When he was first called by the
commandment of God, he was plucked away from his country, his parents and
his friends, in whom men think to be the chief sweetness of life: even
as if God of determined purpose meante to spoil him of all the pleasures of
life. So sone as he came into the land where he was commanded to dwell, he
was driven out from thense with famine. Thither he fled for succor, where to
save himself, he was compelled to deliver out his wife to be abused, which we
know not whether it were not more bitter to him than many deaths. When he was
returned into the land of his own dwelling, he was driven out again from
thense with famine. What a felicity is this, to dwell in that land, wherein a
man must so often be hungry, yea die for famine if he run not away? And
therewithal he was brought to that necessity with Abimelech, Genesis xli.xii.
that he must needs redeem his life with the loss of his wife, while many
years long he wandered uncertainly hither and thither, he was compelled by the
continual brawlynges of his servants to put away his nephew, whom he loved
as his own son. Which departing without doubt he did no otherwise take,
than if he had suffered the cutting of one of his limbs. A little after, he
heard that he was carried away captive by his enemies. Whether so ever he
went, he found neighbors outrageously barbarous, which would not suffer
him so much as to drink water out of the wells that himself had dug with
great labor. For he would not have redeemed the use of them at the hand of
king Gerar, if he had not first ben forbidden. Now when he came to old age, he
saw the thing which is the most unpleasant and bitter that that age has,
himself punished with having no children, till beside all hope he begat
Ismaell, whose birth yet he paid dear for, when he was weried with the
brawlyng of Sara, as if he in maynteinyng the stubbornness of his bondwoman
were himself the cause of the trouble of his household. At length Isaac was
borne, but with this condition that his first begotten Ismaell must, as
forsaken, be cruelly cast out of doors. When only Isaac was left, in whom the
weryed age of the silly good man might rest, within a little after he was
commanded to kill him. What can man's wit devise more miserable, than the father
to be made the butcher of his own son? If Isaac had dyed of any sickness,
who would not have thought the old manne most miserable, that had a son
given him in mockeage, for whom his grief of want of children should be
doubled? If he had been slain by some stranger, the unhappiness of the thing
would have much encresed his misery. But this passes all examples of
misery, to have him slain with his fathers one hand. Finally, he was in all
the whole course of his life so tossed and vexed, as if a man would in a table
paint out an example of a miserable life, he could find none more fit, than
this of Abraham. And let no man object that he was not altogether unhappy, for
that he at length prosperously escaped from so many and so great tempests.
For we can not say that he lives a blessed life, which for a long space
together paynefully wears out of infinite troubles, but him that without
felyng of euels, quietly enjoys present good things.

Genesis xxvi xxxv.
he had his wife violently plucked away from his bosom: his neighbors often
troubled him, and by all means oppressed him, so that he was feign to strive
for his water: at home in his own house, Ge. xxviii i.
he suffered much troublesonnesse by his childrens wives, he was grieved with
disagreementes of his sons, and could not remedy that so great a mischief,
but by the banishment of him whom he had blessed. But as for Jacob, he is
nothing else but a notable example of extreme infelicitie. He passed his
childehod most unquietly at home among the threatenynges and terrors of his
elder brother, Ge. xxviii v.
to which at length he was compelled to give place. When he was fled from his
parents and his native country, Ge. xxix.xx.
biside that it was a grievous thing to live in banishment, he was nothing more
kindly or gently received of his uncle Laban. The^ it sufficed not that he had
served seven year a hard and cruel service, but that also he must be by guile
defrauded of his wife. For an other wives sake he was driven into new service,
where he was all the day fried with heat of the sun, and all the night lay
wakyng and payned with froste and cold, as himself complained. While he by the
space of.xx. years suffered so hard a life, he was daily vexed with new
injuries of his father in law. Genesis xxxi.xxiii.
Neither was he quiet in his own house, seeing it divided and in a manner
scattered abrobe with the hatred, brawling and envy of his w^ues. When he was
commanded to return into his country, he was compelled to watch an auantage
to take his journey, much like a shameful runnyng away: and yet could he not
so escape the unjust dealyng of his father in law, but was feign to suffer his
reproaches and rebukes in the mids of his journey. Then fell he into a much
more cruel distress. Genesis xxxii xi.
For when he came nere to his brother, he had so many deaths before his eyes,
as might be prepared by a cruel manne and a bent enemy. So was he above
mesure tormented and as it were drawn in sonder with terrible fears, so long
as he looked for his brothers coming: when he came ones in his sight, he fell
down as half dead at his feet, until he found him more favorable than he
durst have hoped. Genesis xxxv xvi.
Biside that, at his first entry into the land, he lost Rachel his derely
beloved wife. Afterward he heard word that the son which he had by her, Ge.
xcj^^ xxx^*
and whom therefore he loved above the rest, was torn with wild beasts: by
whose death how great grief he conceived, he himself declared in this, that
after long weeping he obstinately stopped up all ways whereby comfort might
come to him, leauyng himself nothing, but to go down to his son waylyng
into the grave. Ge. xxx^ii^ ij.
In the mean time how great causes of grief, waiting and werinesse were the
rauishment and deftourynge of his daughter, and the boldness of his sons in
revenging it, which not only made him to be abhorred in sight of all the
inhabitants of that country, but also procured him most present peril of
utter destruction? Genesis xxxvi xij.
Then followed that horrible outrageous offense of Ruben his first begotten
son, which was such as their could not chance a more grievous. For
wheareas the defilyng of a man's wife is reckened among the highest ill fortunes:
what is to be said of it, when that wickedness is committed by a man's own
son? Within a little while after, Ge. xxxvi^^ xviii.
his house is spotted with an other vunaturall adultery: so that so many
shames might well break a heart, that otherwise were most constant and unable
to be vanquished with calamities. Nere before the end of his life, while he
sought to provide succor for the famine of himself and other, he was stricken
with tidings of a new misfortune, understanding that an other of his sons
was kept in prison, Genesis xl^^, xxxii.
for recoueryng of whom he was compelled to leave to the rest Benjamin his
only dearling. Who ca^ think, that in such a heap of mischeues he had any one
moment given him safely to take breath in? And therefore he himself the best
witness of himself, Genesis x^vii ix.
affirmed to Pharao, that his days were short and ^uell upon the earth. Now
truly he that declares that he has passed his life by continual miseries,
denies that he felt that prosperity which the Lord had promised him.
Therefore either Jacob did unkindly and unthankfully weye the grace of God,
or he truly professed that he had been miserable upon the earth. If his
affirmation were true, then it follows, that he had not his hope fastened upon
earthly things.

If these holy fathers looked for (as undoubtedly they did) a blessed Heb. xi.ix.
dwelling in tents with Isaac and Jacob parteners with him of the same
inheritance. For they looked for a city set upon a good fundation, the maker
and bilder whereof is God. All these are dead in faith, not receyuyng the
things promised, but loking at them a far of, and beleuyng and confessyng
that they were gestes and strangers upon the land. Whereby they declare that
they sought for a country. And if they had been moved with desire of that land
from whense they came, they had power to return. But they sought for a better,
that is the heavenly country. Wherefore God is not a shamed to be called their
God, for as much as he has prepared them a city. For they had been duller than
blocks, to follow promises to earnestly* whereof there appeared no hope in
earth, unless they had looked for the fulfillynge of them else where. But this
he chiefly enforces, and that not without good reason, that they called this
life a journey from home, even as Moses reports. For if they were strangers
and foreners in the land of Chanaan, where is the Lords promise whereby they
were made heirs of it? Genesis x^v^^ ix.
He shows plainly therefore, that the Lords promise, concerning the
possession thereof, had a further respect. Wherefore they purchaced not one
foot in the land of Chanaan, but for burial, whereby they testified, that they
did not hope that they should receive the fruit of the promise till after death.
And that is the cause why Jacob so much esteemed to be buried there, Genesis x^vij
^x^x. and. xxx.
that he compelled his son Joseph to promise it him, and to swear to perform
it: and why Joseph willed his bones, Ge. l.xxv.
certain ages after, when they were long before fallen into powder, to be
removed thither.

Genesis xlix.xviij.
Lord, I will look for thy salvation. What salvation could he have looked for,
when he saw that he lay ready to give up the ghost, unless he had seen in
death the beginning of a new life? But what dispute we of the holy ones and
chrildren of God, when even he was not without a taste of such understanding,
which otherwise was enemy to the truth? For what meant Balaam when he said:
Number. xxiij x. Psa. cxvi.xv. Ps. xxxiiij.xx^j.
Let my soul dye the death of the righteous, and let my last times be like
unto theires? but that he meante the same thing that David afterward uttered,
that the death of the Saints is precious in the sight of the Lord, but the
death of the wicked, is very evil? If the furthest bound and end were in
death, there could in it be noted no difference between the righteous and
unrighteous, they differ one from the other by the diversity of the estates,
that after death shall befall to them both.

Ps. xxx x.xiii.
this sentence testifies: I am here a forener and stranger, as al my fathers
were. Every living man is vanity, every one walks about as a shadow. But now
what is my exspectatio^, Lord? even to thee is my hope. Truly he yt co^fessyng
that in the earth there is nothing sound or steadfast, keeps still a
steadfastness of hope in God, co^sidereth his felicity laid up in an other
place. To such consideration is he wont to call all ye faithefull, so often as he
means to comfort them truly. For in an other place, after he had spoken of
the shortenesse, and the transitory and vanishing image of man's life, he
adds: Psalm. ^^.xvii.
but the mercy of the Lord is for ever upon them that fear him. Like
whereunto is that which is in the hundred and second Psalm. At the beginning
Lord thou did lay the foundation of the earth, and the heavens are the
works of thy hands. They shall perish, but thou abidest: they shall wax old
like a garment, and thou shall change them as apparel, but thou remain the
self same, and thy years shall not fail: the sons of thy servants shall
dwell, and thy posterity shall be stablished before thee. If the Godly cesse not
for the decay of heaven and earth to be stablished before the Lord, it
follows, that their salvation is joined with the eternity of God. But that
hope can not stand at all, unless it rest upon the promise that is set forth
in Esaic: Esai. li.vi
The heavens (says the Lord) shall vanish away like smoke, the earth shall be
worn out like a garment, and the inhabitants of it shall perish like those
things. But my salvation shall be for ever, and my righteousness shall not
fail: where euerlastingnesse is given to righteousness and salvation, not in
respect that they remain with God, but in respect that they are felt of men.

Neither may we otherwise take those things, that he commonly Psa. xcvii.x.
he shall deliver them from the hand of the sinner. Light is arisen to the
righteous, and joy to the upright in heart. Psalm. cxii.vii.ix. Ps. c.xl.x i
Ps. c.xii.vi Ps. xxxiiii.xxiii.
The righteousness of the Godly man abides for ever: his horn shall be exalted
in glory, the desire of the sinner shall perish. Again: but the righteous shall
confess unto thy name, the upright shall dwell with thy countenance. Again ye
righteous shall be in eternal remembrance Again. The Lord shall redeem the
souls of his servants. For the Lord oftentimes leaves his servants to the
lust of the wicked, not only to be vexed, but also to be torn in pieces and
destroyed: he suffers the good to lie languishing in darkness and filth,
while the wicked do in a manner shine among the stars. And he does not so
chere them with the brightness of his countenance, that they enjoy long
continuing gladness. Wherefore even he also hides not, that if the faithful
fasten their eyes upon the present state of things, they shall be stricken with
a sore temption, as though there were no favor or reward of innocencye with
God. So much does wickedness for ye most part prosper and flourish, while ye
company of the Godly is oppressed with shame, Ps. lxxiii.xvii.
poverty, contempt and all kinds of crosses. It wanted but little (says he)
that my foot slipped not, and my steps fell not abroad, while the fortune
of fools greueth me, and while I see the prosperity of the wicked. At length
after rehersall of it he concludes. I bente my thought, if I could understand
these things. But it is tormente to my spirit, till I enter into the
sanctuary of the Lord, and understand the last end of them.

Let us therefore learn, yet by this confession of David, that the holy.
fathers under the old testament were not ignorant, how seldom or never God
does in this world perform to his servants those things that he promises
them, and that therefore they did lift up their minds to Gods sanctuary,
wherein they had that laid up in store, which appears not in the shadow of
this present life. That was, the last judgment of God, which when they could
not see with eyes, they were content to understand by faith. Trustinge upon
which affiance, whatsoever happened in the world, yet they doubted not a time
would ones come, when the promises of God should be fulfilled. As these sayengs
do witness, Psa. xvij. Psa. l^^.x. Psa. x^ij.xiij.
I will behold the face of God in righteousness: I will be satisfied with thy
countenance. Again. I as a green Olive tree in the house of the Lord.
Again. The righteous shall flourish as a Date tree, and shall sprede in branches
like the Ceder of Libanus, being planted in the house of the Lord, they shall
florishe in the Palaces of our God: They shall still bear fruit, they shall
be fat and grene in their old age. When he had said a little before: Now
deep are thy thoughts, O Lord, while the wicked do flourish, they budde out
like an herb, yt they may perish for ever. Where is that fair show and
beauty of the faithful, but when the face of this world shall be turned in
ward by dysclosing of the kingdom of God? When they turned their eyes to
that eternity, they despised the hardness enduring but a moment of present
miseries, Psalm. lv.xxiix.
and boldly burste forth into these words: Thou shalt not suffer for ever
the righteous to dye, but thou shalt throw down the wicked hedlong into the
pit of destruction. Where as in this world the pit of eternal destruction
that may swallowe up the wicked? Among whose felicities, this is also reckened
in an other place, that they close up the end of their life in a moment, Job.
xxi.xiij.
without long languishing. Where is that so great steadfastness of the holly
ones, whom David himself each where complains, not only to be shaken with
trouble, but also to be oppressed, and utterly broken in pieces? Forsoothe, he
did set before his eyes, not what the altering course of the world bears,
which is unstable and more unsteadfast than the ebbing and flowing of tides,
but what the Lord will do, when he shall one day sit for the eternal
settling of heaven and earth. Psa. xl.ix v^^.
As in an other place he excellently well describes it: The foolish do stay
upon their welthinesse, and are proud because of their great riches. And yet
no man, though he flourish in never so great dignity, can redeem his brother
from death, no man can pay to God ye price of his ransom, but whereas they
see that both ye wise do dye, and that the wicked also and fools do perish
and leave their riches to strangers, yet they think that their houses shall
abide for ever, and their dwellynges to the end of ages, and they advance
their names upon the earth, but man shall not continue in honor: he shall be
like to the beasts yt die. This imaginacion of theires is extremest folly,
which yet their posterity do gredyly follow. They shall be placed like a flock
in Hell, and death shall have rule over them. When the light arises, the
upright shall have dominion over them, the beauty of them shall perish, Hell
is their dwelling house. First this laughing to scorn of the foolish, for that
they rest on the slipperie and rollynge good things of the world, does show
that the wise must seek a far other felicity. But there he more evidently
discloseth the mystery of the resurrection, where after the destruction and
extinguishmente of them, he erecteth the kingdom of the Godly. For what rising
of light (I pray you) shall we call that, but the reueling of the new life
which follows the end of this present life.

From thense did spring up that consideration, which the faithful Ps. xxx.v^
and life in his mereye. How did they determine afflictions to end in a
moment, that were in affliction in a manner of their life long? where did they
espy so long an e^duringe of Gods kindness, whereof they scarsely felt any
little taste? If they had sticked fast upon the earth, they could have
found no such thing, but because they looked upon heaven, they acknowledged
that it is but a moment of time, while the Lord exercise his holy ones by the
cross, but that his mercies, wherein they are gathered together, do last the
worlds age. Again, they did ^oresee the eternal and never endinge
destruction of the ungodly, which were as in a dream happy for one day.
Pro. x.vij
Whereupon came these sayings: The remembrance of the righteous shall be in
blessing, butte the name of the wicked shall rotte. Precious is the death of
the Saints in the sight of the Lord, Ps. c.xvi and xxx.x^^i. i. Sa. ^^.^x.
but the death of the wicked, most evil. Again in Samuel. The Lord shall
keep the feet of the holy, and the wicked shall be put to silence in
darkness. Which do declare that they well knew, that howesoeuer the holy
were diversely carried about, yet their last end is life and salvation: and
that the prosperity of the wicked is a pleasant way, whereby they by little
and little slide forward into the gulf of death. Therefore they called the
death of such, the destruction of the uncircumcised, E^^. xx^^^^^ x. and
xxxi. Ps. lxix.xx^i.
as of them from whom the hope of the resurrection was cut away. Wherefore
David could not devise a more grievous curse than this: Let them be blotted out
of the book of life, and not be written with the righteous.

But above all other, notable is that saying of Job: I know that Job. x^x.xxv.
which although we grant them in part, yet shall we enforce them to
confess whether they will or not, that Job could not have come to that
largeness of hope, if he had rested his thought upon the earth. Therefore we
must needs confess, that he lifted up his eyes to the immortality to come,
which saw, that his redeemer would be present with him even lyeng in his
grave. For to them that think only of his present life, death is their
uttermost desperation: which very death could not cut of Jobs hope. Job.
^iij.xv.
Yea though he kill me (said he) nevertheless I will still hope in him. And
let no trifler here carpe against me and say* that these were the sayenges but
of a few, whereby is not proved that such doctrine was among the Jews. For I
will by and by answer him, that these few did not in these sayenges utter any
secret wisdom, whereunto only certain excellent wits were severally and
privately suffered to atteine* but that as they were by the holy Ghost appointed
teachers of the people, so they openly published those mysteries of God that
were to be universally learned, and ought to be the principles of the common
religion among the people. Therefore when we hear the public oracles of the
holy Ghost, wherein he spoke of the spiritual life so clearly and plainly in
the Church of the Jews, it were a point of intolerable stubbournesse, to
send them away only to the fleshly covenant, wherein is mention made of
nothing, but earth and earthly wealthinesse.



^^. xxxv^j.iii^.
because they reckened it even all one as if he had told them that rotten
carcases should be restored again to life. The Lord to show, that even that
same difficulty could not stop him from bringing his benefit to effect,
showed to the Prophet in a vision a field full of due bones, to the which in a
moment with ye only power of his word he restored breath and liuelienesse.
The vision in deed served to correct the incredulity at that present time: but
in the mean season he did put the Jews in mind how far ye power of the Lord
extended beyond the account of the people, which so easyly quyckened with his
only beck, bones already rotten and scattered abroad: wherefore you shall
compare that with an other saying of Esaie. Esa. xxvi.xix.
The dead shall rise, my carcass, they shall rise again. Awake ye and rejoice
that dwell in the dust, because the deaw of the green fyelde is thy deaw, and
thou shall pluck down the land of the Gyantes into ruin. So my people, enter
into thy tents: shutt thy doors upon thee: hide the a little while, till my
displeasure pass over. For behold, the Lord shall go out of his place, to
visit the iniquity of the dweller upon the earth agaiste him, and the earth
shall show forth her blood, and shall no longer hide her slain.

Albeith a man should do fondly, that would go about to draw all Esai.
lxvi.xxj.
As new heaven, and a new earth which I make to stand before me, so shall
your seed stand, and there shall be month of month, and Sabbat of Sabbat:
all flesh shall come to worship before my face, faith the Lord. And they
shall go out and see the dead carcases of the men that have offended against
me, that their worm shall not dye, Da. xij.i.
and their fire shall not be quenched. The other of Daniel. In that time shall
rise up Michael the great prince, that stands for the sons of his people,
and there shall come a time of distress, such as was not syns nations first
began to be, and then shall all thy people be saved that shall be found
written in thy book. And of those that sleep in the duste of the earth, there
shall awake some to eternal life, and some to everlasting shame.

Now as for prouinge the other two points that the fathers had Mat. viij.xi.
For at this day Christ promises no other kingdom of heaven to his, but
where they shall rest with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. Act^. iii xxii
And Peter affirmed, that the Jews of his time were heirs of the grace of the
Gospel, for that they were the children of the Prophets, comprehended in ye
covenant, which ye Lord had in the old time made with his people. And, that
the same should not be wittenessed with words only, the Lord also approved
it by deed. For in the very moment that he rose again, Mat. xxvii li.
he vouche saved to have many of ye holy men to rise again in company with
him, and made them to be seen in the City: so giving an assured token, that
whatsoever he did and suffered for the purchacing of eternal salvation,
pertemeth no less to the faithful of the old testament, Ar. xv.vi^j
than unto us. For as Peter testifies, they were also endued with the same
spirit of faith, whereby we are regenerate into life. Now, when we hear that
the same spirit which is in us a certain sparcle of immortality, whereupon it
is also in an other place called The earnest of our inheritance, did likewise
dwell in them, how dare we take from them the inheritance of life? Whereby it is
so much the more marvel, that in the old time the Sadduces fell to such
grossnes of error, that they denied both the resurrection and also the
substance of souls, both which points they saw sealed with so clear
testimonies of Scriptur. And no less to be marvelled at, eue^ at this day,
were the ^olly of all that nation in loking for the earthly kingdom of Christ,
if the Scriptures had not long before declared, that they should have that
punishment for refusing the Gospel. For so it behooved, by the just judgment
of God, to strike those minds with blindness, which in refusinge the light
of heaven being offered them, did wylfully bring them selves into darken^^e.
^. Cor. iii.xiiii.
Therefore they read and continually turn over Moses, butte they are stopped
with a veyle set between them and him, that they can not see the light that
shines in his countenance. And so shall it remain covered and hidden from
them, til he be turned to Christ, from whom now they travail to lead and
draw him away so much as in them lies.

The xi Chapter. Of the difference of the one Testament from the other.
WHat then? will thou say: shall there be no dyfference left between the old
testament and the new? and to what purpose serve all those places of
Scripture, where they are compared one against the other, as things most
contrary? I do willingly allow those differences that are rehearsed in the
Scripture: but so that they nothing hinder the unity already stablyshed, as it
shall be plain to see, when we shall have entreated of them in order. Those
dyfferences are (as far as ever I could mark or can remember) chefely four
in number, to y^ which if you list to adioyne the v. I am not against it. I say
and trust to prove that they are all such as rather belong to the manner of
ministratio^, than to the substance of them. And by this mean they shall
nothing hinder, but yt the promises of both the old and new testament may
remain al one and all one foundation of ye same promises, Christ. Now the
first difference is, yt although, even in the old time also, the Lords will
was to dyrect the minds of his people, and to have them raised up to the
heavenly inheritance: yet, that they might be the better nourished in hope
thereof, he gave it to be seen or rather to be tasted of, under earthly
benefytes: But now having reveled the grace of the life to come, by the
Gospel, he more clearly and plainly directs our minds the straight way to
the meditation thereof, leauinge the inferioure manner of exercising which he
used with the Israelites. They that mark not this purpose of God, do not
think that the old people clymbed any hyer than to the good things promised
to the body. They so often hear the land of Chanaan named, as the excellent,
or rather only reward for the kepers of Gods law. They hear that God
threatens nothing more severely to the transgressors of the same law, than
that they shall be driven out of the possession of the same land, and scattered
abroad into strange regions. They see that in a manner to this effect come all
the blessings and curses that are pronounced by Moses. Herby they do
undoubtedly determine, that the Jews not for their own sakes, but for others,
were severed from other nations: that is, that the Church of Christ might have
an image, in whose outward form she might see exaumples of spiritual
things. But fith the Scripture does sometimes show, that God himself
directed all the earthly benefits that he did for them to this end, that so
he might lead them by the hand to the hope of heavenly benefits. It was to
much unskillfulness, I will not sat blockishnesse, not to consider this order
of disposition. The issue or point of our controversy with this sort of men
is this, that they teach that the possession of the land of Chanaan was to the
Israelites their chief and last blessedness, and that to us after the
reuelinge of Christ, it does but figuratively signify the heavenly
inheritance. On the other side we affirm, that they did in the earthly
possession which they enjoyed, as in a lokinge glass behold the inheritance
to come, which they believed to be prepared for them in heaven.

That shall better appear by the similitude that Paul used to the Gal. ii^j.^.
He compares the nation of the Jews to an hyer, within age, which being not
yet able to govern him self, follows the guydinge of the tutor or
schoolemaister, to whose custody he is committed. And whereas he applies
that similitude to the ceremonies, that nothing hinders but yt it may also
very fittly serve to this purpose. The same inheritance was appointed for them,
that was appointed for us: but such as yet for want of age, they were not of
capacity to enter upon and use. The same Church was among them, but whereof
the age was yet but childyshe. Therefore the Lord kept them under this
schooling, that he gave them not the spiritual promises so naked and openly,
but as it were shadowed with earthly promises. Therefore, where he called Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob, and their posterity unto hope of immortality, he promised
them the land of Chanaan to be their inheritance: not to determine their hopes
upon it, but that in beholdynge of it, they should exercise and confirm them
selves in the hope of that true inheritance that did not yet appear. And that
they might not be deceived, there was given them a hyer promise to testify,
that that land was not the highest benefit of God. So Abraham was not suffered
to f^ye slouthefull in the promise received of the land, but his mind was with
a greater promise raised up unto yt Lord. For Abraham heard this said unto
him: Ge. xv.i.
I am thy protector, and thy reward exceedinge great. Here we see, that
Abraham has the end of his reward set fourth in the Lord, that he should
not account upon a transitory and slippery reward in the elements of this
world, but rather think it to be such as can not wither away. Afterward
he adioyneth the promise of the land to no other intent, but that it should be
a token of the good will of God, and a figure of the heavenly inheritance. And
that the holy men had this meaning, their own sayenges do declare. So David
rises upward from temporal blessings, to that same highest and last
blessing. Ps. lxxiij.xxvi. and lxcxiiii.iiij Ps. xvi.v. Ps. cxlii.vi.
My heart (says he) and my flesh fainte for desire of thee. God is my
portion for ever. Again. The Lord is the part of my inheritance, and of my
cup: thou art he that sauest mine heritage for me. Again. I have cried unto
thee, O Lord, I have said, Thou art my hope, my portion in the land of the
living. Truly they that dare so speak, do without doubt profess that with
their hope they climb above the world, and all the good things here
present. But the Prophets do often describe this blessedness of the world to
come, under yt figure that they had received of the Lord. And so are these
saienges to be understood. Job. xviii.xv.^.
That the Godly shall possess the land by inheritance, and the wicked shall be
destroyed out of it. That Jerusalem shall aboud with all kind of richesse, and
Syon ouerflowe with plenty of al things. All which we see, can not proprely
be spoken of the land of our wayfaringe, or the earthly Jerusalem, but of the
true country of the faithful, Ps. c.xxxii^ iij.
and that heavenly city wherein the Lord has commanded blessinge and life
for ever.



An other difference of the old and new Testament is said to be Psa. c.x.
it is certain, that that prestehoode is taken away, wherein new successors
were daily put in, one after an other. But he proves that the institution of
this new prestehoode is to be preferred, because it is stablished with an
oath. He after adds further, that in the same change of the preestehoode, He.
vij.xl, and xix. and ix.ix. and x.i.
is also contained the change of the Testament. And that it was necessary so
to be, he proves by this reason: for that the weakness of the law was such
that it could help nothing, to perfection. Then he proceeds in declaring
what was that weakness, even this, that it had certain outward
righteousnesses of the flesh, which could not make the obseruers of them
perfect, according to conscience: that by sacrifices of beasts, it could
neither wipe away sins, nor purchase true holiness. He concludes therefore
that there was in it a shadow of good things to come, but not the lively
image of the things them selves: and that therefore it had not other office,
but to be as an introduction into a better hope, which is delivered in the
Gospel. Here is to be seen, in what point the covenant of the law is
compared with the covenant of the Gospel: and the ministry of Christ with
the ministry of Moses. For if the comparison concerned the substance of the
promises, then were there great dyfference between the two testamentes: but
sith the point of our case leads us an other way, we must tend to this
end, to find out the truth. Let us then set forth here the covenant which
he has stablished to be eternal, and never to peryshe. The accomplyshment
thereof, whereby it atteineth to be stablished and continuing in force, is
Christ. While such establyshment was in expectation, the Lord did by Moses
apointe ceremonies, to be as it were solemn signs of the coufyrmation. Now
this came there in question, whether the ceremonies that were ordained in the
law, ought to give place to Christ or no. Although these ceremonies were in
deed only accidents, or verylye additions and things adjoined, or (as the
people call them) accessarie things to the couenaunte, yet because they wear
instruments or means of the admynistration thereof, they bear the name of
the couenaunte yt self, as the like is wont to be attributed to other
Sacraments. Therefore in sum, the old Testamente is in this place called
the solemn form of confyrmynge the couenaunte, contained in Ceremonies and
Sacrifices. The Apostle says, that because in yt is nothing perfect,
unless we pass further, therefore yt behooved that they should be
dysco^tinued and abrogate, that place might be given to Christ, the assurer
and mediatore of better testament, by whom eternal sanctification is ones
purchaced to the elect, and the transgressions blotted out that remained under
the law. Or, if you like it better, thus: That the old testament of the Lord
was that, which was delivered, wrapped up in the shadowish and effectual
observation of ceremonies: and that therefore it was but for a time, because it
did but (as it were) hang in suspense, until it might stay upon a more
steadfast and substantial confyrmation: and that then only it was made new
and eternal, after that it was consecrate and stablyshed by the blood of
Christ. Whereupon Christ calls the cup that he gave at his supper to his
Disciples, The cup of the new testament in his blood: Mat. xxvi.^^.
to signify, that then the testament of God attemeth his truth: by which it
be comes new and eternal, when it is sealed with his blood.

Gal. iii.xxiiii. and iiii.
the Jews were brought unto Christ, before that he was showed in the flesh.
And he confesses, that they were the children and heirs of God, but yet
such, as for their young age were to be kept under the custody of a
schoolmaster. For it behooved, that ere the son of righteousness was yet
risen, their should neither be so great brightness of revelation, nor so great
deep sight of understanding. Therefore God so gave them in measure the light
of his word, that they saw it as yet far of and darkely. Therefore Paul
expresses this sclendernesse of understanding by ye term of young age, which
the Lords will was to have to be exercised with yt elements of this world and
with out ward observations, as rules of instruction for children until
Christ should shine a broad, by whom it behooved that the knowledge of the
faithful people should grow to full age. This distinction Christ him self
meant of, Mat. xi.xiii.
when he said, that the law and the Prophets were until Ihon, and that
from thenseforth the kingedome of God is preached. What did the law and the
Prophets open to men of their time even this, they gave a taste of yt wisdom
which in time to come should be plainly disclosed: and they showed it before
as it were twinclingely shyning a far of. But when it came to pass that
Christ might be pointed to with the finger, then was the kingedome of God set
open. For in him are laid abroad the treasures of al wisdom and
understanding, whereby we atteine, Clos. i.ix.
even in a manner, into the secret closettes of heaven.

of children. Fynallye, there never changed any such clear sfyght to any at
that time, but that it deed in some part savoure of the darkness of the time.
Matt. xiij.xvij. Lu. x.xxiiij
Whereupon Christ said, Many kings and Prophets have desired to see the
things that ye see, and have not seen them: and to hear the things that ye
hear, and have not heard them. Therefore blessed are your eyes, because they
see, and your ears because they hear. And truly it was meet that the
presence of Christ should have this excellencye of prerogative, that from it
should arise the clear reuelinge of the heavenly mysteries. And for this
purpose also makes that, which even we now alleged out of the first epistle
of Peter: *Pet. i.x^
that yt was opened to them, that their travail was profitable, principally
for our age.

Now I come to the third dyfference, which is taken out Ier. xxxi.xxxj.
whose words are these. Behold the days shall come, says the Lord, and I
will make a new covenant with the house of Israel, and the house of Judah, not
according to the covenant that I made with your Fathers, in the day when I
took them by the hand, to lead them out of the launde of Egypt, the covenant
that they made void although I ruled over them. But this shall be the
covenant that I will make with the house of Israel. I will put my law in their
bowelles, and I will write it in their hearts, and I will be merciful to
their iniquity. And no man shall teach his neighbor, and no man his
brother. For they shall al know me, from the least unto the most. Of which
words the Apostle took occasion to make this comparison between the law and
the Gospel, that he called the law a literal, and Gospel a spiritual
doctrine: i. Cor* ^^.vi.
the law, he said, was fashioned out in Tables of stone, the Gospel written
in hearts: that the law was the preachinge of death, the Gospel the
preachinge of life: the law the preachinge of damnation, the Gospel the
preachinge of righteousness: that the law is made void, that the Gospel
abides. Sith the Apostles purpose was butte to declare the meaning of the
Prophet, it shall be suffycient that we weye the words of one of them, to
atteyne the meaning of them both. All be it, there is some vnly^enesse
between them. For the Apostle speaks more odiouslye of the law than the
Prophet does: and that not in simple respect of the ^^we, but because there
were certain naughty men, having a wrong zeal to the law, which did
with perverse love of the ceremonies, obscure the brightness of the Gospel. He
disputes of the nature of the law, according to their error and foolish
affection. Therefore it shall be good to note that peculiarly in Paul. But
both of them, because they do by comparison set the old and the new
testament, the one against the other: do consider nothing in the law, but that
which proprely belongs unto it. As for example. The law does commonly in
every place contain promises of mercy, but because they are borrowed from else
where, therefore they are not reckened as part of the law, when the mere nature
of the law is spoken of. The only thing they ascribe unto it, to command
things that are right, and to forbid wicked doings: to promise reward to
the folowers of righteousness, and to threaten punishmente to the
transgressors: but in the mean time neither to change nor amend ye
perverseness of heart, y^ is naturally in all men.



Romans iv.
Ye have not received the spirit of bondage again to fear, but the spirit of
adoption, by which we cry Abba, father* Hereunto serves that in the epistle
to ye Hebrews, that the faithefull are not now come to the bodyly mount,
(...). xii.xx^i^.
and to kind led fire, an whirlewinde, darkness and tempest, where nothing
can be heard or seen but that strikes menns minds with terrore, in so much
that Moses him self quaked for fear, when the terryble voice sounded, which
they all besoughte, that they might not hear: Butte that we are come to the
Mount Syon, and the City of the sy^ynge God, the heavenly Jerusalem. Butte
that which Paul shortly touches in the sentence that we have alleged out of
the epistle to the Romans, he sets out more largely in ye Epistle to the
Galatians, when he makes an allego^^e of the two sons of Abraham, after
this manner, Gala. iiij.xxi.
that Agar the bondwoman is a figure of the mount Sinai, where the people of
Israel received the law: Sara the freewoman is a figure of the heavenly
Jerusalem, from whense proceeds the gospel. That, as the seed of Agar is
borne bond, which may never come to the inheritance, and the seed of Sara
is ^orne free, to whom the inheritance is due: so by the law we are made
subject to bondage, by the Gospel only we are regenerate into freedom. But
the sum comes to this effect, that the old testamente did stricke into
consciences fear and tremblinge: but by the bene^ite of the new testament it
comes to pass, that they are made ioyefull. The old did hold consciences
bound unto the yoke of boudage, by the lyberalitie of the new they are
discharged of bondage, and brought into freedom. But if out of the people of
Israel they object against us the holy fathers, who sith it is evident, that
they were endued with the same spirit that we are, it follows that they were
also partakers both of the self same freedom and joy: We answer, that
neither of both came of the law. But that when they felt them selves by the
law to be both oppressed with estate of bondage, and weried with vn^^^e^es of
conscience, they s^ed to the succoure of the Gospel, and that therefore it was
a peculiar fruit of the new testament, that beside the common law of the old
testament they were exempted from these euels. Moreover, we will deny that they
were so endewed with the spirit of freedom and assuredness, that they did not
in some part feel both sear and bondage by the law. For how soever they
enjoyed that prerogative which they had obtained by grace of the Gospel, yet
were they subject to the same bonds and b^rdens of observation, that the
common people were. Sith therefore they were compelled to the careful keeping
of those ceremonies, which were the signs of a scholing much like unto
bondage, and the handewritinges whereby they confessed them selves gylty of
sin, did not discarge them from being bond: it may rightfully be said,
that in comparison of us they were under the testament of bondage and fear,
while we have respect to that common order of dystribution that the Lord
then used with the people of Israel.

The three last comparisons that we have recited, are of the law Lib. 3. ad*
Boni. ca. 4
butte whereas Augustine denies that they ought to be reckened under the name
of the old testament, therein he thought very well, and meant even the same
thing that we do now teach, for he had regard to those sa^enges of
Hieremie and Paul, where the old testament is severed from the word of
mercy and grace. And this also he very aptelye adioyueth in the same place,
that the children of promise regenerate of God, which by faith woorkynge
through love, have obeyed the commandments, do from the beginning of the
world belong to the new testament, and that in hope not of fleshly, earthly
and temporal* but spiritual, heavenly, and eternal good things, principally
believing in the mediatore, by whom they doubted no^ that the spirit was not
munstred unto them, both to do good, and to have pardon so often as they sinned,
For the same thing it is that I minded to affirm, that all the Saints whom
the Scripture reherseth to have been from the beginning of the world chosen by
God, were partakers of the self same blessing with us unto eternal salvation.
This difference therefore is between our division and Augustines: that ours
(according to that saying of Christ: Matthew. ^i.^^j.
The law and the Prophets were unto Ihon: from thenseforthe the kingdom of
God is preached) does make distinction between the clerenesse of the Gospel,
and the darker dystribution of the word that went before: and Augustine
doothe only ^ouer the weakness of the law from the strength of the Gospel.
And here also is to be noted concerning the holy fathers, that they so lived
under the old testamente, that they steyed not there, but allwaye aspired to
the new, yea and embraced the assured partakinge thereof. For the Apostle
condemns them of blindness and accursednesse, which being contented with
present shadows, did not stre^ch up their mind unto Christ. For (to speak
nothing of the rest) what greater blindness can be imagined, than to hope
for the purginge of sin by the killinge of a beast, than to secke for the
cleansing of the soul in outward sprinkling of water? than to seek to appease
God with cold ceremonies, as though he were much delited therewith? For to
all these absurdities do they fall, that stick fast in the observations of the
law without respect of Christ.

De^. xxxi.viii. De. x.xiiij.
Jacob the cord of his inheritance. In an other place he thus speaks to the
people: Behold the heaven and earth and all that is in it, are the Lord thy
Gods. He cleaned only to thy fathers, he loved them, to choose their sede
after them even your selves out of all nations. Therefore he vo^tchesaued to
grant the knoweledge of his name to that people only, as if they only of
all men belonged unto him: he laid his covenant as it were in their bosom: to
them he openli showed the presence of his Godhed: them he honored with all
prerogatives. Butte (to omit the rest of his bene^ites, and speak that
which only here is to our purpose) he bound them to him by the
communycatynge of his word, that he might be called and co^mpted their God.
In the mean season he suffered other nations to walk in vanity, as though
they had not any enter course or any thing to do with him: Act x^iij.xvi.
neither did he to help their destruction, even them that which was only the
remedy, namely the preachinge of his word. Therefore Israel was then the
Lords son that was his derlynge, other were strangers: Israel was known
to him and received into his charge and protection, other mere le^te to their
own darkness. Israel was sanctified by God, other were profane: Israel
was honored with the presence of God, other were excluded from coming nigh
unto him. But when the fulness of time was come, appointed for the restoringe
of all men, and that same reconciler of God and men was delivered in deed, the
particion was plucked down, Ga. iiij.iii^ Ep. ij.xiiii. Gala. vi.xv. Psalm.
ij.v^^^. Psalm. lxi^.
which had so long holden the mercy of God enclosed within ye bounds of
Israel, and peace was preached to them that were far of, even as to them that
were nere adjoined, that being together reconciled to God, they might grow
into one people. Wherefore, now there is no respect of Greek or Jew,
circumcision or uncircumcision, but Christ is all in all, to whom the nations
are given for his inheritance, and the ends of the earth for his peculiar
possession, yt universally without difference he might have dominion from sea
to sea, and from the rivers to the uttermost ends of the world.

Therefore the calling of the Gentiles is a notable token, whereby Phil. ii.
Mat. xv.xxiiv.
and ye time of his abacement ended, he received of his father a name that is
above all names, before whom all knees should bow. For which cause when this
conuenience of time was not yet fulfilled, he said to the woman of Chanaan,
that he was not sent but to the lost sheep of ye house of Israel. And he
suffered not his Apostles at the first sending, to pass these bonds. Go not
ye, (says he) into the way of the Gentiles, nor enter into the Cities of the
Samaritanes, but rather go ye to the lost sheep of the house of Israel. But
howesoeuer it was before uttered by so many testimonies, yet when the Apostles
were first to begin it, it seemed so new and strange a thing unto them, that
they were afraid of it, as of some monster. Truly very fearfully and not
without sty^king at it, they first did set upon it. And no marvel, for it
seemed against reason, that the Lord which by so many ages had chosen out
Israel from all other nations, should now undo that choice, as it were,
suddenly changing his purpose. It was in deed spoken of before by prophecies: but
they could not give so great heed to the prophecies, as to be nothing moved
with the newenesse of the thing that they saw. And these examples which the
Lord had showed of the calling of the Gentiles yt should one day come to pass,
were not sufficient to move them. For biside this that he hade called very few,
he did after a certain manner engraffe them into the householde of Abraham, to
add them unto his people as percel of them: but by this general calling the
Gentiles, were not only made egall with the Jews, but also it appeared that
they came into the place of the Jews, that were become dead. And yet all
those strangers whom God has before that tine brought into the body of the
Church, were never made egall with the Jews. And therefore not without a
cause does Paul so extol this mystery hidden fron^ages and generations,
Col. i^xv^
and which he also says to be marvelous to the very Angles.

In these four or five points, I think, I have well and faithfully to much
as suffices to the simple order of teaching. But because many report this
variety in governing the Church, this diverse manner in teaching, so great
alteration of vsages and ceremonies, to be a great absurdity: they are also
to be answered before that we pass forth to other things. And that may be
done shortly, because the objections are not so strong that they need a curious
confutation. It hangs not together (say they) that God which does always
steadfastly agree with him self, should suffer so great an alteration, as
afterward to disalowe ye same thing, which he had before both commanded and
commended. I answer, that God ought not therefore to be compted mutable, for
that he applied diverse forms to diverse ages, as he knew to be expedient
for every one. If the husbandman apoint to his household one sort of business
in winter, and an other in summer, shall we therefore accuse him of
inconstancy, or think that he swarueth from the right rule of husbandry
which agrees with the continual order of nature? Likewise if a father of a
household do instruct, rule and order his children of one sort in
childhoode, of an other in youth, and of an other in man's state, we can not
therefore say that he is fickle and forsakes his own purpose. Why therefore do
we charge God with reproach of inconstantie, for yt he has severed the
diversity of times with fite and agreeable marks? The last similitude ought
fully to satifye us. Paul makes the Jews like unto children, and Christians
to yongmen. What disordre is therein this government of God, yt he held them
in their childish lessons, which according to the capacity of their age were
fit for them, and instructed us with stronger and as it were more manly
discipline. Therefore herein appears the constancy of God, that he taught
one self same doctrine in all ages, and continues in requyring the same
worship of his name, which he commanded from the beginning. But whereas he
changed the outward form and manner thereof, in that he showed not him self
subject to change: butte so far he tempered him self to the capacity of
man, which is diverse and chaungeable.

a young man after one very good mean from his disease, and afterward do use an
other manner of healyng with the same man being old: shall we therefore say,
that he has refused the manner of healyng which before pleased him, but
rather continuyng still in the same, he has consideration of age? So behooved
it, that Christ being absent, should be expressed in figure by one sort of
signs, and by an other sort be before showed that he was to come: and it is
mete that now being already delivered, he be represented by other signs. But as
concerning Gods calling, now at the coming of Christ more largely spread
abroad among all peoples than it was before, and the graces of the holy ghost
more plentiously poured out, who, I pray you, ca^ deny it to be right, that
that God have in his own hand and will the disposyng of his own graces, to
give light to what nations it pleases him? to raise up the preaching of his
word in what places it pleases him? to give what doctrine and how great
profityng and success of doctrine it pleases him? and in what ages he will,
to take away the knowledge of his name out of the world for their
vntha^kefulnesse? and again when he will to restore it for his own mercy? We
see therefore, that the cauillatio^s are to much unmeet, wherewith wicked men do
in this point disquiet the minds of the simple, to make them call either the
righteousness of God, or the faith of the Scripture into doubt.

The. xii. Chapter. That it behooved, that Christ, to perform the office of the
Mediator, should be made man.
NOw, it much behooved us that he should be both God and atteyne to God without
a Mediator. What could he then do being plenged down into death and hell with
deadly fall, defiled with so many spots, strikyng with his own corruption,
and overwhelmed with all accur^ednesse? i. Tim. ij.iii.
Therefore not without cause. Paul meaning to set forth Christ for the
Mediator, does expressly recite that he is Man. Our Mediator says he) of God
and man, the man Jesus Christ. He might have said, God: or at ye least he might
have left the name of Man as well as of God. But because the holy ghost
speaking by his mouth, knew our weakness: therefore to provide for it in time,
he used a most fit remedy, setting among us the son of God familiarly as one
of us. Therefore least any man should trouble himself to know where the
Mediator is to be sought, or which way to come unto him, in namyng Man, he
puts us in mind that he is nere unto us, yea so nere that he touches us,
for as much as he is our own flesh. Truly he means there even the same
thing that in an other place is set out with more words: that we have not a
bishop that can not have compassion of our infirmities, Hebr. iiii.xv.
for as much as he was in all things tempted as we are, only sin excepted.

Ih. x.xvii.
I go up to my father and your father, my God and your God. By this mean is
the inheritance of the kingedome of beauen assured unto us: for that the only
son of God, to whom it wholly did proprely belong, has adopted us into his
brethren: because if we be brethren, Romans viii xvii.
then are we partakers of the inheritance. Moreover it was for the same cause
very profitable, that he which should be our redemer, should be both very
God and very manne. It was his office to swallowe up death: who could do
that but life it self? It was his office to overcome sin: who could do
that but righteousness it self? It was his office to vanquish the powers of
the world and of the air: who could do that but a power above both world
and air: Now in whose possession is life, or righteousness, or the empire
and power of heaven, but in Gods alone? Therefore the most merciful God, in
the person of his only begotten son, made himself our redemer, when his
will was to have us redeemed.

that man which had lost by his disobedience, should for remedy set obedience
against it, should satisfy the judgment of God, and pay the penalty of
sin. Therefore there came forth the true man, our Lord, he put on the person
of Adam, and took upon him his name to enter into his stead in obeyeng his
father, to yield our flesh the price of the satisfaction to the just judgment
of God, and in the same flesh suffer the pain that we had deserved. For
as much as therefore neither being only God he could feel death, nor being only
man he could overcome death, he coupled the nature of man with the nature of
God, that he might yield the one subject to death to satisfy for sins. and
by the power of the other he might wrestle with death, and get victory for us.
They therefore that spoil Christ either of his godhed or of his manhood, do in
deed either diminishe his majesty and glory, or obscure his goodness: but on
the other side they do no less wrong unto me^ whose faith they do thereby
weaken and overthrow, which can not stand but restyng upon this fundation.
Byside that, it was to be hoped, that the Redemer should be the son of
Abraham and David, which God had promised in the law and the Prophets.
Whereby the godly minds do gather this other fruit, that being by the very
course of his pedigree brought to David and Abraham, they do the more
certainly know that this is the same Christ that was spoken of by so many
oracles. But this which I even now declared, is principally to beholden in
mind, that the common nature between him and us is a pledge of our fellowship
with the son of God: yt he clothed with our flesh vanquished death and sin
together, that the victory so might be ours and the triu^ph ours: that he
offered up for sacrifice the flesh that he received of us, that having made
satisfaction he might wype away our giltinesse, and appease the just wrath of
his father.

He that shall be diligently hedefull in considering these things as he Col. i.xv.
(...) sith all the Scripture cries out, that he was clothed with flesh, that he
might be the Redemer: it is to much rash presumption to imagine any other
cause or end. To what end Christ was promised from the beginning it is well
enough known: eve to restore the world fallen in ruin, and to succor men
being lost. Therefore under the law, the image of him was set forth in
sacrifices, to make the faithful to hope that God would be merciful to them,
when after satisfaction made for sin, he should be reconciled. But whereas in
all ages, even when the law was not yet published, the Mediator was never
promised without blood: we gather that he was appointed by the eternal counsel
of God to purge the filthiness of men, for that the shedyng of blood is a
toke^ of expiation. The Prophets so preached of him yt they promised that he
should be the reco^ciler of God and men. That one specially notable testimony
of Esaye shall suffice us for all, Esa. liij.xiv.
where he fortelleth, that he shall be stricken with the hand of God for the
sins of the people, that the chastisement of peace should be upon him: and
that he should be a priest that should offer up himself for sacrifice: that of
his wou^des should come health to other: and that, because al have strayed and
ben scattered abroad like sheep, therefore it pleased God to punish him, that he
might bear the iniquities of all. Sith we hear that Christ is properly
appointed by God to help wretched sinners, who so ever passes beyond these
bounds, he does to much follow foolish curiosity. Now when himself was ones
come, he affirmed this to be the cause of his coming, to appease God, and
gather us up from death into life. The same thing did the Apostles testify of
him. Ioh. i.ix.
So John before that he teaches that the Word was made flesh, declares of
the falling away of man. But he himself is to be heard before all, when he
speaks thus of his own office: Ioh. i.xiiij
So God loved the world, that he gave his only begotten son, that who so ever
believes in him should not perish, but have everlasting life. Again: John.
iii.xvi. Ioh. v.xxv John. xi. Mat. xviij Matt. ix.
The hour is come that the dead shall hear the voice of the son of God, and
they that hear it, shall live. I am the resurrection and life: he that believes
in me, although he be dead, shall live. Again. The son of man comes to save
that which was lost. Again. The whole need not a Physician. I should never
make an end, if I should rehearse all. The Apostles do all with one consent
call us to this fountain: And truly if he had not come to reconcile God,
Hebr. v.i.
the honor of the priesthode should have come to naught. For as much as the
priest appointed mean between God and man to make intercession: ii. Cor. v.xix.
and he should not be our righteousness, because he was made a sacrifice for
us, that God should not impute sins unto us. Finally, he should be spoiled
of all the honorable titles, wherewith the Scripture does set him out. And also
that saying of Paul should prove vain, To. viii.iii
that that which was impossible to the law, God has sent his own son, that
in likeness of the flesh of sin he should satisfy for us. Tit. ii.xi.
Neither will this stand that he teaches in an other place, that in this
glass appeared the goodness of God and his infinite goodness toward men, when
Christ was given to be the Redemer. Finally, the scripture every where
assigns no other end, why the son of God would take upon him our flesh,
and also received this commandment of his father, but to be made a sacrifice
to appease his father toward us. Lu. xxiiii.xxvi. Ioh. x.xvii John. iii.xiiii.
John. xii.xxvij. and xxviii.
So it is written, and so it behooved that Christ should suffer, and repentance
be preached in his name. Therefore my father loves me, because I give my life
for the sheep, this commandment he gave me. As Moses lifted up the Serpent in
ye desert, so must the son of man be lifted up. In an other place. Father,
save me from this hour. But I am therefore come even to this hour. Father
glorify thy son. Where he plainly speaks of the end why he took flesh,
that he might be a sacrifice and satisfaction to do away sin. After the same
sort does Zachary pronounce, Lu. i.xix.
that he came according to the promise given to the fathers, to give light to
them that sat in the shadow of death. Let us remember that all these things
are spoken of the son of God: Col. ii.iii. i. Cor. ii.ii.
in whom Paul in an other place testifies, that all the treasures of
knowledge and wisdom are hidden, and byside whom he glories that he knows
nothing.

things prove the contrary, but that the same Christ that redeemed men being
damned, might also in puttyng on their flesh testify his love toward the^,
being preserved and safe. The answer is short, yt for as much as the holy ghost
pronounces, that by the eternal decree of God these two things were joined
together, that Christ should be our redemer, and also partaker of all one
nature with us, therefore it is not lawefull for us to search any further. For
who so ever is tickled with desire to know any more, he being not contented
with the unchangeable ordinance of God, does show also that he is not
contented with the same Christ that was given us to be the price of our
redemption. But Paul not only reherseth to what end he was sent, but also
climbyng to the hye mystery of the predestination, he very fitly represseth
all wantonness and itchyng desire of man's wit. Ephesians. iiij.v.
The father chose us in Christ before the creation of the world, to make us
his sons by adoption, according to the purpose of his will: and he accepted
us in his beloved son, in whom we have rede^ptio^ by his blood. Truly here
is not the fall of Ada^ set before as though it were foremost in time but is
showed what God determined before all ages, when his will was to help the
misery of ma^kinde. If the adversary obiecte again, that this purpose of God
did hang upon the fall of man which he did fores^ent is enough and more for
me, to say, that they with wicked boldness break forth to feign them a new
Christ, who so ever suffer themselves to search for more, or hope to know more
of Christ than God has foreapointed them by his secret decree. And for good
cause did Paul, Ephe. iii.xvi.
after he had so discoursed of ye proper office of Christ, whish to ye
Ephesians the spirit of understanding, to comprehend what is the length,
heygth, breadth, and depth, even the love of Christ that surmounteth al
knowledge: even as if of purpose he would set bars about our minds, that
when mention is made of Christ, they should not, be it never so little, swerve
from the grace of reconciliation. Wherefore, i. Tim. i.xv.
sith this is a faithful saying (as Paul testifies) that Christ is come to
save sinners, I do gladly rest in the same. And whereas in an other place the
same Apostle teaches, that the grace which is now disclosed by the Gospel,
was given us in Christ before the times of the world: I determine that I
ought constantly to abide therein to the end. Against this modesty Osiander
carpeth unjustly which has again in this time unhappily stirred this
question before lightly moved by a few. He accuses them of presumption yt
say, that the son of God should not have appeared in the flesh, if Ada^ had
not fallen, because this invention is confuted by no testimony of Scripture.
As though Paul did not bridle froward curiosity, when after he had spoken of
redemption purchaced by Christ, he by and by commands to avoid foolish
questions. (...). iij.ix.
The madness of some did burst out so far, that while they disordrely
coueted to seem witty, they moved this question, whether the Son of God might
have taken upon him the nature of an Ass. This monstruousnesse which all the
godly do worthyly abhor as detestable, let Osiander confute with this
pretense that it is never expressly confuted in the Scripture. As though when
Paul accompteth nothing precious or worthy to be known, but Christ crucified,
he does therefore admit an Ass to be the author of salvation. Ephesians. iiij.xxij.
Therefore he that in an other place reports, that Christ by the eternal
counsel of his father was ordained to be a head to gather althinges together:
will never the more acknowledge an other that has no office of redemyng
appointed him.

^e. i.xxvij
Therefore manne was created after the image of God, in whom the creatours
will was to have his glory seen as in a lookynge glass. To this degree of
honor was he aduau^ced by the benefit of the only begotten son: But I say
further, that the same son was a common head as well to Angels as to men,
so that the same dignity that was bestowed upon manne, did also belong unto
Angels. For when we hear them called the children of God, it were inconvenient
to deny, that there is somethyng in them wherein they resemble their father.
Now if his will was to have his glory to be represented as well in Angels as
in men, and to be seen in both natures, Osiander does fondely trif^e in
saying, that the Angeles were then set behind men, because they did not
bear the image of Christ. For they could not continually enjoy the present
beholding of God, unless they were like him. Co^o. iij.x*
And Paul teaches, that men are no otherwise renewed after the image of
God, but if they be coupled with Angels, that they may clean together under
one head. Finally, if we believe Christ, this shall be our last felicity, to be
made of like form to the Angeles, when we shall be received up into heaven. But
if Osiander will conclude, that the original pattern of the image of God was
in Christ as he is man, by the same reason a man may say, that Christ must
needs have been partaker of the nature of Angels, because the image of God
pertains also to them.

like unto God, and yet it should not therefore have been necessary, (...) the
son of God should be made either man or Angel. And in ^ame he fears that
absurdity, least unless the unchangeable counsel of God had been before the
creation of man that Christ should be borne, not as the redemer but as the
first man, he should have lost his prerogative: for as much as now he should
be borne man only by an accident cause, that is to restore mankind being
lost, and so it might be gathered thereupon, that Christ was created after the
image of Adam. For why should he so much abhor that which the Scripture so
openly teaches, that he was made like unto us in all things, except sin?
Hebr. iiii, xv. Luke. iii.xxxviii. i. Cor. xv.xlvii.
Whereupon Luke doubts not to reckon him the son of Adam in his Genealogye.
And I would feign know why Paul calls Christ the second Adam, but because
the estate of man was appointed for him, that he might raise up the posterity
of Adam out of their ruin. For if he were in order before that creation, he
should have been called the first Adam. Osiander boldly affirms, that because
Christ was already before known man in the mind of God, men were formed after
the same pattern. But Paul in namyng him the second Adam sets mean between
the first beginning of man and the restitution which we obtain by Christ, the
fall of man whereby grew the necessity to have nature restored to her first
degree. Whereupon it follows, yt this same was the cause why the son of God
was borne to become man. In the mean time, Osiander reasons ill and
vnsauorily, that Adam, so long as he had stand without falling, should have been the image of himself and not of Christ. I answer by the contrary,
because though the son of God had never put on flesh, nevertheless both in
the body and in the soul of man should have shyned the image of God, in the
bright beams whereof it always appeared, that Christ is verily the head and
has the sovereign supremicie in all. And so is that foolish suttletie
assoyled, which Osiander blows abroad, that the Angels should have lacked
this head, unless it had been purposed by God to clothe his son with flesh,
yea though there had been no fault of Adam. For he does to rashly snatche hold
of that which no man in his right wit will grant, that Christ has no
supremicie over Angels, that they should have him for their Prince, but in so
much as he is manne. But it is easily gathered by the words of Paul, Colos.
^.xv
that in as much as he is the eternal word of God, he is the first begotten
of all creatures: not that he is create, or ought to be reckened among
creatures: but because the state of the world in integrity, such as it was
at the beginning garnished with excellentt beauty, had no other original:
and then, that in as much as he was made manne, Coloss. i.xviii. Col. ^.xvi.
he was the first begotten of the dead. For the Apostle in one short clause
sets forth both these poinctes to be considered: that all things were
create by the son, that he might bear rule over Angels: and that he was
made manne, that he might begin to be the redemer. Of like ignorance is it
that he says, that men should not have had Christ to their king, if he had not
ben man. As though the kingdom of God could not stand, if the eternal son
of God, although not clothed with ye flesh of man, gatheryng together both
Angels and men into the fellowship of his heavenly glory and life, should
himself bear the soueraintie. But in this false principle he is always
deceived, or rather deceyueth himself, that the Church should have be^ without
a head, unless Christ had appeared in the flesh. As though, even as the Angeles
enjoyed him their head, he could not likewise by his divine power rule over
men, and by the secret force of his spirit quicke^ and nourish them like his
own body, till being gathered up into heaven, they might enjoy al one lite
with the Angels. These trifles that I have hither to confuted, Osiander
accompteth for most strong oracles: eue^ so as being drunk with the sweetness
of his own speculations, he uses to blow out fond Bacch^s cries of matters
of nothing. But this one that he brings after, he ^^yth is much more strong,
that is the prophecy of Ada^, which, seeing his wife said, Ge. i.xviii
this now is a bone of my bones and flesh of my flesh. But how proves he
that to be a prophecy? Because in Matthew Christ gives the same saying to
God. As though that what so ever God has spoken by men, conteyneth some
prophecy. Let Osia^der seek prophecies in every commandment of the law,
which, it is certain to have come from God the author of them. Biside that,
Christ should have been gross and earthly, if he had rested upon the ^^erall
sense. Because he speaks not of the mistical vi^on whereunto he has
vouchesaued to receive his church, but only of faithfulness between man and
wife: for this cause he reaches, that God pronounced that man and wife shall be
one flesh, that no man should attemp^ to break tha^ insoluble knot by divorce.
If Osiander loathe this simplicity, let him blame Christ, for that he led not
his disciples further to a mystery* in more suttelly expou^ding the saying of
his father. Neither yet does Paul mameteyne his error, Ephesians. iij.xxx.
which after he had said that we are flesh of the flesh of Christ* by and by
adds, that this is a great mystery, for his purpose was not to tell in what
meaning Adam spoke it, but under the figure and similitude of marriage, to set
forth the holy couplyng together, that makes us one with Christ. And so do
the words sound. Because when he gives warnyng that he speaks this of
Christ and his church, he does as it were by way of correction, sever the
spiritual ioynyng of Christ and his church from the law of marriage. Wherefore
this fickle reason easily vanishes away. And I think I need no more to shake
up any more of that sort of chafe, because the vanity of them all is sone
found out by this short confutation. But this sobriety shall abundantly
suffice to ^eede soundly the children of God: that when the fullness of tunes
was come, the son of God was sent, made of woman, made under the law, to
redeem them that were under the law.

The.xiii. Chapter. That Christ took upon him the true substance of the flesh
of man.
truth of his human nature has in the old time ben impugned both by the
Manichees and the Marcionites: of whom, the Marcionites fained a ghost instead of the body of Christ, and the Manichees dreamed that he had a heavenly
flesh. But both many and strong testimonies of the Scripture do stand against
them both. For the blessing is promised neither in a heavenly seed, nor in the
coun^erfaite shape of man, Ge. (...). and xii.xviii. and xxvi.iiii. Psalm.
x^v.vii. Mat. i.i. Romans i.iii. Romans ix.v
but in the sede of Abraham and Jacob. Neither is the eternal throne promised
to a man made of air, but to the son of David and to the fruit of his womb.
Therefore being delivered in the flesh, he is called the son of David and
Abraham: not because he is only borne of the womb of the Uirgin, and create in
the air, but because (as Paul expounds it) he is according to the flesh
made of the seed of David: as in an other place the Apostle teaches, that he
descended of the Jews. For which cause the Lord himself not contented with
the bare name of man, does oftentimes call himself the son of man, meaning
to express more plainly that he was man truly issued of the seed of
mankind. Sith the holy ghost has so often by so many means with so great
diligence and simplicity declared a thing not obscure of it self, who would
have thought any men to be so shameless as to presume yet to spread mistes to
darken it? And yet we have other testimonies at hand, if we listed to heap up
more of them. As is that saying of Paul: Gal. iiij.iiii.
that God sent his son made of woman. And innumerable other places, whereby
appears that he was subject to hungre, thirst, cold, and other infirmities of
our nature. But out of many these are chiefly to be chosen, that may most
avail to edify our minds in true co^fide^ce. Heb. i^ xvi
As, where it is said, that he gave not so great honor to the Angels, as to
take their nature upon him: but took our nature, that in flesh and blood he
might, by death, destroy him that had the power of death. Again, that by
benefit of that communicating we are reckened his brethren. Heb. i.xi,
^^.xvii. Hebr. iiii.xv.
Again, that he ought to have been made like unto his brethren, that he might
be made a merciful and ^aith^ull intercessour: that we have not a Bishop that
can not be compariont of our infirmities. And such like. And for ye same
purpose serves that which we touched a little before, that it behooved that the
sins of the world should be cleansed in our flesh: Which Paul plainly
affirms. And truly, To. viiii.iii
what so ever the ^ather has given to Christ, it does therefore belong to us,
because he is the head, from which the whole body being knit together, grows
into one. Yea, and otherwise that will not agree together, Ioh. i.xvi.
which is said: that the Spirit was given him without measure, that all we
should draw of the fullness thereof. For as much as there is no greater
absurdity than to say, that God is enriched in his essence by any accidental
gift. Ioh. xvii.xix.
And for this cause Christ says in an other place: I do sacrifice my self for
them.

As for the places that they bring forth to confirm their error, Phil. ii.vii
that he was made after the likeness of man, and that he was found in shape as
a man. But so he nothing weyeth what is Paul's purpose in that place. For his
meaning is not to teach what manner of body Christ took upon him, but that
whereas he might have showed ^orth his godhed, he made none other show of
himself, but as of an abject and unregarded man. For, to exhort us by his
example to submission, he shows, that for as much as he was God, he might have
by and by set forth his glory to be seen to the world: but yet that he gave
over some of his own right, and of his own accord abaced himself, because he
did put on the image of a servant and contended with that humility, suffered
his godhed to be hidden with the veil of the flesh. He does not here teach
what Christ was, but how he behaved himself. And also by the whole process of
the text it is easily gathered, that Christ was abaced in the true nature of man. For what means this, that in shape he was found as manne, but that
for a time the glory of his godhed did not shine forth, but only the shape of man appeared in base and abject estate? For otherwise that place of Peter
could not stand together, i. Pet. iii.xviii.
that he was dead in the flesh, but quickened in the spirit, if the son of
God had not ben weak in the nature of man: which Paul expresses more
plainly in saying, ii. Cor. xiii iiii. i. Cor. xv.xlvii.
that he suffered by reason of the weakness of the flesh. And hereunto
serves the exaltation: because it is expressly said, that Christ atteyned a
new glory after that he abaced himself, which could not well agree to be
spoken of any, but of a man having flesh and soul. Manichees framed Christ a
body of air, because Christ is called the second Adam, heavenly of heaven.
But neither in that place does the Apostle bring in a heavenly essence of the
body, but a spiritual force which being poured abroad by Christ, does quicken
us. Now, as we have already seen, Peter and Paul do sever the same from his
flesh. But rather that doctrine which is received among the true teachers,
concerning the flesh of Christ, is v^ry well proved by that place. For if
Christ had not all one nature of body with us it were a very vain argument,
that Paul with such vehemency ^oloweth: i. Cor. xv.xvi.
that if Christ be risen again, we shall also rise again: and y^ we do not
rise, then that Christ also is not risen. By what cauillatio^s so ever either
the old Ma^ichees or their new Disciples go about to escape, they shall not
wind themselves away. It is a foul shifte, that they fondly say, that Christ
is called the son of man, in so much as he is promised of men. For it is
plain, that after the Hebrewe phrase, very man in deed is called the Son of man. And Christ without doubt kept the phrase of his own tongue. Also it
ought to make no question, what ought to be understood by the children of
Adam. And (not to go far of) the place of the.viij. Psalm, which the
Apostles apply to Christ, shall be sufficient enough: What is man that thou art
myndefull of him, or the son of man, that thou visitest him? In this figure
is expressed the true manhood of Christ. For though he were not immediately
begotten of a mortal father, yet his race came from Adam. For else that place
could not stand which we have already alleged, that Christ is made par^aker of
flesh and blood, Hebr. ii.xiiii.
that he might gather to him young children to the service of God. In which
words it is plainly determined, that Christ is made fellow and partaker of
all one nature with us. In which meaning also he says, that both the author
of holiness and they that are made holy, are all of one. For it is proved by
the process of the text, that the same is referred to the fellowship of nature:
because he by and by adds, Therefore he is not ashamed to call them brethren.
For if he had said before, that the faithful are of God in so great dignity,
what cause should there be to be ashamed? But because Christ of his infinite
grace does join himself to the base and unnoble, therefore it is said, yt he
is not a shamed. But in vain the^ object, that by this mean ye wicked shall
become the brethern of Christ: because we know that the children of God are not
borne of flesh and blood, but of the holy ghost by faith. Therefore only flesh
makes not a brotherly joining. But although the Apostle give this honor to
the faithful only, to be of one with Christ, yet it follows not, but that the
wicked may be borne of the same original. As when we say that Christ was
made man, to make us the sons of God: this saying extends not to all men,
because faith is the mean which spiritually graffeth us into ye body of
Christ. Also they foolishly move a brawle about the name of First begotten.
Romans viij.xxix.
They say that Christ should have been borne of Adam straight at the beginning,
that he might be the first begotten among brethren. For the title of First
begotten, is not referred to age, but to the degree of honor, Hebr. ij.xvi.
and excellence of power. And more color has that which they babble, that
Christ took to him man and not Angels, because he received mankind into
favor. For, to set out more largely the honor which God vouchesaued to give
us, he compared the Angels with us, which were in this behalf set behind us.
And if the testimony of Moses be well weyed, where he says that the seed of
the woman shall break the serpents head, Ge. iii.xv
it shall utterly end the controversy. For only Christ is not there spoken of,
but all mankind. Because the victory was to be gotten by Christ for us, he
generally prounounceth that the posterity of the woman should get the
vpperhand of the Deuell. Whereupon follows, that Christ issued of mankind,
because it was Gods purpose there to raise up Eve, whom he spoke unto with good
hope, that she should not fainth with sorrow.

They do no less wickedly than foolishly entangle with allegories Gal.
iii.xviii.
but one Christ. Of like sort is it that they allege: that he is no otherwise
called the son of David, but because he was promised and at length in his
dew time delivered. For after that Paul had ones named him the son of God:
in that he by and by adds, Romans i.iii.
According to the flesh, he truly means of nature. And so in the.ix.
chapter calling him the blessed God, he says severally byside, that according
to the flesh he descended of the Jews. Now if he were not truly begotten of
the seed of David, to what purpose shall be this saying, that he is the fruit of
his womb? What means this promise? Ps. cxxxii, xi*
Out of thy loins shall he descend, that shall abide in thy seat. Now in the
Genealogy of Christ, as it is rehearsed of Matthew, they do Sophistically
mock. For though he do not rehearse the parents of Marie but of Joseph, yet
because he speaks of a thing sufficiently known abroad among the people, he
reckeneth it enough to show that Joseph came of the seed of David, when it
was well known that Marie was of the same stock. But Luke more presses them
in teaching that salvation brought by Christ, is common to all mankind:
because Christ the author of salvation proceeded from Adam the common parent of
al. I grant in deed, that by the Genealogy it can none otherwise be gathered
that Christ was the son of David, but in so much as he was begotten of the
Uirgin. But the new Marcionites to color their error do to proudely, in this
that to prove that Christ took his body of nothing, they affirm that women are
sedelesse, and so they overthrow the principles of nature. But because that is
no question of divinity, and the reasons that they bring are so fickle, that
they may very easily be confuted: therefore I will not touch those things
that belong to Philosophy and Physike, and will hold me contented to wipe away
those things that they allege out of Scripture: that is, that Aaron and
Ioiadah took wives of the tribe of Iehuvah, and so the difference of tribes had
then ben confounded, if woman had engendryng seed in her. But it is well
enough known, tha^^s touching civil order, the kinreds are reckened by the
seed of the man, and yet the excelle^cye of the kind of man above woman
proue^h nor the contrary, but that in generation the sede of woman mu^^ ^^te.
And this solution extends to all the Genealogies. Oftentimes when the
Scripture reckeneth up a Genealogy, it names the m^n only: shall we therefore
say, that the women are nothing? But very children do know, that women are
comprehended under the name of men. And after this sort it is said, that women
bring forth to their husbands, because the name of the household always
remains with the males. Now as this is granted to the excellency of the
male kind, that the children are compted noble or unnoble, according to the
estate of their fathers: so also in the state of bondage the issue follows the
womb, according to the judgment of the Civil lawiers. Whereby we may gather,
that the issue is engendered of the seed of the woman. And it has of long time
ben received in common use of all nations, that the mothers are called
Genitrices, that is engendrers. Wherewith Gods law also agrees, which else
should wrongefully forbid the marriage of the uncle with his sisters daughter,
because there were no consanguinitie between them: and also it were lawful for
a man to marry his sister by the mothers side, so that she were begotten of an
other father. But as I grant that there is a passive power as^ribed to women,
so do I answer that the same thing is indifferently spoken of them that is of
men. Gal. ^^^.iiii.
And Christ himself is not said to be made by the woman, but of the woman.
But some of their company shaking of all shame do to lewdely ask, whether we
will say that Christ was engendered of the menstruall sede of the Uirgin, for I
will likewise ask of them, whether he did not congele in the blood of his
mother, which they shall be constrained to confess. Ther^ore it is fitly
gathered of Matthewes words, that because Christ was begotten of Marie, ^
he was engendered of her seed: as a like eng^ndring is meant when it is said,
that Booz was begotten of Rahab. Neither does Matthewe here describe the Uirgin
as a condu^^ pipe through which Christ passed: but he seuereth this marvelous
manner of generation from the common manner, for that by her Christ was begotten
of the seed of David. For even in the same sort, that Isaac was begotten of
Abraham* Solomon of David, and Joseph of Jacob, likewise it is said, that
Christ was begotten of his mother. For the Evangelist so frames the order of
his speech, and willing to prove that Christ came of David, is contented with
this one reason, that he was begotten of Marie. Whereby it follows, that he
took if for a matter confessed, that Marie was of kin to Joseph.

The absurdities wherewith they would charge us, are stuffed full To. v.xii.
that as by one man came sin, and by sin death, so by the righteousness of
one man grace has abounded. i. Cor. xv.xlvii.
Wherewith also agrees an other comparison of his: the first Adam of earth,
earthly and natural, the second of heaven, heavenly. Therefore in an other
place, Romans viii.iii.
the same Apostle, where he teaches that Christ was sent in the likeness of
sinful flesh to satif^ie the law, does so expressly sever him from the common
estate of men, that he be very man without fault and corruption. But very
childishly they trifle in reasonyng thus: If Christ be free from all spot, and
was by the secret workyng of the holy ghost begotten of the seed of Marie,
then is not the woman's seed, but only the man's seed unclean. For we do not
make Christ free from all spot, for this cause that he is only engendered of his
mother without copulatio^ of man, but because he is sanctified by the holy
ghost, that the generation might be pure and uncorrupted, such as should have been before the fall of Adam. And this always remained steadfastly determined with
us, that so often as the scripture puts us in mind of the clennesse of
Christ, it is meant of his true nature of manhood: because it were superfluous
to say that God is clean. Also the sanctification that he speaks of in
the.xvii. of John, could have no place in the nature of God. Neither are their
feigned two seeds of Ada^, although there came no infection to Christ: because
the generation of man is not unclean or vicious of it self, but accidental by
his fa^lyng. Therefore it is no marvel, if Christ, by whom the estate of
innocence was to be restored, were exempt from common corruption. And whereas
also they thrust this upon us for an absurdity* that if the Word of God did
put on flesh, then was it enclosed in a narrow prison of an earthly body: this
is but mere waywardenesse: because although the infinite essence of the Word
did grow together into one person with the nature of man: yet do we feign no
enclosyng of it. For the Son of God descended maruellously from heaven, so as
yet he left not heaven, it was his will to be maruelously borne in the Uirgins
womb, to be conversant in earth, and hang upon the cross, yet that he always
filled the world even as at the beginning.

The.xiiii. Chapter. How the ^wo natures of the Mediator do make one person.
Ioh. i.xiiij
but because he chose him a temple of the Uirgins womb to dwell in: he that
was the Son of God, became also the son of man, not by confusion of
substance, but by unity of person. For we so affirm the godhed joined and
united to the manhood, that either of the^ have their whole propretie
remaining, and yet of them both is made one Christ. If any thing in all
worldly things may be found like to so great a mystery, the similitude of
man is most fit, whom we see to consist of two substances, whereof yet
neither is so myngled with other, but that either keeps the property of his
own nature. For neither is the soul the body, nor the body the soul.
Wherefore both that thing may be severally spoken of the soul, which can no
way agree with the body: and likewise of the body that thing may be said,
which can by no mean agree with the soul: and that may be said of the whole
man, which can be but unfitly taken neither of the soul nor of the body
severally. Finally, the propreties of the soul are sometime attributed to the
body, and the properties of the body sometime to the soul* and yet he that
consists of them is but one man and not many. But such forms of speech do
signi^ie both that there is one person in man compounded of two natures knit
together, and that there are two diverse natures which do make the same
person. And so do the Scriptures speak of Christ: Sometime they give unto
him those things that ought singularly to be referred to his manhood, and
sometime those things that do peculiarly belong to his godhed, and sometime
those things that do comprehend both natures, and do agree with neither of
them severally. And this conioynynge of the two natures that are in Christ,
they do with such religiousnesse express, that sometime they do put them in
common together: which figure is among the old authors called, Communicatyng
of propreties.

Ioh. viij.lviij.
saying: Before that Abraham was, I am: was far disagreyng from his ma^hode.
Neither am I ignorant with what cauillation the erroneous spirits do deprave
this place: for they say yt he was before all ages, because he was already
foreknowen the Redemer, as well in the counsel of the father, as in the minds
of the godly. But where as he openly distinguissheth the day of his
manifestation from his eternal essence, and o^ purpose pronunce^h unto
himself an authority by antiquity wherein he excels above Abraham, he does
undoubtedly challenge to himself ye which is propre to the godhed. Whereas Paul
affirms yt he is the first begotten of al creatures, Colos. i.xv. Ih. xvii.v.
which was before al things, and by whom al things keep their being: and
whereas he himself reports that he was in glory with the father before the
creation of the world, Ih. v.xvii.
and that he works together with the father: these things do nothing more
agree with ye nature of men. It is therefore certain, that these and such like
are peculiarly ascribed to the godhed. Esa. xlij.l. Luc. i.lii. Ih. viii.l.
Mat. xiii. Ih. xiiii.x. and. vi.xxxvi.
But whereas he is called the servant of the father: and whereas it is said, that
he grew in age, wisdom and favor with God and men: that he seeks not his
own glory: that he knows not the last day: that he speaks not of himself:
that he does not his own will: where it is said, that he was seen and felt:
this wholly belongs to his only manhood. For in respect that he is good, Luc.
xxiiii.xxxix.
neither can he increase in any thing, and he works all things for his own
sake, neither is any thing hidden from him, he does all things according to
the free choice of his own will, and ca^ neither be seen nor felt. And yet he
does not severally ascribe these things to his nature of man only, but takes
the^ upon himself, as if they did agree with the person of the mediator. But
the communicating of propreties is in this that Paul says, Act. xx.xxviiii.
i. Co. ii.vi. i. Iho. i.i.
that God did by his own blood purchase unto him a Church: and the Lord of
glory crucified. Again, where John says, that the Word of life was felt.
Truly God neither has blood, nor suffers, nor ca^ be touched with hands.
But because he which was both very God and man, Christ being crucified, did
shed his blood for us: those things that were done in his nature of man, are
improperly, and ye^ not without reason given to his godhed. i. Iho. iii.xvi.
A like example is, where John teaches that God gave his soul for us:
therefore there also the propretie of the ma^hode is communicate with the other
nature. Ih. iii.xiii.
Again, when Christ said being yet conversant in earth, that no man has
ascended into heaven, but the son of man that was in heaven: truly
according to his manhood, and in the flesh that he had put on, he was not then
in heaven: but because himself was both God and manne, by reason of the
unity of both natures, he gave to the one that, which belonged to the other.

But most plainly of all do these places set forth the true substance Ih.
i.xxix. and. v.xxi.
that he has received of his father power to forgive sins, to raise up whom
he will, to give righteousness, holiness and salvation, to be made judge over
the quick and the dead, to be honored even as the father is: Iho. ix.v.
Finally, that he is called the light of the world, the good shepeherd, the
only door, ye true Uine. For such prerogatives had the son of God, when he
was showed in ye flesh: which although he enjoyed with his father before the
world was made, Ih. xxi.i.
yet he had the^ not in the same manner or the same respect, and which could not
be given to such a man as was nothing but man. i. Cor. xv, xxiiii
In the same meaning ought we to take that which is in Paul: that Christ
after the judgment ended, shall yield up the kingdom to God and the father:
Even the kingdom of the son of God, which had no beginning, nor shall have
any ending: but even as he lay hid under the baseness of the flesh, and
abaced himself taking upon him the form of a servant, Philip. ij, v^^^.
and layng aside the port of majesty, he showed himself obedient to his
father: and having performed al such subjection, at length is crowned with
honor and glory, Heb. ii.vi. Phil. ii.x. i. Cor. xv.xxvi^.
and auaunced to the hiest dominion, yt all knees shall bow before him: so shall
he then yield up to his father both that name and crown of glory, and what so
ever he has received of his father, that God may be al in all. For to what
purpose is power and dominion given him, but that the father should govern us
by his hand? In which sense it is also said, yt he sits at the right hand of
the father. But this is but for a time, til we may enjoy ye present beholding
of the godhed. And here ye error of ye old fathers ca^ not be excused, which
while they took no heed to the person of ye Mediator, have obscured the
natural meaning of almost al yt doctrine that is read in the gospel of John,
and have entangled themselves in many snares. Let this therefore be unto us the
keye of right understanding, that such things as belong to the office of the
Mediator, are not spoken simply of the nature of God, nor of the nature of
man. Therefore, Christ shall reign till he come forth to judge the world, in so
much as he joins us to his father, according to the small measure of our
weakness. But when we being made partakers of the heavenly glory, shall see
God such as he is, then he having performed the office of Mediator, shall
cesse to be the ambassador of his father, and shall be contented with that glory
which he enjoyed before the making of the world. And ye name of Lord does in
no other respect peculiarly agree with ye person of Christ, but in this, that
it signifies the mean degree between God and us. For which purpose makes yt
saying of Paul: i. Cor. viij.^^i.
One God, of whom are al things, and one Lord, by whom are althinges, eue^ he
to whom the dominion for a time is committed by the father, until his divine
majesty be to be seen face to face. From whom so fare is it of yt any thing
shall decay, by yelding up the dominion to his father, yt he shall become so much
ye more glorious. For the^ shall God also cesse to be ye head of Christ, because
christ's godhed shall the^ shine of it self, whereas yet it is covered with a
certain veil.

Aug. in (...) ad (...). cap. 30.
to take away his Godhed: and likewise of those things that are spoken of his
godhed to take away his manhood: and of those things that are so jointly spoken
of both natures, that they severally agree with neither, to take away both.
But what is that else but to say, that Christ is not manne, because he is God:
and that he is not God, because he is manne: and that he is neither manne nor
God, because he is both manne and God? We therefore do determine that Christ,
as he is both God and manne, consistynge of both natures united, though not
confounded, is our Lord and the true son of God, even according to his
manhood, though not by reason of his manhood. For the error of Nestorius is
to be driven far away from us, which when he went about rather to draw in
sonder, than to distinguish ye nature, did by yt mean imagine a doble Christ.
Whereas we see yt the Scripture cries out with loud voice against it, where
both the name of the son of God is given to him that was borne of the
Uirgin, Luc. xxxiij. and xl^^i.
and the Uirgin her self is called the mother of our Lord. We must also
beware of the madness of Eutiches, least while we go about to show the
unity of the person, we destroy either nature. For we have already alleged so
many testimonies, and there are every where so many other to be alleged, where
his Godhede is distinguished from his manhood, as may stop the mouths even
of the most contentious. And a little here after I will adioyne some
testimonies, to confute better that fained devise, but at this present, one
place shall content us. Christ would not have called his body a Temple, Iho.
ij.xix.
unless the Godhed did distinctly dwell therein. Wherefore as Nestorius was
worthily condemned in the synod at Ephesus, so also was Eutiches afterward
condemned in the synodes of Constantinople and Chalcedon: for as much as it is
no more lawful to confound the two natures in Christ, than it is to draw
them in sonder.

But in our age also there has risen up no less pestilent a monster, the
flesh, which yet had this alwaie from eternal begetting to be the Son,
which the Angeles words to Marye do secretly show, That holy thing that
shall be borne of thee, shall be called the son of God: as if he should have
said, that the name of the Son which was obscure in time of the law,
should now become famous and every where known abroad. Romans viij.xv.
Wherewith agrees that saying of Paul, that now by Christ we are the
children of God, freely and with boldness to cry Abba, Father. But were not
the holy fathers in the old time also accounted among the children of God?
Yea: and bearing them bold upon that interest, they called upon God by name
of their Father. But because sins the only begotten son of God was brought
fourth into the world, the heavenly fatherhod is become more plainly known:
therefore Paul assigns this, as it were, a privilege to the kingdom of
Christ. But yet this is steadfastly to be holden, that God never was father
either to Angels or men, but in respect of the only begotten son: and
that men specially, whom their own wickedness makes hateful to God, are
his children by free adoption, because he is the son of God by nature. And
there is no cause why Seruettus should cavil, that this hangs upon
filiation or becoming a son, which God had determined with him self:
because our purpose is not hear to speak of the fygures how the expiation
was showed in the blood of beasts: but because they could not in deed be the
children of God, unless their adoption were grounded upon the head, it is with
out reason to take that from the head which is common to all the me^bres. I
go yet further: Whereas the Scripture calls the Angels the sons of God,
Ps. lxxxij.vii.
whose so great dignity did not hang upon the redemption to come: yet must
it needs be, that the son is in order before them, which makes the father
to be their father. I will repete it again shortly, and add the same of
mankind. Since from at their first beginning both Angels and men were
created, with this condition, yt God should be common father to them both, if
that saying of Paul be true, that Christ was always the head and the first
begotten of all creatures, Col. i.xv.
to have the first degree in all: I think I do rightly gather that he was
also the son of God before the creation of the world.

that he be truly and proprely the Son of God, which was also borne of the
Uirgin, and offered him self for sacrifice to his father upon the cross: Romans
i.^.
but yet in respect of his Godheade, as Paul teaches, when he says, he was
severed out to preach the Gospel of God, which he had before promised of
his Son, which was begotten of the seed of David according to his flesh,
and declared the son of God in power. But why, when he names him distinctly
the Son of David according to the flesh, should he severally say, that he
was declared the Son of God, unless he meante to show that this did hang
upon some other thing, than upon the very flesh? For in the same sense in an
other place he says, ii. Co. xlii.iiii
that he suffered by the weakness of the flesh, and rose again by the
power of the spirit, even so in this place he makes a dyfference of both
natures. Truly they must needs grant, that as he has that of his mother
for which he is called the Son of David, so he has that of his Father for
which he is called the Son of God: and the same is an other thing and
several from the nature of man. The Scripture gives him two names,
calling him here and there sometimes the Son of God, and sometimes the Son
of Man. Of the second there can be no contention moved: but according to the
common use of the Hebrew tongue he is called ye Son of Man, because he is of
ye ofspringe of Adam. By ye contrary I affirm, that he is called the Son of
God in respect of the Godheade and eternal essence: because it is no less
meet that yt be referred to the nature of God, that he is called the Son of
God, than to ye nature of man, yt he is called ye Son of Man. Again, in the
same place that I alleged, Paul does mean that he which was according to
the flesh begotten of the seed of David, To. ix.v.
was no otherwise declared the Son of God in power, tha^ he teaches in an
other place, that Christ which according to the flesh descended of the
Jews, is God blessed for ever. Now if in both places the distinction of the
double nature be touched, by what right will they say, that he which
according to the flesh is the Son of Man, is not also the Son of God, in
respect of the nature of God?

They do in deed disordrely enforce for the maintenance of their errore, Romans
viij.xxxij.
that God spared not his own Son: and where the Angel commanded, that the
very same he that should be borne of the Uirgin, Lu. i.xxxij.
should be called the Son of the highest. But, least they should glory in
so fickle an objection, let them weye with us a little, how strongly they
reason. For if it be rightly concludes, that from his conception he began to
be the Son of God, because he that is conceived is called the Son of God,
then shall yt follow, that he began to be the word at his manifesting in the
flesh, because Ihon says, i. Ih. i.i.
that he brengeth them tydinges of the Word of life, which his hands have
handled. Likewise that, which is read in the Prophet, ^^jic. v.ij
Thou Bethleem in ye land of Judah, art a little one in thousands of Judah: Out
of yt shall be borne to me a guide to rule my people Israel, and his coming
fourth from the beginning, from the days of eternity. How will they be
compelled to expound this, if they will be content to follow such manner of
reasoninge? For I have protested, that we do not agree with Nestorius, which
imagined a double Christ: whereas by our doctrine, Christ has made us the
sons of God with him, by right of brotherly conioyninge, because he is the
only begotte son of God in the flesh which he took of us. And Augustine
does wisely admonish us, that this is a bright glass, wherein to behold the
marvelous and syngular favor of God, that he atteined honor in respect
that he is man which he could not deserve. Therefore Christ was adorned with
this excellency, even according to the flesh from the womb of his mother,
to be the Son of God. Yet is there not in the unity of person to be fained
such a mixture, as may take away that which is propre to the Godheade. For
it is noe more absurdity, that the eternal word of God and Christ, by
reason of the two natures united into one person, be diverse ways called the
Son of God, than that he be according to diverse respects, called
sometime the Son of God, and sometime the Son of Man. And no more does
that other cauillation of Seruertus accomber us: that before that Christ
appeared in the flesh, he is no where called the Son of God, but under a
figure, because although the describinge of him, then was somewhat dark: yet
where as it is already clearly proved that he was no otherwise eternal God,
but because he was the word begotten of the eternal father, and that this name
does no otherwise belong to the person of the Mediatore which he has taken
upon him, but because he is God openly showed in the flesh: and that God the
Father had not been called Father from the beginning, if there had not then
been a mutual relation to the Son, Ep. iii.xv
by whom all kindred or fatherhoode is reckened in heaven and in earth: hereby
it is easy to gather, that even in the time of the law and the Prophets, he
was the Son of God, before that this name was commonly known in the Church.
But if they strive only about the only word, Solomon discoursinge of the
infinite hyghenesse of God, affyrmeth as well his Son as himself to be
incomprehensible. Tell his name if thou cannest (says he) or the name of his
son. Pro. xxx.iiij.
Yet I am not ignorant, that with the contentions this testimony will not be
of sufficient force: neither do I much ground upon it, sauinge that it
shows that they do maliciously cavil, that deny Christ to be the Son of
God, but in this respect that he was made man. Bysyde that, all the oldest
writers with one mouth and consent have openly testified the same: so that
their shamelessness is no less worthy to be scorned than to be abhorred,
which dare object Ireneus an Tertullian against us, both which do confess
that the Son of God was invisible, which afterward appeared visible.

the Son of God, because according to his nature of man, he is begotten of
God. So the eternal begettinge of Wisdom, that Solomon speaks of, is
destroyed, and there is noe account made of the Godheade in the Mediatore, Ec.
xxiiij.xiiii.
or a fantasyed ghooste is thruste in place of the Manhood. It were in deed
profitable to confute the grosser deceytes of Seruettus, wherewith he has
bewitched himself and some other, to the end that the godly readers
admonyshed by this exaumple, may hold them selves within the compass of
sobrenesse and modesty: sauinge that I think it should be superfluous,
because I have already done it in a book by it self. The sum of them
comes to this effect, that the Son of God, was a form in mind from the
beginning, and even then he was before appointed to be man that should be the
essential image of God. And he does acknowledge no other Word of God,
butte in outewarde show. This he expounds to be the begettinge of him,
that there was begotten in God from the beginning a will to begette a Son,
which also in act extended to the nature yt self. In the mean time he
confounds the Spirit with the Word, for that God distributed the invisible
Word and the Spirit into flesh and soul. Finally the fyguration of
Christ, has with them the place of begettinge, but he says, that he
which then was but a shadowyshe son in form, was at length begotten by
the word, to which he assigns the office of seed. Whereby it shall
follow that hoges and doges are as well the children of God, because they were
create of the original sede of the word of God. For although he compounde
Christ of three uncreate elements, to make him begotten of the essence of
God, yet he faineth that he is so the first begotten among creatures, that
the same essential Godheade is in stones, according to their degree. And
least he should seem to strippe Christ out of his Godheade, he affyrmeth
that his flesh is consubstantiall with God, and that the Word was made manne
by tourninge the flesh into God. So while he can not conceive Christ to be
the Son of God, unless his flesh came from the essence of God, and were
turned into Godheade, he brings the eternal person of the Word to
nothing, and takes from us the son of David, that was promised to be the
Redeemer. He often repeteth this, that the Son was begotten of God by
knoweledge and predestination, and that at length he was made manne of that
matter which at the beginning shyned with God in the three elements, which
afterward appeared in the first light of the world, in the cloud and in
the pyller of fire. Now how shame fully he sometime dysagreeth with himself,
it were to tedious to rehearse. By this short recital the readers that have
their sound wit may gather, that with the circumstances of this unclean
doge the hope of salvation is utterly extinguished. For if the flesh were the
Godheade it self, it should cesse to be the temple thereof. And none can be
our redeemer, but he that begotten of the seed of Abraham and David, is
according to the flesh truly made man. And he wrongfully stands upon the
words of Ihon, that the Word was made flesh. for as they resist the error
of Nestorius, so they nothing further this wicked invention, whereof Eutiches
was authore, forasmuch as the only purpose of the Evangelist was to defend
the unity of persons in the two natures.

The.xv Chapter. That we may know, to what end Christ was sent of his
Father, and what he brought us: three things are principally to be considered
in him, his Prophetical office, his Kingdom, and his Preesthoode.
^
but that it remains only propre to the Church. For if these things be
diligently considered that belong to Christ. Christ shall be found among
them only in name, and not in very deed. So at this day the Papists, although
the name of the Son of God, redemer of the world, sound in their mouth: yet
because being contented with vain pretense of the name, they spoil him of
his power and dignity: this saying of Paul may be well spoken of them, Col.
ii xix.
that they have not the head. Therefore, that faith may find sound matter of
salvation in Christ, and so rest in him, this principle is to be stablished,
that the office which is committed to him by his Father, consysteth of three
parts. For he is given both a Prophet, a King, and a Priest. Albeit, it were
but small profit to know those names, without knowledge of the end and use
of them. For they are also named among the Papists, but coldly and to no
great profit, where it is not known what each of these titles contains in
it. We have said before, how, though God sending Prophets by continual
course one after an other did never leave his people destitute of profitable
doctrine, and such as was sufficient to salvation: that yet the minds of the
godly had alwaie this persuasion, that full light of understanding was to
be hoped for only at the coming of Messiah: yea and the opinion thereof was
come, even to the Samaritanes, who yet never knew the true religion, as
appears by the saying of the woman: Io. iii.xxv
When Messiah comes, he shall teach us all things. And the Jews had not
rashly gathered this upon presumptions in their minds: But as they were taught
by assured oracles, so they believed. Notable among the other is that saying of
Esaie: Esa. ^v.iiij
Behold, I have made him a witness to peoples, I have given him to be a guide
and Schoolemayster to peoples: even as in an other place he had called him the
Angel or interpreter of the great counsel. After this manner the Apostle
commending the perfection of the doctrine of the Gospel, Hebr. i.i.
after that he had said, that God in the old time spoke to the Fathers by
the Prophets diversely, and under manifold fygures, adds that last of all
he spoke unto us by his beloved Son. But because it was the common office of
the Prophets to keep the Church in suspense, and to uphold it until the
coming of the Mediator, therefore we read that in their scattering abroad,
the faithful complained that they were deprived of that ordinary benefit,
saying: Ps. lxxiiii.ix. Danie. ix.xxiiii.
We see not our tokens: there is not a Prophet among us: there is no more any
that has knoweledge. But when Christ was now not far of, there was a time
appointed to Daniell to seal up the vision and the Prophet, not only that
the prophecye, which is there spoken of, should be stablished in assured
credit, but also that the faithful should learn with contented mind to want
the Prophets for a time, because the fullness and closing up of all
revelations was at hand.

Now it is to be noted, that ye title of commendation of Christ belongs Esa.
ii.i.
in these words: The spirit of the Lord Iehoua upon me. Therefore the Lord
has anointed me, that I should preach to the meek, should bring health
to the contrite in heart, should declare deliverance to captives, should
publishe the year of good will. etc. We see that he was anointed with the
Spirit, to be the publisher and witness of the grace of the Father. And that
not after the common manner: for he is severed from other teachers, that had
the like office. And here again is to be noted, that he took not the
anoyntinge for him self alone, that he might execute the office of teachinge,
but for his whole body, that in his continual preachinge of the Gospel, the
virtue of the Spirit should join wythal. But in the mean time this remains
certain, that by this perfection of doctrine which he has brought, an end
is made of all prophecys: so that they do diminish his authority, that being
not content with the Gospel, do patche any forain thing unto it. For that
voice which thundered from heaven, Mat. i^^.xvij
saienge: This is my beloved Son, hear him: has auaunced him by singular
privilege above the degrees of all other. Then, this oyntement is poured
abroad from the head unto all the members: as it was forespoken by Joel:
Joel. ij.xxviij i. Cor. i.xxx Col. ij.iii.
your children shall prophecy, and your daughters shall see visions. etc. But
where Paul says, yt he was given us unto wisdom: and in an other place.
that in him are hidden all the treasures of knowledge and vnderstandin he: this
has somewhat an other meaning: that is, that out of him there is nothing
profitable to know, and that they which by faith perceive what he is, have
comprehended the whole infiniteness of heavenly good things. For which cause
he writes in an other place: i. Cor. ii.^^.
I have compted it precious to know nothing, but Jesus Christ, and him
crucified: which is most true, because it is not lawful to pass beyond the
simplicity of the Gospel. And hereunto tends the dignity of a prophets
office in Christ, that we might know that in the sum of the doctrine, which
he has taught, are contained all points of perfect wisdom.

Now come I to his kingdom, of which were vain to speak, the eternity
which in Daniel the angel does attribute to the person of Christ: and
again the Angel in Luke does woorthily apply to the salvation of the
people. But that is also double or of two sorts, for the one belongs to the
whole body of the Church, the other is propre to every membre. To the first
is to be referred that which is said in the Psalm: Psa. lxxxix xxxvi.
I have ones sworn by my holiness to David, I will not lie, his seed shall
abide for ever, his seat shall be as the Sun in my syghte, yt shall be
stablyshed as the Moon for ever, and a faithful witness in heaven. Neither
is it doubtful, but that God does there promise, that he will be by the hand
of his son an eternal gouerner and defender of his Church. For the true
perfourmance of this prophecy can be found nowhere else but in Christ: for
as much as immediately after the death of Solomon, the greater part of the
dignity of the kingedome fell away, and was to the dishonor of the house of
David conveyed over to a private man, and afterward by little and little was
diminished, till at length it came to utter decaie with heavy and shameful
destruction. And the same meaning has that exclamation of Esaie: Who shall
show fourth his generation? ^sa. liii.^^ii.
For he so prnounceth that Christ shall remain alive after death, that he
joins him with his members. Therefore, so often as we hear that Christ is
armed with eternal power, let us remember that the everlasting continuance of
the Church is vpholden by this support, to remain still safe among the
troublesome tossinges, wherewith it is continually vexed, and among the
grievous and terrible motions that threaten innumerable destructions. So when
David scorneth the boldness of his enemies; Psalm. ii.xxxiiii
that go about to break the yoke of God and of Christ, and says, that the
kings and peoples raged in vain, because he that dwells in heaven is strong
enough to break their violent assaults: he assures the Godly of the
contynuall preservation of the Church, and encourages them to hope well so
often as it happens to be oppressed. So in an other place, when he says in
the person of God: Psalm. ^^.
fit on my right hand, till I make thine enemies thy foot stool: he
warns us, that how many and strong enemies so ever do conspire to besege the
Church, yet they have not strength enoughe to prevail against that
unchangeable decree of God, whereby he has appointed his son an eternal
king: whereupon it follows, that it is impossible that the Deuell with all
the preparation of the woorlde, may be able at any time to destroy the
Church, which is grounded upon the eternal seat of Christ. Now for so
much as concerns the special use of every one, the very same eternal
continuance ought to raise us up to hope of immortality. For we see, that
whatsoever is earthly and of the world, endures but for a time, Job.
^viii.xxxvi.
yea and is very frail. Therefore Christ, to lift up our hope unto heaven,
pronounces that his kingdom is not of this world. Finally, when any of us
hears, that the kingdom of Christ is spiritual, let him be raised up with
this saying, and let him pearce to the hope of a better life: and whereas he
is now defended by the hand of Christ, let him look for the full fruit of
this grace in the world to come.

to be spiritual, appears sufficiently though it were but by this, that
while we must live in warfare under the cross, during ye whole course of our
life, our estate is hard and miserable: what then should it profit us to be
gathered together under ye dominion of a heavenly king, unless we were
certain to envy the fruit thereof out of the state of this earthly life? And
therefore it is to be known, that whatsoever felicity is promised us in
Christ, it consists not in outward commodities, that we should lead a merry
and quiet life, flourish in wealth, be assured from al harms, and flow full of
those deliteful things that the flesh is wont to desire, but that it wholly
belongs to the heavenly life. But as in the world the prosperous and desired
state of the people is partly mainteyned by plenty of good things and peace
at home, and partly by strong forceable defenses, whereby it may be safe
against outward violence: so Christ also does enriche his with all things
necessary to eternal salvation of souls, and fortifieth them with strength,
by which they may stand invincible against al assaults of spiritual enemies.
Whereby we gather, that he reigns more for us than for himself, and that both
within and without: that being furnished, so far as God knows to be
expedient for us, with ye gifts of ye spirit, whereof we are naturally empty,
we may by these first fruits perceive that we are truly joined to God unto
perfect blesednesse. And then, that bearinge us bold upon the power of the
same spirit, we may not doubt that we shall alwaie have the victory against
the Deuell, the world, and every kind of hurtful thing. Luc. xvij.xxviii.
To this purpose tends the a unswer of Christ to the Pharisees, that because
the kingedome of God is with in us, it shall not come with observation. For it
is likely that because he professed that he was the same king, under whom
the sovereign blessinge of God was to be hoped for, they in scorn required
him to show fourth his signs. But he, because they (who otherwise are to
much bent to the earth) should not foolishly rest upon worldly pompes,
byddeth them to enter into their own consciences, To. x^iii.xvii.
because the kingdom of God is righteousness, peace and joy in the holy
ghos^e. Hereby we are breefely taught, what the kingedome of Christ avails
us. For, because it is not earthly or fleshly, subject to corruption, but
spiritual: he lifts us up even to eternal life, that we may patienth pass
over this life in miseries, hunger, cold contempt, reproaches, and other greues,
contented with this one thing, that our king will never leave us destitute,
but succoure us in our necessities, till having ended our war, we be called
to triumph. For such is his manner of reigning, to communicate with us all
that he has rec^iued of his father. Now whereas he armeth and furnishes us
with power, and garnisheth us with beauty and magnificens, enricheth us with
wealth: hereby is ministered unto us most plentyfull matter to glory upon, and
also bold courage to fight without fear against the Deuell, sin and death.
Finally, yt clothed with his righteousness, we may valiantly overcome all the
reproaches of ye world, and as he liberally fills us with his gifts, so we
again for our part, may bring forth fruit to his glory.

Therefore his kingly anointing is set forth unto us, not done with oil or
ointme^tes made with spices, but he is called ye anointed of god, because upon
him has rested ye spirit of wisdom, understanding, counsel, strength and
fear of God. This is the oil of gladness, wherewpth the Psalm reports
that he was anointed above his fellows, because if there were not such
excellency in him, we should be all needy and hungry. For, as it is already
said, he is not privately enriched for him self, Ihon. iii.xxxiiii. Iho.
i.xvi.
but ^o pour his plenty upon us being hungry and dry. For as it is said,
that the father gave the spirit to his son, not by measure, so there is
expressed a reason why, that all we should receive of his fullness, and grace
for grace. Out of which fountain flows that liberal geuinge, Ephesians. iiii.vii.
whereof Paul makes mention, whereby grace is diversely distributed to the
faithful, according to ye measure of the gift of Christ. Hereby is that
which I said, sufficiently confyrmed, that the kyngedome of Christ consists
in the spirit, not in earthly delytes or pompes, and therefore we must
forsake the woorlde that we may be partakers of it. Ih^. xxxii Lu. iii.xxii
A visible sign of this holy anoyntinge was showed in the baptism of Christ,
when the holy ghooste rested upon him in the likeness of a dove. That the holy
ghooste and his gifts are meante by the word Anoyntinge, ought to seem
neither novelty nor absurdity. For we are none other way quickened,
specially for so much as concerns the heavenly life: there is no drop of
lively force in us, but that which the holy ghost pours into us, which
has chosen his seat in Christ, that from thense the heavenly richesse
might largely flow out unto us, whereof we are so neady. And whereas both
the faithful stand invincible by the strength of their king, and also his
spiritual richesse plenteously flow out unto them, they are not vnwoorthyly
called Christians. But this eternity whereof we have spoken, i. Cor. xv.xxiiii.
1. Cor. xv.xxviii.
is nothing derogate by that saying of Paul: Then he shall yield up the
kingdom to God and the Father. Again* the son him self shall be made
subject, that God may be all in all things: for his meaning is nothing
else, but that in that same perfect glory, the administration of the kyngedome
shall not be such as it is now. For the father has given all power to the
son, that by the sons hand he may govern, cherishe and sustain us,
defend us under his sauegarde, and help us. So while for a little time we are
waueringe abroad from God, Christ is the mean between God and us, by little
and little to bring us to perfect conioyning with God. And truly, whereas he
sytteth on the right hand of the father, that is as much in effect, as if
he were called the fathers deputee, under whom is the whole power of his
dominion, because it is Gods will to rule and defend his Church by a mean
(as I may so call it) in the person of his Son. As also Paul does expound
it in the first chapter to the Ephesians, that he was set at the right
hand of the father, to be the head of the Church, which is his body. And to
no other meaning tends that which he teaches in an other place, Phi.
ii.ix.
that there is given him a name above all names, that in the name of Jesus all
knees should bow, and all tongues confess that it is to the glory of God
the Father. For even in the same words also he sets out in the kingedome
of Christ an order necessary for our present weakness. So Paul gathers
ryghtely, that God shall then be by himself the only head of the church,
because Christ's office in defending of the Church, shall be fulfilled. For
the same reason the Scripture commonly calls him Lord, because his Father
did set him over us to this end, to exercise his own Lordely power by him.
For though^ there be many lordeshippes in the world, yet is there to us but
one God the father, of whom are all things and we in him, and one Lord
Christ, by whom are all things and we by him, says Paul. Whereupon is
rightly gathered that he is the self same God, Esa. xxx^^^ xx^^
which by the mouth of Esaie affyrmed him self to be the king and the
lawemaker of the Church. For though he do every where call all the power that
he has, the benefit and gift of the Father, yet he means nothing else,
but that he reigns by power of God: because he has therefore put on the
personage of the Mediator, that descendinge from the bosom and
incomprehensible glory of the father, he might approach nigh unto us. And so
much more rightful it is, that we be with all consent prepared to obey, and
that with great cherefullnesse we direct our obediences to his
commandment. For as he joins the offices of king and pastor toward them
that willingly yield them selves obedient: so on the other side we hear that
he bears an iron scepter, Psa. i^.^^. Psa. ^x.^x.
to break and broose all the obstinate like potters vessels: we hear also
that he shall be the judge of nations, to cover the earth with dead corpses,
and to overthrow the height that stands against him. Of which thing there
are some examples seen at this day: but the full proof thereof shall be at the
last judgment, which may also proprely be accounted the last act of his
kingedome.

Concerning his Preesthoode, thus it is breefely to be holden, that Ps. ^x.iiii
which was spoken without repentance: Thou art a priest for ever, according to
the order of Melchisedech. For without doubt his will was to establishe y^
principle point, which he knew to be the chief ioynte whereupon our salvation
hanged. For, as it is said, there is no way open for us or for our prayers
to God, unless our filthynesse being purged, the prestes do sanctify us and
obtain grace for us, from which ye uncleanness of our wicked doings and
sins does debar us. So do we see, yt we must begin at ye death of Christ,
yt the efficacy and profit of his Preesthoode may come unto us. Of this it
follows that he is an eternal intercessor, by whose mediation we obtain
favor, where upon again arises not only affiance to pray, but also
quietness to godly consciences, while they safely lean upon the fatherly
tenderness of God, and are certaynely persuaded that it pleases him
whatsoever is dedicated to him by the Mediator. But whereas in the time of the
law, God commanded sacrifices of beasts to be offered to him: there was an
other and a new order in Christ, that one should be both the sacrificed
host, and the Pressed: because there neither could be found any other meet
satisfaction for sins, nor any was worthy so great honor to offer up to God
his only begotten son. Now Christ bears the person of a priest, not
only by eternal mean of reconciliation to make the Father favorable and
merciful unto us, but also to bring us into the fellowship of so great ^n
honor. For we yt are defiled in our selves, yet being made Priests in him
do offer up our selves, Reave. i.vi.
and all ours to God, and do freely enter into the heavenly sanctuary, that
all the sacrifice of prayer and praise that come from us, may be acceptable and
sweet smelling in the sight of God. And thus far does that saying of
Christ extend: For their sakes I sanctify my self: Io. xvij.xv
because, having his holiness poured upon us, in as much as he has offered
us with himself to his father, we that otherwise do stincke before him, do
please him as pure and clean, yea and holy. Hereunto serves the anointing of
the sanctuary, whereof mention is made in Daniell. Dani. ix.xxiiij.
For the comparison of contrariety is to be noted between this anointing, and
that shadowish anointing that then was in use: as if the Angel should have
said, that the shadows being driven away, there should be a clear preesthod
in the person of Christ. And so much more detestable is their invention,
which not contented with the sacrifice of Christ, have presumed to thrust in
them selves to kill him: which is daily enterprised among the Papists, where the
Mass is reckened a sacrificing of Christ.

The.xvi. Chapter. How Christ has fulfilled the office of Redeemer, to
purchase salvation for us, Wherein is entreated of his Death, and Resurrection,
and his Ascendyng into Heaven.
Act. ii^i.xii.
that there is none other name under heaven given to men where in there must be
saved. Neither was the name of Jesus given him unadvisedly, or at chaunsable
adventure, or by yt will of men, but brought from heaven by the Angel the
publysher of Gods decree, and with a reason also assigned: because he was sent
to save the people from their sins. Mat. i.xii. Lu. xxxi.
In which words that is to be noted, which we have touched in an other place,
that the office of redeemer was appointed him, that he should be our
savior: butte in the mean time our redemption should be but imperfect,
unless he should by continual proceedings convey us forward to the
vttermoste mark of salvation. Therefore, so sone as we swerve never so little
from him, our salvation by little and little vanishes away, which wholly
rests in him: so that all they wilfully spoil them selves of all grace, that
rest not in him. And that admonition of Bernarde is worthy to be rehearsed,
Ber. in. can. sermo. 15.
that the name of Jesus is not only light, but also meat, yea and oil also,
without which all the meat of the soul is dry, and that it is also salt
without the seasoning, whereof all that is set before us is unsavory. Finally,
that it is honey in the mouth, melody in the ear, and ioyfulnesse in the
heart, and also medicine, and that whatsoever is spoken in disputation is
unsavory, but where this name sounds. But here it behooves to weie
diligently, how salvation is purchased by him for us: that we may not only be
persuaded that he is ye author of it, but also embracing such things as are
sufficient to the steadfast uphold in of our faith, we may refuse all such
things as might draw us away hither or thither. For sith no man can
descend into him self, and earnestly consider what he is, but feelinge God
angry and bent against him, he has need carefully to seek a mean and way
to appease him, which demands satisfaction: there is no common assuredness
required, because the wrath and curse of God lies alwaie upon sinners, till
they be loose from their gyltenesse: who, as he is a righteous judge, suffers
not his law to be broken without punishment, but is ready armed to revenge it.

But before we go any further, it is to be seen by the way, how it Romans v.x.
that God was enemy to men, till they were restored into favor by the death
of Christ: Gal. iii.x. Col. i.xxi.
that they were accursed till their iniquity was purged by his sacrifice: that
they were severed from God, till they were received into a conioyninge by his
body. Such manner of phrases are applied to our capacity, that we may the
better understand how miserable and wreatched our estate is being out of
Christ. For if it were not spoken in express words, that the wrath and
vengeance of God, and everlasting death did rest upon us, we would less
acknowledge how miserable we should be without Gods mercy, and would less
regard the benefit of deliverance. As for example. If a man hear this spoken
to him: If God, at such time as thou wast yet a sinner, had hated thee, and
cast thee away as thou had deserved, thou should have suffered horrible
destruction: but because he has willingly and of his own free kindness kept
the in favor, and not suffered thee to be estranged from him, he has so
delivered thee from that peril: truly he will be moved with, and in some
part feel how much he owes to the mercy of God. Butte if he hear on the
other side that which the Scripture teaches, that he was by sin estraunged
from God the heyr of wrath, subject to the curse of eternal death, excluded
from all hope of salvation, a stranger from all blessing of God, the bondslaue
of Satan, captive under the yoke of sin. Finally, ordained unto and already
entangled with horrible destruction, that in this case Christ became an
intercessor to entreat for him, that Christ took upon him and suffered the
punishment which by the just judgment of God did hang over al sinners, that
he has purged with his blood those euels yt made them hateful to God, that
by this expiation is sufficient satisfaction and sacrifice made to God the
father: that by this intercessor his wrath was appeased: that within this
foundation rests the peace between God and men: that upon this bond is
contained his good will toward them: shall not he be so much the more moved
with these, as it is more lively represented, out of how great misery he
has been delivered? In a sum: because our mind can neither desirously
enoughe take hold of life in the mercy of God, nor receive it with such
thankfulness as we ought, but when it is before stricken and thrown down
with the fear of the wrath of God and dread of eternal death, we are so
taught by holy Scripture, that without Christ we may see God in manner
wrathfully bent against us, and his hand armed to our destruction: and that
we may embrace his goodwyll and fatherly kindness no otherwhere, but in
Christ.

i. Ih. iiii.xxix
yea, because he first loved us, therefore he afterward doothe reconcile us
unto himself. But because, until Christ with his death come to succoure us,
there remains wickedness in us, which deserves Gods indignation, and is
accursed and damned in his sight: therefore we are not fully and fyrmely
joined to God, until Christ do join us. Therefore if we will assure our
selves to have God made well pleased and favorable unto us, we must fasten
our eyes and minds upon Christ only: as in deed we obtain by him only,
that our sins be not imputed to us, the imputing whereof, draws with it
the wrath of God.

And for this reason Paul says, that the same love, wherewith God Ihon.
iii.xvi. Romans v.x.
that God declared his love toward us in this, that he gave his only begotten
son to death: and yet that he was our enemy till he was made favorable
again to us by the death of Christ. But that they may be more strongly
proved to them that require the testament of the old Church, I will allege
one place of Augustine, where he teaches the very same that we do. Tract. in
Euang. lo. 1.10.
The love of God (says he) is incomprehensible and unchangeable. For he
began not to love us, sins the time that we wear reconciled to him by the
blood of his son. But before the making of the world he loved us, even
before that we wear any thing at all, that we might also be his children with
his only begotten Son. Therefore whereas we are reconciled by the death of
Christ, it is not so to be taken as though the Son did therefore reconcile
us unto him, that he might now begin to love us whom he hated before: but
we are reconciled to him that already loved us, to whom we wear enemies by
reason of sin. An whether this be true or no that I say, To. v.viij.
let the Apostle b^are witness. He does commend (says he) his love toward
us, because when we were yet sinners. Christ died for us. He therefore had a
love to us, even the^ when we wear enemies to him and wroughte wickedness.
Therefore after a marvelous and divine mannner he loved us, even then when he
hated us. For he hated us in that we wear such as he had not made us, and
because our wickedness had on every side wasted away his work, he knew
how in every one of us, both to hate that which we our selves had made, and
to love that which he had made. These be the words of Augustine.

Now where it is demanded, how Christ has done away our To. v.xix.
As by one man's offense many were made sinners, so by one man's obedience we are
made righteous. And in an other place he extends the cause of the pardon that
delivers us from the curse of the law, Gal. iiii.iiij. Mat. iii.xxv.
to the whole life of Christ, saying: When the fullness of time was come, God
sent his son made of a woman, subject to the law, to redeem them that
were under the law: And so affirmed that in his very baptism was fulfilled
one part of righteousness, that he obediently did the commandment of his
father. Finally, from the time that he took upon him the person of a servant,
he began to pay the ransom to redeem us. Butte the Scripture to set
out the manner of our salvation more certainly, Mat. x.xviv.
doothe ascribe this as peculiar and proprely belonginge to the death of
Christ. He him self pronounced that he gave his life to be a redemption
for many. Romans iiij.xxv. Ihon. i.xxix.
Paul teaches that he dyed for our sins. Ihon the Baptiste cried out
that Christ came to take away the sins of the woorlde, because he was the
Lamb of God. In an other place Paul says, Romans iij. Romans v. i. Cor. v.xxi.
that we are justified freely by the redemption that is in Christ, because he
is set forth the reconciler in his own blood. Again, that we are justified
in his blood, and reconciled by his death. Again* He that knew no sin,
was made sin for us, that we might be the righteousness of God in him. I
will not recite all the testimonies, because the mimbre would be infinite, and
many of them must be hereafter alleged in their order. Therefore in the sum
of belefe, which they call the Apostles creed, it is very ordrely passed
immediately from the birth of Christ to his death and resurrection, wherein
consists the sum of perfect salvation. And yet is not the rest of his
obedience excluded, which he performed in his life: ^hi. i.vii.
as Paul comprehends it wholye from the beginning to the end in saying,
that he abaced him self, taking upon him the form of a servant, and was
obedient to his father to death, even ye death of the cross. And truly even
in the same death his willing submission has the first degree, because the
sacrifice, unless it had been willingly offered, ^^on. x.xv
had nothing profited toward righteousness. Therefore, where the Lord
testified, that he gave his soul for his sheep, he expressly adds this, no
man takes it away from my self. According to yt which meaning, Esaie says,
Esa. vij. Iho^. xviij.iiii. Mat. xxvij ij.
yt he held his peace like a lamb before the sherer. And the history of the
Gospel reherseth, that he went forth and met the soldiers, and before Pilate
he left defending of him self, and stood still to yield him self to judgment
to be pronounced upon him. But that not without some strife: for both he had
taken our infirmities upon him, and it behooved that his obedience to his
father, should be this way tried. And this was no sclender show of his
incomparable love toward us, to wrestle with horrible fear, and in the
midst of these cruel torments, to cast away all care of himself, that he
might provide for us. And this is to be believed, that there could no sacrifice
be well offered to God any otherwise, but by this that Christ forsaking all
his own affection, did submit and wholly yield himself to his fathers will.
Heb. x.v. Psa. xl.ix.
For proof whereof, the Apostle does fyttly allege that testimony of the
Psalm: In the book of the law it is written of me, yt I may do thy will, O
God. I will, and thy law is in the midst of my heat. Then I said: Lo, I
come. But because trembling consciences find no rest but in sacrifice and
washing whereby sins are cleansed: therefore for good cause we are directed
thither, and in the death of Christ is a appointed for us the matter of life.
Now forasmuch as by our own gyltinesse, curse was due unto us, before the
heavenly judgment seat of God, therefore first of all is recited how he
was condenmed before Ponce Pilate presidente of Jury: that we should know
that the punishment whereunto we weere subject, was justly laid upon us. We
could not escape the dreadful judgment of God: Christ, to deliver us from
it, suffered himself to be condemned before a mortal man, yea a wicked and
heathen man. For the name of the president is expressed not only to procure
credit to the history, but that we should learn that which Esaie teaches,
Esa.liij.ix.
that y^ chastisemente of our peace was upon him, and that by his stripes we
wear healed. For to take away our damnation, every kind of death sufficed
not for him to suffer, but to satisfye our redemption, one special kind of
death was to be chosen, wherein both drawinge away our damnation to
himself, and taking our giltynesse upon himself, he might deliver us from them
both. If he had been murdered by thieves, or had been ragyngly slain in a
commotio^ of the common people: in such a death there should have been no
appearance of satisfaction. But when he was brought to be arrained before the
judgment seat, when he was accused and pressed with witnesses against him,
and by the mouth of the judge condemned to dye: by these tokens we understand,
that he did bear the person of a gilty manne and of an evil doer. And here
are two things to be noted, which both were before spoken by the prophecies
of the Prophets, and do bring a singular comfort and confirmation of faith.
For when we hear that Christ was sent from the judges seat to death, and was
hanged among thieves, we have the fulfillynge of that prophecy which is
alleged by the Evangelist. He was accounted among the wicked. (...) liij.xi^
Mar. xv.xv^^^.
And why so^ even to take upon him the stead of a sinner, not a man righteous
or innocent, because he suffered death not for cause of innocence, but for
sin. On the other side when we hear that he was acquitted by the same mouth
whereby he was condemned, for Pilate was compelled openly more than ones to
bear witness of his innocence: let that come in our mind which is in the
other Prophet: Ps. lxij.v
that he repayed that which he had not taken away. And so we shall behold
the person of a sinner and evil doer represented in Christ: and by the open
appearance of his innocence it shall become plain to see, that he was charged
rather with others offense than his own. He suffered therefore under Ponce
Pilate, and so by the solemn sentence of the President, Ih. xviii.xxxviij.
was reckened in the number of wicked doers: but yet not so, but that he was by
the same judge at the same time pronounced righteous, when he affirmed that he
found no cause of condemnation in him. This is our acquitall, that the
giltynesse which made us subject to punishment, is removed upon the head of the
son of God. For this setting of the one against the other, we ought
principally to hold fast, least we tremble and be careful all our life
long, as though the just vengeance of God did hang over us, which the son of
God has taken upon himself.

Byside that, the very manner of his death is not without a singular Ashemoth:
Which word proprely signifies sin it self. By which figurative change
of name, the holy ghost meant to show, that they were like unto cleansyng
playsters to draw out to themselves, and bear the curse due to sins. But
that same which was figuratively represented in the sacrifices of Moses, is in
deed delivered in Christ the original pattern of all ye figures. Wherefore he*
to perform a perfect expiat^o, Esa. liij.v. and. xxi.
gave his own soul to be an ashame, that is a satisfactorie oblation as the
Prophet calls it, upon the which our filt and punishment might be cast,
and so cesse to be imputed to us. The Apostle testifies the same thing more
plainly where he teaches, ij. Cor. v.xxi.
that he which knew no sin, was by his father made sin for us, that we
might be made the righteousness of God in him. For the son of God being most
clean from all fault, did yet put upon him the reproach and shame of our
iniquities, and on the other side covered us with his cleanness. Romans viij.iij.
It seems that he meante the same, when he speaks of sin, that sin was
condemned in his flesh. For the father destroyed the force of sin, when the
curse thereof was removed and laid upon the flesh of Christ. It is therefore
declared by this saying, that Christ was in his death offered up to his father
for a satisfactorie sacrifice, that the whole satisfaction for sin being
ended by his sacrifice, we might cesse to dread the wrath of God. Now is it
plain, Es. liij.vi.
what that saying of the Prophet means, that the iniquities of us all were
laid upon him, that is, that he entendynge to wype away the filthiness of
our iniquities, was himself as it were by way of enterchanged imputation,
covered with them. Of this, the cross whereunto he was fastened was a token,
as the Apostle testifies. Gala. iij.xiij. Deu. xxvij.xxvi.
Christ (says he) redeemed us from the curse of the law, when he was made a
curse for us. For it is written: Accursed is every one that hangs on the
tree: that the blessing of Abraham might in Christ come to the Gentiles. And
the same had Peter respect unto, where he teaches that Christ did bear our
sins upon the tree. i. Pet. ij.xxv^^.
Because by the very token of the curse we do more plainly learn that the
burden wherewyth we wear oppressed was laid upon him. And yet it is not so to
be understood, that he took upon him such a curse, wherewith himself was
ouerloden, but rather that in taking it upon him, he did tread down, break
and destroy the whole force of it. And so faith conceyueth acquitall in the
condemnation of Christ, and blessyng in his being accursed. Wherefore Paul
does not without a cause honorably report^ the triumph that Christ obtained
to himself on the cross, as if the cross which was full of shame, had been
turned into a Chariot of triumph. Col. ij.xix.
For he says, that the hand writing which was against us, was fastened to
the cross, and the Princely powers were spoiled and led openly. Hebr. ix.xv^j.
And no marvel: because (as the other Apostle testifies) Christ offered up
himself by the eternal spirit. And thereupon proceeded that turnynge of the
nature of things. But that these things may take steadfast root, and be
thoroughly settled in our hearts, let us always think upon his sacrifice and
washyng. For we could not certainly believe that Christ was the ransom,
redemption, and satisfaction, unless he had been a sacrificed host. And
therefore there is so often mention made of blood, where the Scripture shows
the manner of our redemyng. Albeit the blood of Christ that was shed, served
not only for sacrifice, but also in steed of washyng, to cleanse away our
filthynesse.

again it is to be seen, how he did every where put himself in our
stead, to pay the price of our redemption. Death held us bound under his yoke,
Christ in our stead did yield himself into the power of death, Heb. ij.ix.
to deliver us from it. This the Apostle means where he writes, that he
tasted of death for all men. For he by dyeng brought to pass that we should
not dye, or (which is all one) by his death he did redeem life for us. But in
this he differed from us, that he gave himself to death as it were to be
devoured, not that he should be swallowed up with the gulfes of it, but rather
that he should swallowe up it, of which we should have benne presently
swallowed: that he gave himself to death to be subdued, not that he should be
oppressed with the power thereof, but rather that he should overthrow death
which approached nere us, yea and had already beaten us down and triumphed
upon us. Heb. ij.xix.
Finally, that by death he might destroy him that had the power of death,
that is the Deuell: and might deliver them that by fear of death were all
their life long subject to bondage. This is the first fruit that his death
did bring us. An other is, that by enterpartenyng of himself with us, he
mortifieth our earthly members, that they should no more hereafter use their
own works: and kills our old manne, that it should no more live and bear
fruit. And to the same purpose perteyneth his burial, that we being partakers
thereof, should also be buried to sin. Gal. ij.xix and. ix.xiiii.
For when the Apostle teaches that we are graffed into the likeness of the
death of Christ, and buried with him to the death of sin, that by his cross
the world was crucified to us, and we to the world, that we are dead together
with him: he does not only exhort us to express the example of Christ's
death, Col. iii.iii.
but he declares that there is such effectualnesse in it, as ought to appear
in all Christians, unless they will make his death unprofitable and
frutelesse. Therefore in the death and burial of Christ, there is offered us a
double benefit to be enjoyed, that is deliverance from death, whereunto we
wear become bond, and the mortifieng of our flesh.

But it is not meet to ouerpasse his going down to the helles, full and in
all points perfect sum of our faith, whereinto nothing may be thrust, but
that which is taken out of the most pure word of God. Now if any will not
for precise curiosity admit it into the Creed, yet shall it straight way be
made to appear plainly, that it is of so great importance to the sum of our
redemption, that if it be left out, there is lost a great part of the fruit
of the death of Christ. There are again some that think, that there is no
new thing spoken in this article, but that in other words the same thing is
repeted which was spoken before of his burial: for as much as the word
Infernum, hell, is in the Scripture oftentimes used for the grave. I grant
that to be true which they allege of the signification of the word, that Hell
is oftentimes taken for the grave: but there are against their opinion two
reasons, by which I am easilye persuaded to dissent from them. For what an
idleness were it, when a thing not hard to understand, has ones ben set
out in plain and easy words, afterward with darker implication of words
rather to point toward it than to declare it. For when ^wo manners of speaking
that express one thing be joined together, it behooves that the later be an
exposition of the former. But what an exposition were this, if a man should
say thus: Whereas it is said that Christ was buried, thereby is meante that
he went down to hell? Again, it is not likely that such a superfluous vain
repetitio^ could have crepte into this abrigeme^t, where in the chief points
of our faith are summarily noted in as few words as was possible. And I
doubt not that so many as shall have somewhat diligently weyed the matter it
self, will easily agree with me.

Psa. x.xvi.
that he brake the brazen gates and iron bars. Again out of Zachary, Zaca
x.xi.
that he redeemed them that were bound, out of the pit wherein was no water.
But whereas the Psalm speaks of their deliverances that in far countrees
are cast captive into bonds, and Zachary compares the Babylonicall
overthrow, wherein the people was oppressed, to a dry pit or bottomless
depth, and there withal teaches that the salvation of the whole Church is as
it were a coming out of the deep helles. I wot not how it is come to pass,
that they which came after, thought that there was a certain place under the
earth whereunto they have feigned the name of Limbus. But this fable, although
they were great authors, and at this day many do earnestly defend it for a
truth: is yet nothing else but a fable. For, to enclose the souls of dead men
as in a prison, is very childish. And what need was it yt Christ's soul should
go down the there to set the^ at liberty? I do in deed willingly confess, yt
Christ shined to them by the power of his spirit, that they might know that the
grace which they had only tasted of by hope, was then delivered to ye world,
And to this purpose may ye place of Peter be probably applied, where he says,
yt Christ came and preached to the spirits yt were in a do^geon or prison, as
it is commonly translated. i. Pet. iij.xix.
For the very process of the text leads us to this, that the faithful which
were dead before that time, were partakers of the same grace that we were:
because he does thereby amplify the force of Christ's death, for that it
pierced even to the dead, when the godly souls enjoyed the present sight of
that visitation which they had carefully looked for: on the other side it did
more plainly appear to ye reprobrate that they were excluded from all
salvation. But whereas Peter in his saying makes no distinction between them,
that is not so to be taken, as though he mingled together the godly and ungodly
without difference: but only he meante to teach that generally they both had
one common felyng of the death of Christ.

But concerning Christ's going down to the helles, byside the Esa. liij.v.
that he was stricken of his father for our sins, and broused for our
infirmities. Whereby is meante, that he was put in the stead of wicked doers,
as surety and pledge, yea and as the very gilty person himself, to able and
suffer all the punishments that should have been laid upon them: this one
thing excepted, Act. ii.xxiiij.
that he could not be holden still of the sorrows of death. Therefore it is no
marvel if it be said that he went down to the helles, sith he suffered that
death wherewith God in his wrath stryketh wicked doers. And their exception is
very fond, yea and to be scorned, which say, that by this exposition the
order is perverted, because it were an absurdity to set that after his burial
which went before it. For after the setting forth of those things that
Christ suffered in the sight of men, in very good order follows that
invisible and incomprehensible judgment which he suffered in the sight of God:
that we should know that not only the body of Christ was given to be ye price
of our redemption, but that there was an other greater and more excellent price
paid in this, that in his soul he suffered the terrible torments of a damned
and forsaken manne.

According to this meaning does Peter say, that Christ rose again (...).
ii.xx^i^.
of which it was impossible that he should be holden, or ouercomme. He does
not name it simply death; but he expresses that the son of God was wrapped
in the sorrows of death, which proceed from the curse and wrath of God,
which is the original of death. For how small a matte^ had it ben, carelessly
and as it were, in sport to come forth to suffer death* But this was a true
proof of his infinite mercy, not to shun that death which he so sore
trembled at. And it is no doubt that the same is the Apostles meaning to
teach, in the Epistle to the Hebrews, where he writes: Job. v.vij
that Christ was heard of his own Fear: some translate it Reverence or
piety, but how unfitly, both the matter it self, and the very manner of
speaking proves. Christ therefore prayeng with tears and mighty cry, is
heard of his own fear: not to be free from death, but not to be swallowed up
of death as a sinner: because in yt place he had but our person upon him. And
truly there can be imagined no more dreadful bottomless depth, than for a man to feel himself forsaken and enstranged from God, and not to be heard
when he calls upon him, even as if God himself had conspired to his
destruction. Even thither we see that Christ was thrown down, so far that
by enforcement of distress he was compelled to cry out: Ps. xxij.^i. Mat.
xx^ij.x^^^.
My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? For whereas some would have it
taken, that he so spoke rather according to the opinion of other, than as he
felt in himself: that in no case probable, for as much as it is evident, that
this saying proceeded out of the very anguishe of the bottom of his heart. Yet
do we not mean thereby, that God was at any time his enemy or angry with
him. For how could he be angry with his beloved son, upon whom his mind
rested? Vide Cyrill. lib. 2. de recta fide ad Regin.
Or how could Christ by his intercession appease his fathers wrath toward
other, having him hatefully bente against himself? But this is our meaning:
that he suffered the greuousnesse of Gods rigor, for that he being stricken and
tormented with the hand of God, did feel all the tokens of God when he is
angry and punishes. Lib. 4. de Trin.
Whereupon Hylarie argues thus, that by this going down we have obtained
this, that death is slain. And in other places he agrees with our judgment,
Lib. 1. and Lib. 3.
as where he says. The cross, death, and helles are our life. Again in an
other place. The son of God is in the helles, but manne is carried up to
heaven. But why do I allege the testimony of a private manne, when the
Apostle affirms the same, rehersing this for a fruit of his victory, that
they were delivered which wear by fear of death al their life long subject
to bondage? It behooved therefore, that he shall ouerco^me that fear, that
naturally does continually torment and oppress all mortal men: which could
not be done but by fightyng with it. Moreover, that his fear was no common
fear or conceived upon a sclender cause, shall by and by more plainly appear.
So by fighting hand to hand with the power of the Deuel, with the horror of
death, with the peines of the helles it came to pass, that he both had the
victory of them, and triumphed over them, that we now in death should no
more fear those things, which our Prince has swallowed up.

Here some lewd men, although unlearned, yet rather moved by malice than by
ignorance, cry out that I do a heinous wrong to Christ, because it was
against conueniencie of reason, that he should be fearful for the salvation
of his soul. And then they more hardly enforce this cauillation with saying,
that I ascribe to the son of God desperation, which is contrary to faith.
First they do but maliciously move controversy of Christ's fear and
trembling, which the Evangelists do so plainly report. For a little before
that the time of his death approached, he was troubled in spirit, and passioneth
with heaviness, and at his very metyng with it, he began more vehemently to
tremble for fear. If they say that he did but counterfeit, yt is to foul a
shift. We must therefore, as Ambrose truly teaches, boldly confess the
sorrowfulness of Christ, unless we be a shamed of his cross. And truly if
his soul had not ben partaker of pain, he had been only a redemer for bodies.
But it behooved that he should wrestle, to raise up them that lay thrown
down. And his heavenly glory is so nothing appeired thereby, that even herein
gloriously shines his goodness which is never sufficiently praised, that he
refused not to take our weaknesses upon him. From whense is also that comfort
of our anguishes and sorrows, which the Apostle sets before us: that this
Mediator did feel our infirmities, that he might be the more earnestly bente
to succor us in misery. They say: that that thing which is evil of it
self, Hebr. iiii.xv.
is unworthily ascribed to Christ. As though they were wiser than the spirit of
God, which joins these two things together, that Christ was in all things
tempted as we are, and yet that he was without sin. Therefore there is no
cause that the weakness of Christ should make us afraid, whereunto he was
not by violence or necessity compelled, but by mere love of us and by mercy
was led to submit himself. And what so ever he of his own will suffered for
us, diminishes nothing of his power. But in this one point are these
backebiters deceived, that they do not perceive in Christ an infirmity clean
and free from all fault and spot, because he kept himself within the bounds
of obedience. For whereas there can be found no moderation in our corrput
nature, where al our affections do with troublesome violence excede all
measure, they do wrong to measure the form of God by that standard. But when
man was in his uncorrupted state, then there was a moderation having force in
all his affections. to restrain excess. Whereby, he might well be that he was
like unto us in sorrow, dread, and fearfulness, and yet that by this mark
he differed from us. Being so confuted, they leap to an other cauillation,
that though Christ feared death, yet he feared not the curse and wrath of God
from which he knew himself to be safe. But let the godly readers weye how
honorable this is for Christ, yt he was more tender and more fearful than the
most part of the very rascal sort of men. Thieves and other evil doers do
obstinately have to death, many do with haute courage despise it: some other do
midly suffer it. But what consta^cie or stout courage were it, for the son
of God to be astonished and in a manner stricken dead with fear of it? For even
that which among the common sort might be accounted miraculous, is reported of
him, that for vehemency of grief, very drops of blood did fall from his
face. Neither did he this to make a show to the eyes of other, but when in a
secret corner whether he was gone out of company, he groned unto his father.
And this puts it out of all dout, ye it was needeful that he should have
Angels to come down from heaven to relieve him with an unwonted manner of
co^forting. How shameful a te^dernesse, as I said, should this have been, to be
so far tormented for fear of common death, as to melt in bloody sweat, and
not to be able to be comforted but by sight of Angels? What? does not that
prayer thryse repeted, (Father, Mat. xxvi.^xxix
if it be possible, let this cup depart from me) proceeding from an
incredible bitterness of heart, show that Christ had a more cruel and harder
battle than with common death? Whereby appears that those triflers against
whom I now dispute, do boldly babble upon things that they know not,
because they never earnestly considered what it is, or of how great importance
it is that we be redeemed from the judgment of God. But this is our wisdom,
well to understand how dear our salvation did cost the son of God. Now if a
man should ask me, if Christ went then down to hell, when he prayed to escape
that death: I answer, that then was the beginning of it: whereby may be
gathered, how grievous and terrible torments he suffered, when he knew himself
to stand to be arrayned for our cause before the judgment seat of God. But
although for a moment of time, the divine power of the spirit did hide it
self, to give place to the weakness of the flesh: yet must we know, that
the tentation by felyng of sorrow and fear was such as was not against
faith. And so was that fulfilled which is in the Sermon of Peter, Act.
ij.xxiiij.
that he could not be holden of the sorrows of death, because when he felt
himself as it were forsaken of God, yet he did nothing at all swerve from the
trust of his goodness. Which is proved by that his notable calling upon God, ^
when for extremity of pain he cried out, My God, my God, why have thou
forsaken me? For though he was above measure grieved yet he cesseth not to call
him his God, of whom he cries out that he was forsaken. Moreover hereby is
confuted as well the error of Apollinaris, as theirs that were called
Monothelites. Apollinaris feigned that Christ had an eternal spirit instead of
a soul, so that he was only but half a man. As though he could cleanse our
sins any other way, but by obeyeng his father. But where is the affection or
will of obedience but in the soul? which soul of his we know was troubled
for this purpose, to drive away fear, and bring peace and quietness to our
soul. Again, for confusion of the Monothelites, we see how now he willed not
that thing according to his nature of manhood, which he willed according to
his nature of godhed. I omit to speak how he did subdue the aforesaid fear
with a contrary affection. Ioh. xii.xxvii
For herein is a plain show of contrariety. Father deliver me from this
hour. But even herefore I came even into this hour. Father glorify my name.
In which perplexity yet was there no such outrage in him as is seen in us,
even then when we must of al endeavor to subdue our selves.

i. Pet. i.iii.
but by his risyng again. For as he in risyng again rose up the vanquisher of
death, so the victory of our faith consists in the very resurrection: but
how this is, is better expressed in the words of Paul. Romans iiij.xxv.
For he says, that Christ died for our sins, and was raised up again for
our justification: as if he should have said: that by his death sin was taken
away, and by his risyng again righteousness was renewed and restored. For
how could he by dy^ng deliver us from death if he himself had lain still
ouerco^me by death? Now could he have gotten victory for us, if himself had been vanquished in fight? Wherefore we do so part the matter of our salvation
between the death and resurrection of Christ, that by his death we say sin
was taken away and death destroyed, and by his resurrection righteousness was
repaired, and life raised up again: but so that by mean of his resurrectoi^,
his death does show forth her force and effect unto us. Therefore Paul
affirms, that in his very resurrection he was declared the son of God,
because then at last he uttered his heavenly power, which is both a clear
glass of his godhed, and a steadfast stay of our faith. As also in an other
place he teaches, that Christ suffered after the weakness of the flew, i.
Cor. xiij.iiii Phil. iij.x.
and rose again by the power of the spirit. And in the same meaning, in an
other place, where he entreats of perfection, he says: that I may know him
and the power of his resurrection. Yet by and by after he adioyneth the
fellowship with death. Wherw th most aptly agrees that saying of Peter: i.
Peter. i.xxi.
that God raised him up from the dead and gave him glory, that our faith and
hope might be in God: not that our faith being vpholden by his death should
waver, but that the power of God which keeps us under faith, does principally
show it self in the resurrection. Therefore let us remember, that so often as
mention is made of his death only, there is also comprehended that which
properly belongs to his resurrection: and like figure of comprehension is
there in the word Resurrection, as often as it is used severally without speaking
of his death, so that it draws with it that which peculiarly pe^teineth to
his death. But for as much as by risyng again he obtained the crown of
conquest, so that there should be both resurrection and life: i. Cor. xv.xvij
therefore Paul does for good cause affirm yt faith is destroyed, and the
Gospel is become vain and deceitefull, if the resu^^^^tion of Christ be not
fastened in our hearts. Therefore in another place, after he had gloried in the
death of Christ against all the errors of damnation, Romans viij.xxxiiij
to amplify the same he says further: Yea the same He which died, is risen
up again and now stands a Mediator for us in the presence of God.
Furthermore as we have before declared, that upon the partakyng of his cross
hangs the mortificatio^ of our flesh: so is it to be understood, that by
his resurrection we obtain an other commodity which answers that
mortificatio^. For (says the Apostle) we are therefore graffed into the
likeness of his death, Romans vi.iiij.
that being partakers of his resurrection, we may walk in newness of life.
Therefore in an other place: as he gathers an argument of this that we are
dead together with Christ, Col. iij.v.
to prove that we ought to mortify our members upon earth: likewise also,
because we are risen up with Christ, he gathers thereupon that we ought to
seek for those things that are above, Col. iij.i.
and not those that are upon the earth. By which words we are not only
exhorted to be raised up after the example of Christ, to follow a newness of
life. But we are taught that it is wrought by his power yt we are regenerate
into righteousness. We obtain also a third fruit of his resurrection yt we
are, as by an earnest delivered us, assured of our own resurrection, of which
we know that his resurrection is a most certain argument. Whereof he
disputes more at large in the.xv. chapter of his first Epistle to the
Corinthians. But by the way this is to be noted, that it is said, that he rose
again from the dead: in which saying is expressed the truth both of his
death and of his resurrection: as if it had been said, that he did both die the
same death that other men naturally do dye, and received immortality in the
same flesh which he had put on mortal.

Ephesians. iiij.x
Which the Apostle shows where he teaches, that Christ ascended to fulfill
al things Where in semyng of repugnancie he shows that there is a goodly
agreement: because he so departed from us, that yet his presence might be more
profitable to us, which had been penned in a base lodgyng of the flesh, while
he was conversant in earth. John. vij.xxxvij.
And therefore John, after that he had rehearsed that notable calling, If any
thirst, let him come to me, etc. By and by says, that the holy ghost was not
yet given to the faithful, because Jesus was not yet glorified. Which the
Lord himself also did testify to the Disciples, John. xvi.vij.
saying: It is expedient for you that I go away. For if I do not go away,
the holy ghost shall not come. But he gives them a comfort for his corporal
absence, that he will not leave them as parentlesse, but will come again to
them after a certain manner, in deed invisible, but yet more to be desired,
because they were then taught by more assured experience, that the authority
which he enjoys, and the power which he uses, is sufficient for the
faithful, not only to make them live blessedly, but also to die happyly. And
truly we see how much greater abundance of his spirit he then poured out,
how much more royally he then aduau^ced his kingdom, how much greater power
he then showed, both in helpyng his, and in ouerthrowyng his enemies. Being
therefore taken up into heaven, he took away the presence of his body out of
our sight: not to cesse to be present with the faithful that yet wandered in
the earth, but with more present power to govern both heaven and earth. But
rather the same that he had promised, that he would be with us to the end of
the world, he performed by this his ascendyng, by which as his body was
lifted up above all heavens, so his power and effectual workynge was poured
and spread abroad beyond all the baundes of heaven and earth. But this I had
rather to declare in Augustines words than mine own. Traec^a. in. Euan. Ioha.
109.
Christ (says he) was to go by death to the right hand of the father, from
whense he is to come to judge the quick and the dead: and that likewise in
bodyly presence according to the ^ounde doctrine and rule of faith. For in
spiritual presence with them, he was to come after his ascension. And in an
other place more largely and plainly: According to an unspeakable and
unvisible grace is that fulfilled which he had spoken: Ma. xxvii^ xx.
behold I am with you all the days, even to the end of the world. But
according to the flesh which the Word took upon him, according to that that
he was borne of the Uirgin, according to that that he was taken of the Jews,
that he was fastened on the tree, that he was taken down from the cross, that
he was wrapped in linen clothes, that he was laid in the grave, that he was
openly showed in his risynge again: this was fulfilled, Ye shall not always have
me with you. Why so? because he was conversant according to the presence of his
body forty days with his disciples, Act. i.iii. and. ix
and they being in his company, seeing him, not following him, he ascended into
heaven and is not here, for he sits there, at the right hand of his father:
and is here, for he is not gone away in presence of majesty. Therefore
according to the presence of his majesty, we always have Christ: according to
the presence of his flesh, Marc. xvi Heb. i.iij.
it was truly said to his Disciples: but me ye shall not always have. For the
church had him a few days according to the presence of his flesh, but now she
holds him by faith, but sees him not with eyes.

Wherefore, it by and by follows, that he is sitte^ down at the right Ephesians.
i.xx. Phi. ij.ix. i. Cor. xv.xxvii. Ephesians. iiii.xv. Act. ii.xxx. and iii.xxi
when he says thus: The Father has set him at his right hand, above all
principality, and power, and stre^ght and dominion, and every name that is
named not only in this world, but in the world to come, etc. He has put
althinges under his feet, and has given him to be head of the church above
althynges. Now you see to what purpose belongs that sittyng, that is, that
all creatures both heavenly and earthly may with admiration look upon his
majesty, be governed with his hand, behold his countenance, and be subject
to his power. Heb. i.vii.
And the Apostles mean nothing else, when they so often rehearse it, but to
teach, that all things are left to his will. Therefore they think not
rightly, which think that blessedness is only meant by it. Act vii.lv^
And it forces not, that in the Acres, Stephen testifies that he saw him
standing, because we speak not hear of the gesture of his body, but of the
majesty of his dominion: so that to Sit is nothing else, but to be chief
judge in the heavenly judgment seat.

Hereupon does faith gather manifold fruit: For it learneth, that Ephesians. ii.vi.
that we do already in him after a certain manner sit in heaven. For that we
do not with bare hope look for heaven, but already in our head we possess it.
Moreover faith perceyueth that he sits with his father to our great benefit.
Zachr. vii.xiv. and. ix.xi
For he is entered into a ^anctuarie not made with hands, and there appears
before the face of the Father a continual advocate and intercessor for us: he
so turns the fathers eyes to his righteousness, that he turns them away
from our sins: Rom viii.^xxxiiii.
He so reconcileth his mind unto us that by his intercession he prepares us a
way and passage to his throne, fillyng it with grace and mercifulness, which
otherwise would have been full of horror to wretched sinners. Thirdly, faith
conceyueth his power, wherein consists our strength, might, wealth, and
glorieng against the helles. Ephesians. iiii.vi.
For ascendyng into heaven he led captivity captive, and spoilyng his enemies
he enriched his people, and daily fills them with heaps of spiritual
richesse. He sits therefore on hye, that from thense pouryng out his power
unto us, he may quicken us to a spiritual life, sanctify with his spirit, and
garnish his church with the diverse gifts of his grace, preserve it safe
against all hurtes by his protection, restrain with the strength of his hand
the ragyng enemies of his cross and of our salvation: Psa. ^x.i.
finally, hold all power both in heaven and in earth, till he have
overthrown all his enemies which are also our enemies, and made perfect the
bildyng up of his Church. And this is the true state of his kingdom: this is
the power that his father has given him, till he make an end of the last
act, when he comes to judge the quick and the dead.

Act. i.xi.
For he shall in visible form come down from heaven, even such as he was seen
to go up: and he shall appear to all men with unspeakable majesty of his
kingdom, Mat. xxiiij xxx.
with bright glistryng of immortality, with infinite power of godhed, with a
guard of Angeles. From thense therefore we are bidden to look for him to come
our redemer at that day, when he shall sever the Lambs from the Goaste, the
chosen from the forsaken: and there shall be none of all, either the quick or
the dead, that shall escape his judgment. For from the furthest corners of the
world shall be heard the sound of the trompet, Mat. xxv.xixi i. These. iiii.xvi.
wherewith all shall be called to his judgment seat, both they that shall be
found alive at that day, and they whom death has before taken out of the
company of the quick. Some there be that in this place expound the words of
the Quick and the dead otherwise: and we see that some of the old writers did
stick in doubt upon the constructio^ of this article. But as the aforesaid
meaning is plain and easy to perceive: so does it better agree with ye Creed
which is evident that it was written according the capacity of the common
people. And herewith nothing disagreeth that which the Apostle affirms,
Hebr. ix.xvij.
that it is appointed to all men ones to die. For although they which shall
remain in mortal life at the last judgment, shall not dye after a natural
manner and order: yet that change which they shall suffer, because it shall be
like a death, is not vnproprely called death. It is in deed certain, ^
that not all shall sleep, but all shall be (...) means that* In one moment
their mortal life shall perish (...) be swallowed up and be utterly
transformed into a new nature. This perishyng of the flesh no man can deny
to be a death: and yet in the meanetime it remains true, that the quick and
the dead shall be summoned to the judgment: i. The. ii^^.xvi.
because the dead that are in Christ shall first rise, and then they that shall
remain and beliuyng, shall with them be suddenly taken up into the air to
meet the Lord. And truly it is likely that this article was taken out of the
sermon of Peter, Act. x.xlij. ii. Ti. iiii.i
which Luke recites, and out of the solemn protestation of Paul to Timothee.

Hereupon arises a singular comfort, when we hear that he is Roma. v.xxxiii.
For if the Apostle dare cry out, that while Christ is intercessour for us,
there ca^ none come forth that can condemn us: it is much more true, that
Christ himself being our intercessour, will not condemn them whom he has
received into his charge and tuition. It is truly no small assuredness, that
we shall be brought before no other judgment seat, but of our own redemer,
from whom our salvation is to be looked for: moreover that he which now by
the Gospel promises eternal blessedness, shall then by sittyng in judgment
perform his promise. Ioh. v.xxij.
Therefore to this end the father has honored the son, in geuyng him al
judgment, that so he has provided for the consciences of them that he his,
tremblyng for fear of the judgment. Hitherto I have followed the order of the
Apostles Creed, because whereas it shortly in few words co^teyneth the chief
articles of our redemption, it may serve us for a table, wherein we do
dinstinctly and severally see those things that are in Christ worthy to be
taken heed unto. I call it the Apostles Creed, not carefully regarding who
were the author of it. It is truly by great consent of the old writers
ascribed to the Apostles, either because they thought that it was by common
travail written and set out by the Apostles, or for that they judged that this
abridgement being faithfully gathered out of the doctrine, delivered by the
hands of the Apostles, was worthy to be confirmed with such a title. And I
take it for no doubt, that whe^se so ever it proceeded at the first, it has
even from the first beginning of the church, and from the very time of the
Apostles, be used as a public confession, and received by consent of all men.
And it is likely that it was not privately written by any one man, for as much
as it is evident that even from the farthest age it has always continued of
sacred authority and credit among all the godly. But that thing which is only
to be cared for, we have wholly out of controversy, that the whole History of
our faith is shortly and well in distinct order rehearsed in it, and that there
is nothing contained in it that is not sealed with sound testimonies of the
Scripture. Which being understood, it is to no purpose either curiously to
doubt, or to strive with any man, who were the author of it: unless parhappe
it be not enough for some man to be assured of the truth of the holy ghost,
but if he do also understand either by whose mouth it was spoken, or by whose
hand it was written.

Act. iiij.xii.
are comprehended in Christ, we must beware, that we do not draw away from
him any part thereof be it never so little. If we seek for salvation, we are
taught by the very name of Jesus, i. Cori. i.xxx. Hebr. xii.xvii.
that it is in him. If we seek for any other gifts of the spirit, they are to
be found in his anointing. If we seek for strength, it is in his dominion: if
we seek for cleanness, it is in his conception: if we seek for tender
kindness, it shows it self in his birth, whereby he was made in all things
like unto us, that he might learn to sorrow with us: if we seek for
redemption, it is in his passion: if we seek for absolution, Gala. iij.xiii.
it is in his condemnation: if we seek for release of the curse, it is in his
cross: if we seek for satisfaction, it is in his sacrifice: if we seek for
cleansyng, it is in his blood: if we seek for reconciliation, it is in his
going down to the helles: if we seek for mortification of the flesh, it is in
his burial: if we seek for newness of life, yt is in his resurrection: if we
seek for immortality, yt is in the same: if we seek for the inheritance of
the kingdom of heaven, it is in his entrance into heaven: if we seek for
defense, for assuredness, for plenty and store of all good things, it is in
his kingdom: if we seek for a dredlesse lokynge for the judgment, it is in
the power given to him to judge. Finally, sith the measures of all sorts of
good things are in him, let us draw thense and from no where else, even till we
be full withal. For they which, being not content with him alone, are carried
hither and thither into diverse hopes, although they have principal regard to
him, yet eue^ in this they are out of the right way, that they turn any part
of their knowledge to any other where. Albeit such distrust can not crepe in,
where the abundance of his good gifts has ones ben well known.

The.xvii. Chapter. That it is truly and properly said, that Christ has
deserved Gods favor and salvation for us.
Act. iij.x.
as Peter calls him. In deed I confess, yt if a man will set Christ simply
and by himself against the judgment of God, the^ there shall be no room for
deserving: because there can not be found in man any worthiness that may
deserve the favor of God: But, as Augustine most truly writes, Libro. i.
de. (...) sa^ctoru^.
the most clear light of predestination and grace is our Savior himself, the
manne Christ Jesus, which has obtained so to be, by the nature of man,
which is in him, without any deservings of works or of faith going before. I
beseech you let me be answered, whereby that same Man deserved to be taken up
by the Word that is coeternall with the father into one person, and so to be
the only begotten son of God. Let therefore appear in our head the very
fountain of grace, from whom according to the mesure of every one, it flows
abroad into all his members. By that grace every one from the beginnynge of his
faith is made a Christian. by which that same man from his beginning was made
Christ. De bo^o perseuera^^. cap. vlt.
Again in an other place: there is no playner example of predestination than
the Mediator himself. For he that made of the seed of David a man righteous
that never should be unrighteous, without any deseruynge of his will going
before, even the same he does of unrighteous make them righteous that are the
members of that head: and so forth as there follows. Therefore when we speak
of Christ's deseruyng, we do not say that in him is the beginning of
deseruyng, but we clymbe up to the ordinance of God, which is the first cause
thereof: because God of his own mere good will appointed him Mediator, to
purchase salvation for us. And so is the deseruyng of Christ unfitly set
against the mercy of God. For it is a common rule, that things orderly one
under an other do not disagree. And therefore it may well stand together,
that man's justification is free by the mere mercy of God, and that there also
the deseruyng of Christ come between, which is contained under the mercy of
God. But against our works are aptly set, as directly contrary, both the free
favor of God, and the obedience of Christ, either of them in their degree. For
Christ could not deserve any thing but by the good pleasure of God, and but
because he was appointed to this purpose, with his sacrifice to appease the
wrath of God, and with his obedience to put away our offenses. Finally in a
sum: because the deseruynge of Christ hangs upon the only grace of God,
which appointed us this mean of salvation, therefore as well the same
deserving, as that grace, is fitly set against all the works of men.

This distinction is gathered out of many places of the Scripture. Ih. iij.xiii
yt he gave his only begotten son, that who so ever believes him, shall not
perish. We see how the love of God holds the first place, as the sovereign
cause or original, and the^ follows faith in Christ, as the second or nerer
cause. If any man take exception and say, that Christ is but the formal cause,
he does more diminish his power than the words may bear. For if we obtain
righteousness by faith that rests upon him, then is the matter of our
salvation to be sought in him, which is in many places plainly proved. Not
that we first loved him, Ih. iiij.i^.
but he first loved us, and sent his son to be the appeasyng for our
sins. In these words is clearly showed, that God, to the end that nothing
should withstand his love toward us, appointed us a mean to be reconciled in
Christ. And this word Appeasyng, is of great weight: because God after a
certain unspeakable manner, even the same time that he loved us, was also
angry with us until he was reconciled in Christ. And to this purpose serve all
those sayenges: He is the satisfaction for our sins. ^
Again: It pleased God by him to reconcile all things to himself, appeasyng
himself through the blood of the cross by him, etc. Again. God was in
Christ, reconcilyng the world to himself, not impu^yng to men their sins.
Ephe. ij.^vi. Ephesians. i.vi.
Again: He accepted us in his beloved son. Again. That he might reconcile
the^ both to God into one man by the crou^e. The reason of this mystery is to
be fetched out of the first chapter to the Ephesians, where Paul, after that
he had taught that we were chosen in Christ, adds therwithal, that we have
obtained favor in him. How did God begin to embrace with his favor them
who^ he loved before the making of the world, but because he uttered his love
when he was reconciled by the blood of Christ? For sith God is the fountain
of al righteousness, it must needs be, that man so long as he is a sinner,
have God his enemy and his judge. Wherefore the beginning of his love is
righteousness, ii. Cor. v.^^^.
such as is described by Paul: He made him that had done no sin, to be sin
for us, that we might be the righteousness of God in him. For he means, that
we have obtained free righteousness by the sacrifice of Christ, yt we should
please God, which by nature are the children of wrath, and by sin estranged
from him. But this distinction is also meante so often as the grace of Christ is
joined to the love of God. Whereupon follows, that he gives us of his own
that which he has purchaced: For otherwise it would not agree with him, that
this praise is given him severally from his father, that it is his grace and
proceeds from him.

To. v.xi.
as Paul witnesses, we are reconciled and have received reconciliation by his
death. But reco^ciliation has no place, but where there went offense before.
Therefore the meaning is: that God, to whom we were hateful be reason of
sin, is by ye death of his son appeased, so that he might be favorable unto
us. And the comparison of contraries that follows a little after, is diligently
to be noted: As by the tra^sgression of one man, To. v.xix.
many were made sinners: so also by ye obedience of one, many are made
righteous. For ye meaning is thus: As by ye sin of Ada^ we were enstranged
from God and ordained to destruction, so by the obedience of Christ we are
received into favor as rigteous. And the future time of the verb does not
exclude present righteousness, as appears by the process of the text: For
he had said before, that the free gift was of many sins unto justification.

i. Ih. i.v. Luc. xxij.xx.
His blood clea^seth us from sin. This blood is it yt is shed for remission
of sin. If this be the effect of his blood shed, yt sins be not imputed
unto us: it follows, that with that price the judgment of God is satisfied.
To which purpose serves that saying of John the Baptist: Ih. i.xxix.
Behold the lamb of God, that takes away the sin of the world. For he
sets in comparison Christ against all the sacrifices of the law, to teach
that in him only was fulfilled that which those figures showed. And we know,
what Moses each where says: Iniquity shall be cleansed, sin shall be put
away and forgeuen. Finally we are very well taught in the old figures, what
is the force and effect of the death of Christ. And this point the Apostle
sets out in the epistle to the Hebrews, Hebr. ix.xxii.
very fytly taking this principle, that remission is not wrought without
shedynge of blood. Whereupon he gathers, that Christ for the abolishing of
sin, appeared ones for all by his sacrifice. Again: that he was offered up to
take away the sins of many. And he had said before, that not by the
blood of goats or of calves, butte by his own blood he ones entered into
the holy place, finding eternal redemption. Now when he thus reasons: If
the blood of a calfe do sanctify, according to the cleanness of the flesh,
that much more consciences are cleansed by the blood of Christ from dead
works: it easily appears that the grace of Christ is to much diminished,
unless we grant unto his sacrifice the power of cleansinge, appeasing and
satisfieng. As a little after he adds: This is the mediator of the new
testament, that the^ which are called, may receive the promise of eternal
inheritance, by mean of death for the redemption of sins goinge before,
which remained under the law. But specially it is convenient to weye the
relation which Paul describes, Ga. iii.xiii
that he became curse for us. etc. For it were superfluous, yea and an
absurdity, that Christ should be charged with curse, but for this intent,
that he payinge that which other did owe, should purchase righteousness for
them. Esa. liii.v.
Also the testimony of Esaie is plain that the chastisement of our peace was
laid upon Christ, and that we obtained health by his stripes. For if Christ
had not satisfied for our sins, it could not have been said, that he
appeased God by taking upon him the peine whereunto we were subject. Wherewith
agrees that which follows in the same place: For the sin of my people I
have stricken him. Let us also recite the exposition of Peter, i. Pet. ii.xxiii^.
which shall leave nothing doubtful: that he did bear our sin, upon the
tree. For he says, that the burden of damnation from which we were
delivered, was laid upon Christ.

And the Apostles do plainly pronounce, that he paid the price of Romans
iii.xxiij.
Being justified by his grace, through the redemption which is in Christ,
whom God has set to be the propiciatorie by faith which is in his blood.
Paul commends the grace of God in this point, because he has given the
price of redemption in the death of Christ: and then he bids us to flee
unto his blood, that having obtained righteousness, we may stand boldly
before the judgment of God. And to the same effect is that saying of Peter:
i. Peter. i.xviii
that we are redeemed, not by gold and silver, but by the precious blood of
the unspotted Lamb. For the comparison also would not agree, unless with
that price satisfaction had been made for sins: i. Cor. vi.xx.
for which reason Paul says, that we are preciously bought. Also that other
saying of his would not stand together: There is one mediator that gave himself
to be a redemption, unless the peine had been cast upon him which we had
deserved: Therefore the same Apostle defyneth, that the redemptino in the
blood of Christ is the forgiveness of sins: Col. i.xiiii.
as if he should have said, that we are justified or acquyted before God,
because that blood answers for satisfaction for us. Col. v.ii.xiiii.
Wherewyth also agrees the other place, that the hand writing which was
against us, was cancelled upon the cross. For therein is meant the payment or
recompense that acquyteth us from gyltinesse. There is also great weight in
these words of Paul: If we be justified by the works of the law, Gal. ij.xxi
then Christ dyed for nothing. For hereby we gather, that we must fetch
from Christ that which the law would give, if any man can fulfill it: or
(which is all one) that we obtain by the grace of Christ that, which God
promised to our works in the law, Le. xviij.v
when he said: He that does these things, shall live in them. Which he no
less plainly confyrmeth in his sermon made at Antioche, Act. xiii.xxxviii.
affyrmeth that by beleuynge in Christ we are justified from all those
things, from which we could not be justified in the law of Moses. For if
the kepinge of the law be righteousness, who can deny that Christ deserved
favor for us, when taking that burden upon him, he so reconciled us to God,
as if we our selue had kept the law? To the same purpose serves yt which he
afterward writes to the Galatians: Gal. iiii.iiii.
God sent his Son subject to the law, that he might redeem those that
were under the law. For to what end served that submission of his, but that
he purchaced to us righteousness, taking upon him to make good that which we
were not able to pay? Hereof comes that imputation of righteousness without
works, Romans iiii.
whereof Paul speaks, because the righteousness is reckened to us which was
found in Christ only. And truly for no other cause is the flesh of Christ
called our meat, Ioh. vi.lv
but because we find in him the substance of life. And that power proceeds
from nothing else, but because the Son of God was crucified, to be the price
of our righteousness. Ephesians. v.ii. Romans iiii. ^ xxv.
As Paul says that he gave up himself a sacrifice of sweet sauoure. And in
an other place: He died for our sins, he rose again for our justification.
Hervpon is gathered, that not only salvation is given us by Christ, but also
yt for his sake his father is now favorable unto us. For there is no doubt yt
that is perfectli fulfilled in him, which God under a figure pronounces by
Esaie, Esa. xxxvii.xxxv.
saying: I will do it for mine own sake, and for David my servants sake.
Whereof the Apostle is a right good witness, where he says: Your sins are
forgeuen you for his names sake. i. Io. ij.xii.
For though the name of Christ be not expressed, yet Ihon after his accustomed
manner signifies him by this pronoune He. Io. vi.lvij
In which sense also the Lord pronounces: As I live because of my father, so
shall ye also live because of me. Wherewith agrees that which Paul says,
Phi. i.xxix
It is given you because of Christ, not only to believe in him, but also to
suffer for him.

Sentent. li. 3. did. 18.
For what neded ye son of God to come down to purchase any new thing for
himself? And the Lord declaring his own counsel, does put it wholly out of
doubt. For it is not said, yt the father provided for the commodity of his
son in his deseruinges, but yt he delivered him to death, Romans viii. Esa.
ix.vi.
and spared him not, because he loved ye world. And the prophets manners of
speaking are to be noted, as A child is borne to us. Again: Reioce ye daughter
of Sio^: behold thy king comes to thee. Also that confyrmation of love
should be very cold which Paul sets out, Romans v.x.
that Christ suffered death for his enemies. For thereupon we gather, that he
had no respect of himself: and that same he plainly affirms in saying: Ioh.
xvii.
I sanctify my self for them. For he that gives away the fruit of his
holiness unto other, does thereby testify that he purchaceth nothing for
himself. And truly this is most worthyly to be noted, that Christ, to give
him self wholly to save us, did after a certain manner forget himself. But to
this purpose they do wrongfully draw this testimony of Paul: Phi. ii.ix.
Therefore the father has exalted him, and given him a name. etc. For by what
deseruinges could man obtain to be judge of the world, and the head of the
Angeles, and to enjoy the sovereign dominion of God, and that in him should
rest that same majesty, the thousandth part whereof all the powers of men and
Angeles can not reach unto? But the solution thereof is easy and plain, that
Paul does not there entreat of the cause of exalting of Christ, Lu.
xxiiii.xxvi.
but only to show the effect ensuing thereof, that it might be for an example
to us. And no other thing is meant by that which is spoken in an other place,
that it behooved that Christ should suffer, and so enter into the glory of his
Father.

The third book of the Institution of Christian Religion, Which entreats
of the manner how to receive the grace of Christ, and what profits do grow
unto us, and what effects ensue thereof.
The first Chapter. That those things which are spoken of Christ, do profit
us by secret working of the holy Ghost.
Ephe. iiii.xv. Romans viii.xxix To. xi.xvii Ga. iii.xvi
and dwell in us. And for that cause he is called our head, and the first
begotten among many brethren: and on the other side it is said, that we are
graffed into him, and did put on him. For (as I have before said) all that
ever he possesses belongs nothing to us, until we grow together into one
with him. But although it be true that we obtain this by faith: yet
forasmuch as we see that not al without dyfference do embrace this
enterpartening of Christ, which is offered by the Gospel, therefore very
reason teaches us to clymbe up hyer, and to enquire of the secret effectual
workinge of the Spirit, by which it is brought to pass, that we enjoy
Christ and all his good things. I have before entreated of the eternal
godhede and essence of the Spirit, at this present let us be content with this
one special article, that Christ so came in water and blood that the Spirit
should testify of him, least the salvation that he has purchaced, should
slip away from us. For as there are alleged three witnesses in heaven, i.
Io. v.vii
the Father, the Word and the Spirit, so are there also three in earth, Water,
Blood and ye Spirit. And not without cause is the testimony of the Spirit
twice repeted, which we feel to be engraven in our hearts in steed of a
seal: whereby comes to pass, that it seals the washinge and sacrifice of
Christ. After which meaning Peter also says, that the faithful are chosen
in santification of the spirit unto obedience and sprynkling of ye blood of
Christ. i. Pe. i.ii.
By which words he tells us, that to the intent the shedinge of that holy
blood should not become void, our souls are cleansed with it by the
secret wateringe of the holy Spirit. According whereunto Paul also speakinge
of cleansinge and justification, says that we are made partakers of them
both in the name of Jesus Christ and in the Spirit of our God. Finally this
is the sum, that the holy Spyrite is the bond wherewyth Christ effectually
byndeth us unto him. For proof whereof also do serve all that we have taught
in the last book before this, concerning his anoyntynge.

But that this, being a matter specially worthy to be known, may be made more
certainly evident, we must hold this in mind, that Christ came furnished with
the holy Spirit after a certain peculiar manner, to the end that he might
sever us from the world, and gather us together into the hope of an eternal
inheritance. For this cause he is called the Spirit of sanctification, because
he does not only quicken and nourish us with that general power which
appears as well in mankind as in all other living creatures, but also is in
us the root and feed of heavenly life. Therefore the Prophets do principally
commend the kingdom of Christ by this title of prerogative, that then should
florishe more plentiful abundance of the Spirit. And notable above all the
rest is that place of Joel: Joel. ii.xxviii.
In that day I will pour of my Spirit upon al flesh. For though the Prophet
there seem to restrain the gifts of the Spirit to the office of prophecieng,
yet under a figure he means, that God by the enlightening of his Spirit will
make those his scholars which before were unskillful and void of all heavenly
doctrine. Now forasmuch as God the Father does for his Sons sake give us
his holy Spirit, and yet has left with him the whole fullness thereof, to the
end that he should be a minister and distributer of his liberality: he is
sometime called the Spirit of the Father, and sometime the Spirit of the
Son. Romans viii ix.
Ye are not (says Paul) in the flesh, but in the Spirit, for the Spirit of
God dwells in you. But if any have not the spirit of Christ, he is not his.
And hereupon he puts us in hope of full renewing, for that he which raised up
Christ from the dead, shall quicken our mortal bodies because of his Spirit
dwelling in us. To. viii.xi.
For it is not absurdity, that to the Father be ascribed the praise of his
own gifts, whereof he is the author: and yet that the same be ascribed to
Christ, with whom the gifts of the Spirit are left, that he may give them
to those that be his. Ihon. vii, xxxvii. Ephesians. iiii.vii.
Therefore he calls all them that thirste, to come to him to drink. And
Paul teaches that the Spirit is distributed to every one, according to the
measure of the gift of Christ. And it is to be known, that he is called the
Spirit of Christ, not only in respect that the eternal Word of God is with
the same Spirit joined with the Father, but also according to his person of
mediator, because if he had not had that power, he had come to us in vain. i.
Cor. xv.xlv.
After which meaning he is called the second Adam given from heaven, to be a
quickening Spirit: whereby Paul compares ye singular life yt the son of God
breaths into them yt be his yt they may be alone with him, with the natural
life that is also common to ye reprobate. Likewise where he wissheth to the
faithful the favor of Christ and the love of God, he joins withal the
common partaking of the Spirit, without which no man can taste neither of the
fatherly favor of God, To. v.v.
nor of the bountifulness of Christ. As also he says in an other place: The
love of God is poured out into our hearts by the holy Spirit that is given
us.

And here it shall be profitable to note, with what titles the Scripture and
whole restoring of our salvation. First he is a called the Spirit of
adoption, because he is a witness unto us of the free goodwil of God,
wherewyth God the Father has embraced us in his beloved only begotten Son,
that he might be a father unto us, and does encourage us to pray boldly, yea
and does minister us words to cry with out fear Abba, Gal. iiii.vi ij.
Cor. i.xxi
Father: by the same reason he is called the earnest pledge, and seal of our
inheritance, because he so gives life from heaven to us wandringe in the
world, and being like to dead men, that we may be assured that our soul is
in safegarde under the faithefull keeping of God: for which cause he is also
called life, by reason for righteousness. And forasmuch as by his secret
watering he makes us frutfull to bring forth the buddes of righteousness,
To. viiij.x.
he is oftentimes called water, Esa. lv.i. Esa. xliiii.ii. John. vii.xvii. Eze.
xxxvi.xxv.
as in Esaie: All ye that thyrste come to the waters. Again: I will pour out
my spirit upon the thyrsty, and stoodes upon the dry land: wherewith agrees
that saying of Christ, which I did even now allege: If any thyrste, let him
come to me. Albeit sometime he is so called, by reason of his power to purge
and cleanse, as in Ezechiell where the Lord promises clean waters wherewith he
will wash his people from fylthinesse. And forasmuch as herestoreth and
norisheth into lively quicknes, them upon whom he has poured the liquore of
his grace, he is therefore called by the name of oil and anoyntement. i. Io.
ii.xx. Lu. iii.xvi.
Again because in continually seethynge out and burninge up the vices of our
lust, he sets our hearts on fire with the love of God and zeele of
godliness, John. iiii.xiiii. Act. i.xxi.
he is also for this effect worthyly called fire. Finally he is described unto
us as a fountain, from whense do flow unto us all heavenly richesse, or the
hand of God, wherewyth he uses his power: because by the breathe of his power
he so breaths divine life into us, that we are not now styrred by our
selves, but ruled by his styrringe and mouynge: so that if there be any good
things in us, they be the fruits of his grace: but our own gifts without
him, be darkness of mind and pereuersnesse of heart. This point is set
out plainly enoughe, that till our minds be bente upon the holy ghost,
Christ lies in a manner idle, because we coldely espy without us, yea and
far away from us. But we know that he profyteth none other but them whose
head he is, and the first begotten among brethren, Ephe. iiij.xv. Romans
viii.xxix. Gala. iij.xxvii Ephesians. v.xxx
and them which have put on Him. This conioynynge only makes that, as
concerning us, he is come not vnprofytably with the name of savior. And for
proof hereof serves that holy marriage whereby we are made flesh of his
flesh, and bones of his bones, yea and all one with him. but by the Spirit
only he makes him self one with us: by the grace and power of the same
Spirit we are made his members, so that he conteyneth us under him, and we
again possess him.

Io. i.xiii.
yt they be ye children of God which are borne not of flesh and blood, but of
God: where setting God against flesh and blood, he affirms it to be a
supernatural gift that they receive Christ by faith, who otherwise should
remain subject to their own infidelity. Like where unto is that answer of
Christ: Mat. xvi.xvii.
Flesh and blood has not reveled it to thee, but my Father which is in
heaven. These things I do now but shortly touch, because I have already
entreated of them at large. And like also is that saying of Paul, Ephesians. i.xiii.
that the Ephesians were sealed up with the holy spirit of promise. For Paul
shows that he is an inward teacher, by whose workynge the promise of
salvation pearceth into our minds, which otherwise should but beat the
air or our ears. Likewise when he says, ii. The. xiii.
that the Thessalonians were chosen of God in the sanctification of the spirit
and believing of the truth: by which joining of them together, he brefely
admonishes that faith it self proceeds from nothing else but from the holy
spirit: i. Ioh. iii.xxiiij. and iiii. Ioh. xiiij.xvij.
which thing Ihon sets out more plainly, saying: We know that there
abides in us of the spirit which he has given us. Again. By this we know
that we dwell in him, and he in us, because he has given us of his spirit.
Therefore Christ promised to his Disciples the Spirit of truth which the
world can not receive, that they might be able to receive the heavenly
wisdom. And he assigns to the same spirit this propre office, to put them
in mind of those things that he had taught them by mouth. Because in vain
should the light show it self to the blind, unless the same spirit of
understanding should open the eyes of their mind: so as a man may rightly
call the holy spirit, the keye by which the treasures of the heavenly kingdom
are opened unto us: and may call his enlightening, ij. Cor. iij.vi.
the eyesight of our mind to see. Therefore does Saint Paul so much commend
the ministry of the spirit: because teachers should cry without profiting,
unless Christ himself the inward master should draw them with his spirit
that are given him by his Father. Therefore as we have said, that persecte
salvation is found in the person of Christ: so that we may be made partakers
thereof, he does baptize us in the holy spirit and fire, Lu. iii.xvi.
lightning us into the faith of his Gospel, and so new begetting us, that we
may be new creatures: and purging us from unholy fylthynesse, does dedicate
us to be holy temples to God.

The second Chapter. Of faith, wherein both is set the definition of it,
and the propreties that it has, are declared.
BUt al these things shall be easy to understand, when there is showed a plain
definition of faith, that the readers may know the force and nature thereof.
But first it is convenient to call to mind again these things that have been
already spoken, that sith God does appoint us by his law what we ought to do,
if we fall in any point thereof, the same terrible judgment of eternal death
that he pronounces does rest upon us. Again, that forasmuch as it is not only
heard but altogether above our strength and beyond all our power to fulfill
the law, if we only behold our selves, and w^ie what estate is worthy for our
deseruinges, there is no good hope left, but we lie cast away from God under
eternal destruction. Thirdly this has been declared, that there is but one
mean of deliverance to draw us out of so wretched calamity: wherein appears
Christ the Redeemer, by whose hand it pleased the heavenly father, having
mercy upon us of his infinite goodness and clemency, to succoure us, so that
we with sound faith embrace this mercy, and with constant hope rest upon it.
But now it is convenient for us to weie this, what manner of faith this ought
to be, by which al they that are adopted by God to be his children, do enter
upon the possession of the heavenly kingdom, forasmuch as it is certain that
not every opinion nor yet every persuasion is sufficient to bring to pass so
great a thing. And with so much the more care and study must we look about for,
and search out the natural propretie of faith, by how much the more hurtful
at this day is the error of many in this behalf. For a great part of the
world, hearing the name of faith, conceiueth no hier thing, but a certain
common assent to the history of the Gospel. Yea when they dispute of faith in
the schools, in barely calling God the obiecte of faith, they do nothing but
(as we have said in an other place) by vain speculation rather draw wretched
souls out of the right way, tha^ direct them to the true mark. i. Tim. vi.xvi.
For whereas God dwells in a light that none can atteine to, it behooves of
necessity that Christ become mean between us and yt. For which cause he
calls him self the light of the world: and in an other place The way, the
Truth, and the Life, because no man comes to the father (which is the
fountain) of life, John. viij.x^. Ih. xiiij.vi Luc. x.xij. i. Cor. ij. Act.
xx.xvii. ii. Cor. iiii vi.
but by him: because he only knows the Father, and by him the faithful to
whom it pleases him to disclose him. According to this reason, Paul
affirms, that he accompteth nothing excellent to be known, but Christ: and
in the.xx. chapter of the Acts he says, that he preached faith in Christ,
etc. And in an other place he brings in Christ speakeinge after this manner,
I will send thee among the Gentiles, yt they may receive forgeuenes of sins,
and por^ion among holy ones, by the faith which is in me. And Paul testifies,
yt the glory of God is in his person visible unto us: or (which is all one in
effect) that the enlightening of the knowledge of Gods glory shines in his
face. It is true in deed yt faith has respect only to the one God, but this
also is to be added, that it acknowledge him whom he has sent, even Jesus
Chrste. Because God himself should have lain secret and hydden far from us,
unless the brightness of Christ did cast his beams upon us. For this intent
the father left al yt he had with his only begotten son, even by the
co^municatinge of good things with him to express the true image of his
glory. For as it is said, that we must be drawn by the spirit, yt we may be
stirred to seek Christ, so again we ought to be admonished, Libr. 11. de
Ciuit. Dei, cap. 2.
that the invisible father is no where else to be sought but in this image. Of
which matter Augustine speaks excellently well, which entreating of the
mark that faith should shoot at, says that we must know whether we must go
and which way: and then by and by after he gathers yt the safest way
against all erroures is he that is both God and man. For it is God to whom we
go, and man by whom we go: and both these are found no where but in Christ.
Neither does Paul when he speaks of faith in God, mean to overthrow that
which he so often repeteth of faith that has her whole stay upon Christ. i.
P^^. i.xxi.
And Peter does most fittly join them both together, saying that by him we
believe in God.

Therefore this evil, even as innumerable other, is to be imputed Romans x.x.
For when the Apostle says, that with the heart we believe to righteousness,
and with the mouth confession is made to salvation, he shows that it is not
enoughe, if a man vnexpressedly believe that which he understands not, nor
seeks to learn: but he requires an expressed acknowleging of Gods
goodness, in which consysteth our righteousness.

In deed I deny not (such is ye ignorance wherewith we are compassed) Io.
xvii.ii^
is a great absurdity. For faith lies in knoledg of God and of Christ not in
reverence of ye church. And we se what a maze they have framed with this their
hidden implication, that any thing whatsoever it be without any choice, so
that it be thrust in under title of the Church, is gredy received of the
ignorant as it were an oracle, ye sometime also most monsterous erroures. Which
unadvised lyghtnesse of belief, whereas yt is a most certain downfall to
ruin, is yet excused by them, for that yt believes nothing determynately, but
with this condition adjoined, if the faith of the Church be such. So do they
feign, that truth is holden in error, light in blindness, true knowledge in
ignorance. But because we will not tarry long in confuting them, we do only
warn ye readers to compare their doctrine with ours. For ye very pleanesse of
the truth it sefe will of it self minister a confutation ready enough. For
this is not ye question among them, whether faith be yet wrapped with many
remnauntes of ignorance, but they definitiuely say that they believe aryght,
which stand amassed in their ignorance, yea and do ^^atter them selves
therein, so that they do agree to the authority and judgment of the Church,
concerning things unknown. As though the Scripture did not euerywhere teach,
that with faith is joined knoweledge.

Phili. iii.xv.
Therefore Paul exhorts the faithful, if upon any thing they differ one
from an other, to abide for revelation. And truly experience teaceth, that
till we be unclothed of our flesh, we atteine to know less than were to be
wisshed, and daily in reading we light upon many dark places which do
convince us of ignorance. And with this bridle God holds us in modesty,
assigning to every one a measure of faith, that even the very best teacher may
be ready to learn. And notable exaumples of this unexpressed faith, we may
mark in the Disciples of Christ, before that they had obtained to be fully
enlightened. We see, how they hardly tasted the very first introductions, how
they did stick even in the smallest points, how they hanginge at the mouth
of their master did not yet much proceed, yea when at the women's information
they ran to the grave, the Resurrection of their master was like a dream
unto them. Sith Christ did before bear witness of their faith, we may not
say that they were utterly without faith: but rather, if they dad not been
persuaded that Christ should rise again, all care of him would have perished
in them. For it was not superstition that did draw the women to embalme with
spices the corpse of a dead man of whom there was no hope of life: but
although they believed his words whom they knew to be a speaker of truth, yet
the grosnesse that still possessed their minds so wrapped their faith in
darkness, that they were in a manner amassed at it. Whereupon it is said,
that they then at the last believed when they had by trial of the thing it
self proved the truethe of the words of Christ: not that they then began to
believe, but because the seed of hidden faith which was as it were dead in
their hearts, then receiving liuelynesse, did spring up. There was therefore
a true faith in them, but an unexpressed faith, because they reverently
embraced Christ for their only teacher, and then being taught of him, they
determined that he was the author of their salvation: finally, they believed
that he came from heaven, by the grace of his father to gather his Disciples to
heaven. And we need not to seek any more familiar poofe hereof than this, that
in all things always unbelief is mingled with faith.

where it was in deed but the beginning of faith. So the courtie^ that
believed Christ's promise, concerning the healinge of his son, when he came
home, Io. iiij.iii.
as the Evangelist testifies, believed again: because he received as an oracle
that which he heard of the mouth of Christ, and then submitted him self to
his authority to receive his doctrine. Albeit it is to be known, that he was
so tractable and ready to learn, that yet in the first place the word of
beleninge signifies a particular belief: and in the second place makes him
of the number of the Disciples, that professed to be the scholars of Christ.
Alyke exaumple does Ihon set forth in the Samaritanes, which so believed
the woman's report, John. iiii.
that they ran earnestly to Christ, which yet when they had heard him,
said thus: Now we believe not because of thy report, but we have heard him,
and we know that he is the savior of the world. Hereby appears that they
which are not yet instructed in the first introductions, so that they be
disposed to obedyence, are called faithful, in deed not proprely, but in this
respect, that God of his tender kyndenesse voutchesaueth to grant so great
honor to that godly affection, but this willingness to learn, with a desire
to proceed further, differs far from that gross ignor^^ce, wherein they lie
dull that are content with the unexpressed says, such as the Papists have
imagined. For if Paul severely condemns them which alwaie learning, ij.
Tim. iii.vii.
yet never come to the knowledge of truth, how much more grievous reproach do
they deserve, that of purpose stadie to know nothing?

This therefore is ye true knowledge of Christ, if we receive him such Ephesians.
iiii.xx
Yet do I not so restrain faith to the Gospel, but that I confess that there
has been so much taught by Moses and the Prophets, as suffised to the
edification of faith, but because there has been delivered in the Gospel a
fuller opening of faith, To. x.iiii.
therefore it is woorthyly called of Paul, the doctrine of says. For which
cause also he says in an other place, that by the coming of faith the law
is taken away, meaning by this word faith, ye ^ewe and unaccustomed manner of
teaching, whereby Christ sins he appeared our scholemaster, has more plainl^
set forth the mercy of his father, and more certainly testified of our
salvation. Albeit it shall be ye more easy and more convenient order, if we
descend by degrees from the generaltie to ye specialtie. First we must be put
in mind yt there is a general relation of faith to the word, and that faith
can no more be severed from ye word, than ye sun beams from ye sum from whom
they proceed. Therefore in Esaie God cries out: Esa. lv.iii Io^. x.xiii
Hear me and your soul shall live. And that the same is the fountain of
faith, Ihon shows in these words: These things are written that ye may
believe. And the prophet meaning to exhort the people to belief, Psa.
xv^^.vi^i.
says: This day yi^ ye shall hear his voice. And to hear is commmonly
taken for to Believe. Moreover, God does not without cause in Esaie set this
mark of difference between the children of the Church and strangers, that he
will instruct them all, that they may be taught of him. For if it were a
benefit universal to all, why should he direct his words to a few?
Wherewith agrees this that the Evangelists do commonly use the words
Faithful, and Disciples, as several words expressing one thing, and
specially Luke very often in the Acts of the Apostles. Act. vi.i. and ^x.
and.xxvi. and xi.xxvi. and xiii. and xiiij.
Yea and he stretches that name even to a woman in the ninthe chapter of the
Acts. Wherefore if faith do swerue never so little from this mark, to which
it ought to be directly leuelled, it keeps not her own nature, butte becomes
an uncertain lightness of belefe and wandering error of mind. The same
Word is the foundation wherewith faith is vpholden and sustained, from which if
it swerve, it falls down. Therefore take away ye Word, and then there shall
remain no faith. We do not here dispute whether the ministry of man be
necessary to sow the word of God that faith may be conceived thereby, which
question we will else where entreat of: but we say that the word it self,
howesoeuer it be conveyed to us, is like a mirroure when faith may behold God.
Whether God does therein use the service of man, or work it by his own only
power, yet he does alwaie show him self by his word to those, whom his will
is to draw unto him: whereupon Paul defines faith to be an obedience that
is given to the Gospel. To. i.v.
Romans i. And in an other place he praises the obedience of faith in the
Philippians. Philip. ii.xvij.
For this is not the only purpose in the understanding of faith, that we
know that there is a God, but this also, yea this chefely, that we understand
what will he bears toward us. For it not so much behooves us to know what he
is in himself, but what a one he will be to us. Now therefore we are come to
this point, that faith is a knoweledge of the will of God, perceived by his
word. And the foundation hereof is a foreconceiued persuasion of the truth of
God. Of the assuredness whereof so long as thy mind shall dispute with it
self, the word shall be but of doubtful and weak credit, yea rather no
credit at all. But also it suffices not to believe that God is a true speaker,
which can neither deceive nor lie, unless thou further hold this for
undoubtedly determined, that whatsoever proceeds from him, is the sacred and
inviolable truth.

Ge. ij.xvii and iiij.x.
It was the saying of God to Adam: Thou shalt die the death. It was the
saienge of God to Cain: The blood of thy brother cries to me out of the
earth. Yet these are such saiengs as of them selves can do nothing butte
shake faith, so much less are they able to stablyshe faith. We deny not in
the mean season that yt is the office of faith to agree to the truth of God,
how often soever, what soever, and in what sort soever yt speaks: butte now
our question is only, what faith fyndeth in the word of the Lord to lean
and rest upon. When our conscience beholds only indignation and vengeance,
how can it butte tremble and quake for fear? And how should yt butte flee
God, of whom yt is afraid? But faith ought to seek God, and not to flee
from him. It is plain therefore, that we have not yet a full definition of
faith, because it is not to be accounted for faith to know the will of God,
of what sort so ever it be. But what if in the place of will, whereof many
times the message is sorrowefull and the declaration dreadful, we put
kindness or mercy? Truly so we shall come nerer to the nature of faith. For
we are then allured to seek God, after that we have learned that salvation
is laid up in store with him for us. Which thing is confyrmed unto us, when
he declares that he has care and love of us. Therefore there needs a
promise of grace, whereby he may testify that he is our merciful father,
for that otherwise we can not approach unto him, and upon that alone the
heart of man may safely rest. For this reason commonly in the Psalms these
two things Mercy and Truth do cleave together, Psa. xl.xi.
because neither should it any thing profit us to know that God is true,
unless he did mercifully allure us unto him: neither were it in our power to
embrace his mercy, unless he did with his own mouth offer it. Ps. xxv.xx
I have reported thy truth and thy salvation, I have not hidden thy goodness
and thy truth. Thy goodness and thy truth keep me. In an other place. Psa.
xxxvj vi. Psa. cvii. ps. cxxxviii.
Thy mercy to the heavens, thy truth even to the clouds. Again. All the
ways of the Lord are mercy and truth, to them that keep his covenant.
Again. His mercy is multiplied upon us, and the truth of the Lord abides
for ever. Again. I will singe to thy name upon thy mercy and truth. I omit
that which is in the Prophets to the same meaning, that God is merciful and
faithful in his promyses. For we shall rashly determine that God is
merciefull unto us, unless himself do testify of himself and prevent us
with his calling, least his will should be doubtful and unknown. But we have
already seen, that Christ is ye only pledge of his love, without whom on
every side appear the tokens of hatred and wrath. Now forasmuch as the
knoweledge of Gods goodness shall not much prevail, unless he make us to
rest in it, therefore such an understanding is to be banished as is mingled
with doubting, and does not soundli agree in it self, but as it were,
disputes with it self. But man's wit, as yt is blind and darkened, is far
from atteining and climbing up to perceive the very will of God: and also the
heart of man, as it wauereth with perpetual doubting, is far from resting
assured in that persuasion. Therefore it behooves both that our wit be
lightened, and our heart strengthened by some other mean, that ye word of God
may be of full credit with us. Now we shall have a perfect definition of faith,
if we say, yt it is a steadfast and assured knowledge of Gods kindness toward
us, which being grounded upon ye truth of the free promise in Christ, is both
reveled to our minds, and sealed in our hearts by ye holy ghost.

But before I proceed any further, it shall be necessary, yt I make some
Scripture cries out against it, they give the name of faith to such
persuasion void of the fear of God. We need to strive no further with their
definition, but simply to rehearse the nature of faith, such as it is declared
by the word of God. Whereby shall plainly appear how unskillfully and
foolishly they rather make a noise than speak of it. I have already touched
part, the rest I will add hereafter as place shall serve. At this present I
say, yt there can not be imagined a greater absurdity, than this invention
of theires. They will have faith to be an assent, whereby every despyser of God
may receive that which is uttered out of the Scripture. But first they
should have seen whether every manne of his own power do bring faith to
himself, or whether the holy ghooste be by it a witness of adoption.
Therefore they do chyldyshly play the fools, in demaundinge, whether faith,
which quality adds does form, be the same faith or an other and a new
faith. Whereby appears certainly, that in so bablinge they never thought of
the syngular gift of the holy ghooste. For the beginning of beleuinge does
already contain in it the reconciliation, whereby manne approaches to God. But
if they did weye that saying of Paul: Romans x.x.
With the heart is believed to righteousness, they would cesse to feign that
same cold quality. If we had but this one reason, it should be sufficient
to end this contention: that the very same assent (as I have already touched,
and will again more largely repete) is rather of the heart than of the
brain, rather of affection than of understanding. Romans i.v.
For which cause it is called the obeydience of faith, which is such as the
Lord prefers no kind of obeydience above it: and that woorthyly,
forasmuch as nothing is more precious to him than his truth, Io. iii.xxv.
which as Ihon the Baptist witnesses, the beleuers do as yt were subscribe
and seal unto. Sithe the matter is not doubtefull, we do in one word
determinately say, that they speak fondly when they say that faith is
fourmed by adding of godly affection unto assent: whereas assent it self, at
least such assent as is declared in the Scriptures, consists of godly
affection. Butte yet there is an other playner argument that offers yt self
to be alleged. For whereas faith embraces Christ as he is offered us of the
Father: and Christ is offered not only for righteousness, forgiveness of
sins and peace, butte also for sanctification, and a fountain of living
water: without doubt noe mann ecanne ever truly know him, unless he do
therewythall receive ye sanctification of ye Spirit. Or, if any manne desire
to have it more plainly spoken, Faith consysteth in the knowledge of Christ.
And Christ can not be known, butte with sanctification of his Spirit:
therefore it follows, that faith can by no mean be severed from godly
affection.

i. Cor. xii.x.
If a man have all faith, so that he remove mountains: if he have not
charity, he is nothing: whereby they would deforme faith, in spoylinge it
of charity: they consider not what the Apostle in that place means by
faith. For when in the chapter next before it, he had spoken of the diverse
gifts of the holy ghost, among the which he had reckened the diverse kinds
of languages, power and prophecy, and had exhorted the Corynthians to follow
the best of these gifts, that is to say, such gifts whereby more profit
and commodity might come to the whole body of the Church: he straight way
said further, that he would show them yet a more excellent way. That all
such gifts, how excellent soever they be of them selves, yet are nothing
to be esteemed, unless they serve charity. For they were given to the
edyfyeng of the Church, and unless they be applied thereunto, they loose
their grace. For proof of this he particularly reherseth them, repetynge the
self same gifts that he had spoken of before, butte in other names. And
he uses the words Powers and Faith, for all one thing, that is for the
power to do miracles. Sithe therefore this, whether ye call it power or faith,
is a particular gift of God, which every ungodly manne may boothe have and
abuse, as the gift of tongnes, as prophecy and other gifts of grace: yt is
no marvel if yt be severed from charity. Butte all the error of these
men stands in this, that where this word Faith, has diverse
sygnifcations, they not consyderinge the dyuersitie of the thing sygnifyed,
dispute as though it were taken for one thing in all places a like. The place
of James which they allege for mayntaynance of the same error, shall be else
where dyscussed. Butte although for teachynges sake, when we mean to show
what manner of knoweledge of God there is in the wicked, we grant that there
are diverse sorts of faith: yet we acknoweledge and speak of butte one
faith of the godly, as the Scripture teaches. Many in deed do believe that
there is a God, they think that the History of the Gospel and other parts
of the Scripture are true (as commonly we are wont to judge of such things,
as either are reported being done long ago, or such as we our selves have
been present at and seen. There be also some that go further, for both
they believe the word of God to be a most assured oracle, and they do not
altogether despise his commandments, and they somewhat after a sort are
moved with his threatenynges and promyses. It is in deed testified that such
have faith: butte that is spoken out by abuse, because they do not with open
ungodliness fight against the word of God, or refuse or despise it: butte
rather pretend a certain show of obedyence.

But this image or shadow of faith, as yt is of no value, so is yt Act.
viiii.xiii. and xviii
which yet within a little after bewrayed his own unbelief. And whereas it is
said that he believed, we do not understand it as some do, that he fained a
belefe when he had none in his heart: butte we rather think that being
overcome with ye majesty of the Gospel, he had a certain faith such as it
was, and so acknowledged Christ to be the author of life and salvation, that he
willingly professed himself to be one of his. After the same manner it is
said in the Gospel of Luke, that they believe for a time, Luc. viii.vii. and
xiij.
in whom the seed of the word is choked up before it bring forth fruit, or
before it take any rote at al, it by and by withers away and perishes: we
doubt not that such delited with a certain taste of the word do greedyly
receive it, and begin to feel the divine force of it: so far that with
deceitful counterfaiting of faith, they be guile not only other men's eyes, but
also their own minds. For they persuade them selves, that that reverence
which they show to the word of God, is most true godliness, because they
think that there is no ungodliness but manifest and confessed reproach or
contempt of his word. But what manner of assent soever that be, it pearceth
not to ye very heart to remain there stablished: and though sometime it
seems to have taken roots, yet those are lively roots. The heart of man
has so many secret corners of vanity, is full of so many hidinge holes of
lyeng, is covered with so guilefull hypocrisy, that it often deceives
himself. But let them that glory in such shadows of faith understand, Iac.
ii.xix
that therein they are noe better than the Deuell. But that first sort of men
are far worse then the Deuell, which do senslessly hear and understand
those things for knoweledge whereof the Deuells do tremble. And the other are
in this point egall with the Deuell, that the feeling such as it is wherewith
they are touched, tournet only to terroure and discouragement.

ii. Tess. i.iiii.
which doubt yet is easily dysolued: for though none receive the light of
faith, nor do truly feel the effectual working of the Gospel, but they that
are foreordeyned to salvation: yet experience shows that the reprobate are
sometime moved with the same feeling that the elect are, so that in their own
judgment they nothing differ from the elect. Wherefore it is no absurdity,
that the Apostle ascribes to them the taste of the heavenly gifts, Heb. vi.
that Christ ascribes to them a faith for a time: not that they soundly
perceive the spiritual force of grace and assured light of faith: but because
the Lord, the more to condemn them and make them in excusable, conueieth
himself into their minds so far forth, as his goodness may be tasted
without the spirit of adoption. If any object, that then there remains nothing
more to the faithful whereby to prove certainly their adoption: I answer
that though there be a great likeness and affinity between the elect of God,
and them that are endued with a fallinge faith for a time, yet there lives in
the elect only that affiance which Paul speaks of, that they cry with
full mouth, Abba, Father. Therefore as God does regenerate only the elect
with incorruptible seed for ever, so that the seed of life planted in their
hearts never perishes: so soundly does he seal in them the grace of his
adoption, that it may be stable and sure. But this withstandeth not but that
that other inferioure working of the Spirit may have his course, even in the
reprobate. In the mean season the faithful are taught, carefully and humbly
to examine them selves, least in steed of assuredness of faith, do creep in
careless confidence of the flesh. Byside that, the reprobate do never
conceive but a confused feelinge of grace, so that they rather take hold of
the shadow than of the sound body, because the holy Spirit does proprely
seal the remission of sins in the elect only, so that they apply is by
special faith to their use. But yet it is truly said, that the reprobate
believe God to be merciful unto them, because they receive the gift of
reconciliation, although confusedly and not plainly enough: not that they are
partakers of the self same faith or regeneracion with the children of God, but
because they seem to have as well as they, the same beginnynge of faith, under
a cloak of Hypocrisy.

And I deny not, that God does so far give light unto their minds, that
they acknowledge his grace, but he makes that same felyng so different from
the peculiar testimony which he gives to his elect, that they never come to
the sound effect and fruition thereof. For he does not therefore show
himself merciful unto them, for that he having truly delivered them from
death, does receive them to his sauegarde, but only he discloseth to them a
present mercy. But he vouchesaueth to grant to the only elect the lively
root of faith, so that they continue to the end. So is that objection
answered, if God do truly show his grace, that the same remains
perpetually stablished, for that there is no cause to the contrary, but that
God may enlighten some with a present felyng of his grace, which afterward
vanishes away.

Also, though faith be a knowledge of Gods kindness toward the seed that he
casts in their hearts, to make it abide always incorruptible, as he does
in the elect. I go yet further, for whereas it is evident by the teaching of
the Scripture and by daily experience, that ye reprobate are sometime touched
with the felyng of Gods grace, it must needs be that there is raised in their
hearts a certain desire of mutual love. So for a time there lived in Saul a
godly affection to love God, by whom he knew himself to be fatherly handeled,
and therefore was delited with a certain sweetness of his goodness. But as
the persuasion of the fatherly love of God is not fast rooted in the
reprobate, so do they not soundely love him again as his children, but are
led with a certain affection like hired servants. For to Christ only was
that Spirit of love given, to this end, that he should pour it into his
members. And truly that saying of Paul extends no further, Romans v.v.
but to the elect only: The love of God is poured abroad into our hearts by
the holy Spirit that is given us, even the same love yt engenders the same
confidence of calling upon him, which I have before touched. As on the
contrary side we see God to be maruelously angry with his children, whom yet
he cesseth not to love: not that in himself he hates them, but because his
will is to make them afraid with the feeling of his wrath, but to the intent
to abate their pride of flesh, to shake of their drowesinesse, and to move
them to repentance. And therefore all at one time they conceive him to be
both angry with them or with their sins, and also merciful unto them:
because they not fainedly do pray to appease his wrath, to whom yet they
flee with quiet assured trust. Hereby it appears that it is not true that some
do counterfayte a show of faith, which yet do lack the true faith, but
while they are carried with a sodeyne violent motion of Zele, they deceive
themselves with false opinion, And it is no doubt that sluggishnesse so
possesses them, that they do not well examine their heart as they ought to
have done. It is likely that they were such to whom (as John witnesses)
Christ did not commit himself when yet they believed in him: Ih. ij.xxiiij
because he knew them all, and knew what was in manne. If many did not fall
from the common faith (I call it common, because the faith that lasts but a
time has a great likeness and affinity with the lively and continuynge
faith) Christ would not have said to his Disciples: Ih. viij.iij
If ye abide in my word, then are ye truly my Disciples, and ye shall know
the truth, and the truth shall make you free. For he speaks to them that
had embraced his doctrine, and exhorts them to the increase of faith, that
they should not by their own sloughtfulnesse quench the light that is given
them. Tit. i.i.
Therefore does Paul affirm, that faith peculiarly belongs to the elect,
declaryng that many vanish away, because they have not taken lively root. Like
as Christ also says in Matthew: Matt. xv.xiij.
every tree that my father has not planted, shall be rooted up. In other there
is a grosser kind of lyeng, that are not ashamed to mock both God and men.
I^^. ii.
James inueyeth against that kind of men, that with deceiptfull pretense do
wickedly abuse faith. i. Tim. i.v
Neither would Paul require of the children of God a faith unfeigned, but in
respect that many do presumptuously challenge unto themselves that which they
have not, and with vain colored deceyte do beguile other or sometime
themselves. i. Tim. i^ xix.
Therefore he compares a good conscience to a cheste wherein faith is kept,
because many in falling from good conscience, have suffered shipwreck of their
faith.

We must also remember the doutefull signification of the word i. Tim. iij.ix.
Deacons to hold fast the mystery of faith in a pure conscience. Again,
where he publishes the falling away of certain from the faith. But on the
other side he says that Timothee was nourished up with the words of faith.
i. Tim. iiii i. and. vi. ii. Tim. i^ xvi. and. iij.viii. Tit. i.xiii. and.
ii.ii.
where he says that profane vanities and oppositions, falsely named sciences,
are the cause that many depart from the faith: whom in an other place he
calls reprobate touching faith. As again he charge Tit^s, Again saying,
Warn them that they be sound in the faith. By soundenesse he means nothing
else but pureness of doctrine, which is easily corrupted and brought out of
kind by the lightness of men. Even because in Christ, Ecl. ii.iii.
whom faith possesses, are hidden all the treasures of wisdom and
knoweledge: therefore faith is worthyly extended to signify the whole sum of
heavenly doctrine, from which it can not be severed. Contrariewise sometime it
is restrained to signify some particular object, Mat. ix.ii.
as when Matthew says, that Christ saw the faith of them that did let down
the manne sick of the palsy through the tyles: and Christ himself cries out
that he found not in Israel so great faith as the Centurion brought. But it
is likely that the Centurion was earnestly bente to the healyng of his
daughter, Mat. viii.x.
the care whereof occupied all his mind: yet because being contented with the
only assent and answer of Christ, he required not Christ's bodyly presence,
therefore in respect of this circumstance his faith was so much commended.
And a little here before we have showed, i. Cor. xiii.x.
that Paul takes faith for the gift of workynge miracles, which gift they
have that neither are regenerate by the Spirit of God, nor do hartyly
worship him. Also in an other place he sets faith for the doctrine whereby
we are instructed in faith. For where he writes that faith shall be
abolished, it is out of question that that is meante by the ministry of the
Church, which at this (...) is profitable for our weakness. In these forms
of speech stands a proportional relation. But when the name of faith is
improperly removed, to signify a false profession, or a lyeng title of faith,
that should seem to be as hard a figurative abuse, as when the fear of God
is set for a corrupt and wrongefull manner of worshyppynge, as when it is
oftentimes said in the holy History, that the foreign nations which had been
transplanted into Samaria and the places borderynge there about, feared the
feigned Gods and the God of Israel: which is as much, as to mingle heaven and
earth together. But now our question is, What is that faith which makes the
children of God different from the unbelievers, by which we call upon God by the
name of our Father, by which we pass from death to life, and by which Christ
the eternal salvation and ^he dwells in us. The force and nature thereof I
think I have shortly and plainly declared.

Ephe. iii.xviij.
Therefore Paul says very well, where he calls it to comprehend what is
the length, breadth, depth, and height, and to know the love of Christ that
far surmounteth knowledge. For his meaning was to signify, Colos. i.xxviii.
that the thing which our mind conceyueth by faith, is every way infinite,
and that this kind of knowledge is far hyer than all understanding. But yet
because the Lord has disclosed to his Saints the secret of his will which
was hidden from ages and generations, therefore by good reason faith is in
Scripture sometime called an acknowledging: and John calls it a certain
knowledge, i. Ih. iii.ii.
where he testifies, that the faithful do certainly know that they are the
children of God. And undoubtedly they know it assuredly: but rather by being
confirmed by persuasion of Gods truth, than by being informed by natural
demonstration. And his, i^. Cor. v.vi.
also the words of Paul do declare, saying that while we ^well in the body,
we are wanderyng abroad from the lord, because we walk by faith and not by
sight: whereby he shows that those things which we understand by faith,
are yet absente from us and are hidden from our sight. And hereupon we
determine, that the knowledge of faith stands rather in certainty than in
comprehendyng.

Psa. xix.xxxi.
as the S^^^e^^ryed in a furnace of earth, fined seven times. Again. The word
o^ the Lord fined is a shield to all that trust in him. And Solomon
confirmynge the same, Pro. (...)
and in a manner in the same words, says: Every word of God is pure. But
sith the whole.cxix. Psalm entreats only in a manner upon the same, it
wear superfluous to allege any more places. Truly so often as God does so
commend his word unto us, he does therein by the way reproach us with our
vnbeleuingnesse: because that commendacio^ tends to no other end, but to
root up all perverse doubtinges out of our hearts. There be also many which
so conceive the mercy of God, that they take little comfort thereof. For they
be even therewithal pinched with a miserable carfulness, while they doubt
whether he will be merciful to them or not, because they enclose within to
narrow bounds the very same mercifulness, of which they think themselves
most assuredly persuaded. For thus they think with themselves, that his
mercy is in deed great and plentiefull poured out upon many, offrynge it
self and ready for all men: but that it is not certain whether it will
extend unto them or no, or rather whether they shall atteyne unto it or no.
This thought when it so stays in the midde race, is but a half. Therefore it
does not so confirm the spirit with assured quietness, as it does trouble
it with unquiet doubtefulnesse. But there is a far other felyng of full
assuredness, which in the Scriptures is always assigned to faith, even such
a one as plainly setting before us the goodness of God, does clearly put
it out of doubt. And that can not be, but that we must needs truly feel
and prove in our selves the sweetness thereof. Ephesians. iii.xx.
And therefore the Apostle out of faith deriueth assured confidence, and out of
it again boldness. For thus he says, that by Christ we have boldness,
and an entrance with confidence, which is through faith in him. By which
words truly he shows, that it is no right faith, but when we are bold with
quiet minds to show our selves in the presence of God. Which boldness
proceeds not but of assured confidence of Gods good will and our salvation.
Which is so true, that many times this word Faith, is used for Confidence.

But herupon hangs the chief stay of our faith, that we do not Romans v.i.
unless some had rather say, yt peace is derived of it. It is an assuredness
that makes the conscience quiet and cherefull before God, without which the
conscience must of necessity be vexed, and in a manner torn in pieces with
troublesome trembling, unless parhappes it do forget God and it self, and so
slo^ber a little while. and I may truly say, For a little while, for it does not
long enjoy that miserable forgetfulness, but is with often recourse of the
remembrance of Gods judgment sharply tormented. Briefly, there is none truly
faithful, but he that being persuaded with a sound assuredness that God is his
merciful and loving father, does promise himself all things upon trust of
Gods goodness: and none but he that trustyng upon the promises of Gods good
will toward him, conceyueth and undoubted lokynge for of salvation: Hebr.
iij.xiii.
as the Apostle shows in these words: If we keep sure to the end our
confidence and gloriyng of hope. For hereby he means that none hops well in
the Lord, but he that with confidence glories that he is heir of the
kingdom of heaven. There is none (I say) faithful, but he that leanyng upon
the assuredness of his own salvation, does confidently triumph upon the
deuell and death, as we are taught by that notable concluding sentence of
Paul: Romans viii.xxxvii^.
I am persuaded (says he) that neither death, nor life, nor Angeles, nor
principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things to come, shall be
able to separate us from ye love of God. wherewith he embraces us in Christ
Jesus. And in like manner, the same Apostle thinks, that the eyes of our mind
are by no other mean well lightened, unless we see what is the hope of the
eternal inheritance to which we are called. Ephesians. i.xviii.
And each where his common manner of teaching is such, that he declares that
no otherwise we do not well comprehend the goodness of God, unless we gather
of it the fruit of great assuredness.

Psa. xlii.vi. ^ xliii.v
specially if a man behold the whole continual course of his life. But yet
how he was not always of quiet mind, himself declares by innumerable
complaints, of which at this time it shall be sufficient do choose out a
few. When he reprocheth his own soul with troublesome motions, what is it
else but that he is angry with his own vnbeleuengnesse? Why tre^blest thou my
soul (says he) and why art thou disquieted within me? trust in God. And
truly that same discouragement was a plain token of destruction, even as if
he thought himself to be forsaken of God. And in an other place we read a
larger confession thereof, Psa. xxxi.xxij.
where he says: I said in my overthrow, I am cast out from the sight of thy
eyes. Also in an other place he disputes with himself in careful and
miserable perplexity, yea and quareleth of the very nature of God, saying:
Has God forgotten to have mercy? will he cast of for ever? And yet harder is
that which follows: Ps. lxxvii.x.
But I have said, To die is mine: charges are of the right hand of the highest.
For, as in despere he condemns himself to destruction, and not only
confesses himself to be tossed with doutyng, but as if he were vanquished in
battle, he leaves nothing to himself, because God has forsaken him, and has
turned to destroy him, the same hand that was wont to be his helper. Psa.
cxvi.vii.
Wherefore not without cause he exhorts his soul to return to her
quietness, because he had found by experience, that he was tossed among
troblesome waves. And yet (which is meruellous) in all these assaults, faith
vpholdeth the hearts of the godly, and is truly like unto a Date tree to
endeavor and rise upward against all burdens, how great soever they be: as
David, when he might seem to be utterly overwhelmed, yet in rebukyng himself,
cesseth not to rise up to God. And truly he that striving with his own
weakness, resorteth to faith in his troubles, is already in a manner
conqueror. Which may be gathered by this sentence and other like: Psa.
x^vii.xiii^.
Wait for the Lord, be strong, he shall stre^gthen they heart: wait for the
Lord. He reprocheth himself of fearfulness, and in repetyng the same twice,
con^esseth himself to be sometimes subject to many troublesome motions. And in
the mean time he does not only become displeased with himself in these
faults, but earnestly endeuoreth to amendment. Truly if we will more nerely
by good examination compare him with Achaz, there shall be found great
difference. Esa. vii.iii
Esaye was sent to bring remedy to the careful grief of the wicked king
and hypocrite, and spoke unto him in these words: Be in sauegarde and be
quiet: fear not, etc. But what did Achaz? As it was before said, that his
heart was moved as the trees of the wood are shaken with wind, though he
heard the promise, yet he cessed not to quake for fear. This therefore is the
propre reward and punishment of unbelief, so to tremble for fear, that in
temptation he turns himself away from God, that does not open to himself
the gate by faith. Contrariwise the faithful whom the weighty burden of
temptations makes to stoop, and in a manner oppresses, do constantly rise
up, although not without trouble and hardiness. And because they know their
own weakness, they pray with the Prophet: Psa. cxix.xiiii.
Take not the word of truth away from my mouth continually. By which words we
are taught, that sometime they become dumme, as though their faith were utterly
overthrown, yet they faint not, nor turn their backs, but proceed in their
battle, and with prayer do encourage their slothfulness, lest by favoring
themselves they should grow to insensible dullness.

For the understanding thereof, it is needeful to return to that division if in
a faithful mind assuredness be mixed with doubtfulnesse, come we not then
always to this point, that faith stands not in a certain and clear
knowledge, but in a dark and doubtefully entangled knowledge of Gods will
toward us? No, not so. For though we be diversely drawn with sundry thoughts,
yet are we not therefore by and by severed from faith: though we be vexed with
tossyng up and down of distrustfulnesse, yet are we not therefore drowned in
the botto^lesse depth thereof: and though we be shaken, yet be we not thrust*
down out of our place. For this is always the end of this battle, that faith
does at length with wrestling overcome those hard troubles, wherewith when she
is so besieged, she seems to be in danger.



(...) xiii.xx.
that we know imperfectly, and prophecy imperfectly, and see by a dark
speaking as by a glass, he shows how sclender a little portion of the true
godly wisdom is given us in this present life. For though those words do not
expressly show that our faith is imperfect so long as we groan under this
burden of the flesh, but that it happens unto us by our own imperfection,
that we have need to be continually exercised in learning: yet he secretly
declares that that thing which is infinite, can not be comprehended by our
small capacity, and narrow compass. And this Paul reports of the whole
church, but unto every own of us, his own dullness is a hinderance and stay
that he can not come so nere as were to be wished. But how sure and
vndeceuiable a taste of it self, even a small drop of faith does make us
feel, the same Apostle shows in an other place, where he affirms, ^^ Cor.
iii.x^^^ii.
that by the Gospel we behold the glory of God with uncovered face, having no
veil between us and it, so effectually that we be transformed into the same
image. In such entangleme^tes of ignorance there must needs be wrapped
together both much doubtyng and fearful tremblyng, specially for as much as
our heart, by a certain natural instinct of it self, is inclined to
vnbeleuingnesse. Byside that there be tentations which both infinite in
number, and diverse in kind, do oftentimes with great sodeine violence assail
us. But specially our own conscience oppressed with heavy burden of sins
lyeng upon it, does sometime lament and groan with it self, and sometime
accuses it self: sometime secretly murmureth, and sometime is openly
troubled. Whether therefore adversities do show an appearance of the wrath of
God, or the conscience does find in it self any proof or matter of his wrath,
from thense unbelief does take weapons and engines to vanquish faith withal:
which are always directed to this end, that we thinkyng God to be our
adversary and hatefully bent against us, should both not hope for any help
at his hand, and also be afraid of him as of our deadly enemy.

To bear these assaults, faith does army and fortify her self with Mat.
viii.xxv.
So the Disciples, in whom Christ blames their smalnesse of faith, co^playned
in deed that they perished, but yet they called to him for help. And when he
rebukes them for their small faith, yet he does not reject them from the
number of his, nor makes them of the number of the unbelievers, but stirs
them to shake of that fault. Therefore we affirm again that which we have
above spoken, that the root of faith is never plucked out of a godly heart,
but sticks so fast in the bottom, that how so ever it be shaken and seem
to bend this way or that way, the light thereof is so never quenched or
choked up, but that it lies at least hidden under some embers: and by this
token is plainly showed, that the word which is an incorruptible sede,
brings forth fruit like to it self, the spryng whereof does never whither
and utterly perish* for whereas this is the extremest matter of despeire to the
holy ones to ^ele according to the co^sideracion of present things, the hand
of God bent to their destruction: Job. xiii.xv.
yet Job affirms that his hope shall proceed so far* that though God do kill
him, yet he will not therefore cesse to trust in him. This is the truth
therefore: Unbelief reigns not within the hearts of the godly, but outwardly
assayleth them: neither does she deadly wound them with her wepons, but only
troubles them, or so hurts them, that yet the wound is curable. for faith,
Ephe. vi*xviii.
as Paul teaches, serves us for a sheld: that being holden up against
weapons, does so receive the force of them, that it either utterly drives them
back, or at least so breaks their violence, that they can not pearce them to
danger of life. Therefore when faith is shaken, it is like as if a strong
souldior with the violent stroke of a darte be compelled to remove his foot,
and give ground a little: and when faith it self is wounded, that is like as if
his buckler by some stroke be in some part broken, but yet so yt it is not
strike^ through. For always the godly mind will atteine to rise thus hie as to
say with David, Psa. xx^^ iiij.
If I walk in the midst of the shadow of death, I will fear none euel,
because thou art with me. It is in deed terrible to walk in ye darkness of
death and it can not be but that the faithful, how much strength soever they
have must be afraid of it. Yet because this thought surmounteth it, that they
have God present with them, and prouidynge for their safety, that fear is
overcome with assuredness. For (as Augustine says) how great engines so ever
the deuell raises up against us, so long as he possesses not the place of the
heart, where faith dwells, he is cast out of the doors. And so if we may
judge by the success, the faithful not only escape safe from every battle, so
that by and by receyuyng fresh courage they are ready to come again into the
field: but also that is fulfilled which John says in his canonical Epistle:
This is the victory that ouercometh the world, i. Ih. v.iiij
eue^ your faith. For he affirms yt it shall not only win the victory in
one or few battles, or against some one assault, but also that it shall get the
ouerhande of the whole world, although it be a thousand times assailed.

i. Cor. x.xi.
puts ye Corinthians in fear yt they enta^gle not themselves with like euels:
he does not thereby abate their affia^ce* but only shakes away ye dullness of
the flesh by which faith is wont more to be oppressed tha^ stre^gthened. And
when he takes occasion of yt Jews fall to exhort him ye stands, To. xi.xx.
to take heed yt he fall not, he does not thereby bid us to waver, as though
we were not fully assured of our steadfastness, but only he takes away
arroga^t presumption and rash trusting to much in our own strength, yt after
the thrusting out of the Jews, ye Gentiles being received into their place,
should not to much outragiously triumph against them. Albeit he speaks there
not only to the faithful, but also in the same saying comprehends the
Hypocrites that gloried only in outward show. For neither does he admonish
every man particularly, but making a comparison between the Jews and the
Gentiles, after that he had showed that the Jews in this that they were
rejected, did suffer just punishment for their unbelief and unthankfulness,
he also exhorted the Gentiles that they should not, by being proud and
extollyng themselves, lose the grace of adoption lately conveyed unto them. But
as in that general reiectyng of the Jews, there remained yet some that were
not fallen from the covenant of adoption, so out of the Gentiles there might
arise some, which without true faith, should be puffed up only with foolish
confidence of the flesh, and so abuse Gods loving kindness to their own
destruction. But although you take this as spoken to the elect and faithful,
yet thereupon shall follow no inconvenience. For it is one thing to hold down
the rash presumption which out of the remnantes of the flesh crepeth sometime
even into the holy ones, that with vain confidence it wax not outragiously
wanton: and an other thing to strike the conscience with fear, that it rest
not with full assuredness in the mercy of God.

Then, when he teaches, that with fear and trembling we should Phil. ij.xij
he requires nothing else, but that we should accustom us with much abacyng of
our selves, reverently to look up unto the mightiness of God. For truly
nothing does so much awake us to cast all our confidence and assurance of mind
upon the Lord, as does the distrust of our selves and carfulness conceived
by knowledge in conscience of our own wretchedness. And according to this
meaning is that saying in the Prophet to be taken: Pl. v.viij.
In the multitude of thy goodness I will enter into thy temple: I will worship
in fear. Where he comely conioyneth the boldness of faith that leans upon
Gods mercy with a reverent fear, which we must needs feel so often as
coming into the sight of Gods majesty, we perceive by the glorious
bryghtnesse thereof, how great is our own filthiness. And Solomon says
truly, Pro. xxviii xiiij*
where he pronounces the man blessed, that continually makes his own heart
afraid, for by hardening thereof men fall hedlong into evil. But such fear
he means as may make us more heedefull, not such whereby we should be troubled
and utterly fall: even such a fear as when the mind confounded in it self,
does recover it self again in God: when despeiryng it self, it reuiueth by
trust in him. Therefore there is no cause to the contrary, but that the
faithful may at one time both be in fear, and also enjoy most assured
comfort, in respect that sometime they turn their eyes to behold their own
vanity, and sometime they cast the thought of their mind upon the truth of
God. But how (will some man say) shall fear and faith dwell both in one
mind? even thus, as contrarily insensible dullness, and carfulness. For
whereas the wicked travail to procure to themselves a want of grefe, that no
fear of God might trouble the^, yet, the judgment of God so presses them,
that they can not atteyne that which they desire. So there is nothing to
withstand, but that God may exercise them that be his to humiliti^, that in
fightyng valiantly, they may restrain themselves under the bridle of
modesty. And by the process of the text it appears, that this was the
intent of the Apostle, where he assigns the cause of fear and tremblyng to
be the good pleasure of God, whereby he gives to them that be his both to
will well, and valiantly to go through with it. According to this meaning ought
we to take that saying of the Prophet: Ose. iii.v.
The children of Israel shall fear God and his godnesse: because not only,
godliness enge^dreth the reverence of God, but the very sweetness and
pleasant taste of grace, fills man being discouraged in himself with fear
and admiration, to make him hang upon God, and humbly yield himself subject to
his power.

To. viii.x.
The body in deed (says he) is dead by reason of sin: but the Spirit of
Christ that dwells in you, is life for righteousness. According to these
men's trifeling devise he should have said, Christ in deed has life with
himself: but you, as you be sinners, remain subject to death and damnation.
But he says far otherwise. For he teaches that that damnation which we
deserve of our (...)* is swalowed up by the salvation of Christ, and (...) the
same reason that I have alleged, because Christ is not (...) us, but dwells
within us, and cleaves unto us not only with ^^diuidable knot of fellowship,
but with a certain marvelous communion daily more and more grows with us
into one body, till he be made altogether one with us. And yet I deny not, as
I have said a little before, that sometime there happen certain i^^erruptions
of faith, as the weakness thereof is among violent sodeine motions bowed
hither or thither. So in the thick miste of te^tations the lig^^ thereof is
choked, but what so ever happens, it cesseth not from endeavor to seek God.

And no otherwise does Bernarde argue, when he purposely entreats Esa.
lx^^ii*vi.
then what shall the vnrighteounesses thereof be accounted? If the light that
is in us be darkness, how great shall the very darkness be? Matt. v^.xiij.
What then? without doubt man is made like unto vanity: man is brought to
naught: man is nothing. But how the^ is he utterly nothing, whom God does
magnify? How then is he nothing, toward whom Gods heart is set? Brethren, let
us take heart again. Though we be nothing in our own hearts, peradventure
there may somewhat of us lie hidden in the heart of God. O father of mercies,
O father of the miserable, how do thou set thy heart toward us? For thy
heart is where thy treasure is. But how^ ^e we thy treasure, if we be nothing?
All nations are so before thee as if they were not, they shall be reputed as
nothing. Even before thee, not within thee: so in the judgment of thy truth,
but not in the affection of thy pity. Thou call those things that are not,
as though they were. Therefore both they are not, because thou call those
things that are not, and also they are because thou call them. For though
they are not, in respect of themselves, yet with thee they are, according to
that saying of Paul, To. ix.xii.
not of the works of righteousness, but of him that calls. And then he
says, that this couplyng together of both consideracions is marvelous.
Truly those things that are knit together, do not the one destroy the other.
Which also in the conclusion he more plainly declares in these words. Now if
with both these consideracio^s we diligently look upon our selves what we be,
yea in the one consideracio^ how we be nothing, and in the other how much we be
magnified, I think our glorieng seems to be tempered, but paradue^ture it is
more increased. Truly it is perfectly stablished, that we glory not in our
selves but in the Lord. If we think thus: if he has determined to save us, we
shall by and by be delivered: now in this we may take courage. But let us climb
up into a hier watch toure, and seek for the city of God, seek for the
temple, seek for ye house, seek for the spouse. I have not forgotten, but I say
it with fear and reverence, we I say be, but in the heart of God. We be, but
by his allowyng as worthy, not by our own worthiness.

Pro. i.vii.
although it be but one, Psalm. c.xi.
yet it proceeds from a double understanding. For God has in himself the
reverence both of a father and of a lord. Pro. xv.x^iij
Therefore he yt will truly worship him, will endeavor to show himself both
an obedient son and a seruisable servant unto him. Malac. i.vii.
The obedience that is given to him as to a father, the Lord by his Prophet
calls honor: the service that is done to him as to a lord, he calls fear.
The son (says he) honoreth the father and the servant the lord. Job.
vi^^.xxvi^^.
If I be a father, where is my honor? If I be a lord, where is my fear? But
how soever he puts difference between the^, thou see how he confounds
them both together. Therefore let the fear of the lord be unto us a reverence,
mingled with that same honor and fear. Neither is it any marvel, if one mind
receive both those affections. For he that co^sidereth with himself what a
father God is unto us, has cause enough, although there were no helles at al,
why he should dread his displeasure more grievously tha^ any death. But also
(such is the wantonness of our flesh to ru^ne to licentiousness of sinning)
to restrain the same by all means, we ought therewithal to take hold of this
thought, that the Lord under whose power we live, abhors al iniquity, whose
vengeance they shall not escape, yt in living wickedly do provoke his wrath
against themselves.

i. Job. iiii.^viij.
because fear conteyneth punishment, disagreeth not with this that we say. For
ye wicked fear not God in this respect that they dread to incur his
displeasure, if they might do it without punishment: but because they know him
to be armed with power to revenge: therefore they shake for fear at ye hearing of
his wrath. And also they so fear his wrath, because they think that it
hangs over the^, for that they look every moment when it shall fall upon their
heds. As for the faithful: they (as is above said) both fear his displeasure
more than punishment and are not troubled with fear of punishment as if it did
hang over their necks, but they are made the more ware not to procure it. So
says the Apostle, when he speaks to the faithful: Be ye not deceived: Ephesians
v.vi.
for this comes the wrath of God upon the children of unbelief. Co^. iij.vi.
He threateneth not that Gods wrath will come upon them, but puts them in
mind to think upon this, that the wrath of God is prepared for such wicked
doings as he had recited, that they themselves should not be willing also to
prove it. Albeit it seldom happens that the reprobate be awakened with only
and bare threateninges, but rather being already gross and vnsensibly dull
with their own hardness, so often as God thundreth from heaven they harden
themselves to obstinacy, but when they are ones stricken with his hand, then
whether they will or no, they be enforced to fear. This fear they commonly
call a servile fear: and in comparison se^ it for contrary to free natured
and willing fear which becomes children. Some other do suttelly thrust in a
middle kind, because that same servile and constrained affection sometime to
subdueth men's minds, that they come willyngly to the fear of God.

Now we understand that in the good will of God, whereunto faith is Psalm.
lxix.iiij. Ephesians. ij.xiiii.
Let him show his face (says the Prophet) and we shall be safe. Whereupon the
Scriptures determine this to be the sum of our salvation, that God putting
away al enmities, has received us into favor. Whereby they show, that when
God is reconciled unto us, there remains no peril, but that al things shall
prosper well with us. Therefore faith, having taken hold of the love of God,
has promises of the present life and of the life to come, and perfect
assuredness of al good things: but that same such as may be gathered out of
the word of God. For faith does not certainly promise to it self either the
length or honor or wealth of this life, for as much as God willed none of these
things to be appointed unto us, but is contented with this assuredness, that
God will never fail how so ever many things fail us that perteine to the
maintenance of this present life. But the chief assuredness of faith rests
in expertation of the life to come, which is set out of doubt by the word of
God. But what so ever miseries and calamities betide unto them whom God
loves, they can not work the contrary, but that his good will is perfect
felicity. Therefore when we did mean to express the sum of blessedness,
we named the favor of God, out of which spring do flow unto us al kinds of
good things. And this we may commonly note throughout the Scriptures, that
when so ever mention is made not only of eternal salvation, but also of any
good thing in us, we be always called back to the love of God. Psa. lxiij.iiii.
For which cause David says, that the goodness of God when it is felt in a
godly heart, is sweter and more to be desired than life it self. Finally, if
all things else do flow unto us according to our own wishing, and we be
uncertain of Gods love or hatred, our felicity shall be accursed, and therefore
miserable. But if the favorable face of God do shine unto us, even our very
miseries shall be blessed, Romans viii.xxiv.
because they are turned to helps of our salvation. As Paul when he heaped up
a rehersall of all adversities, yet he glories that he was not by them severed
from the love of God: and in his prayers he always begins at the favor of
God, from whense flows all prosperity. Likewise David sets the only
favor of God against all the terrors that trouble us. Ps^. ^^iii.iiii.
If (says he) I shall walk in the midst of the shadow of death, I will
fear no euels, because thou art with me. And we always feel that our minds do
waver, unless being contented with the favor of God, they seek their peace in
it, and have this inwardly fixed in them that is said in the Psalm, Ps. xxxii.
xii.
Blessed is the people whose God is the Lord, and the nation whom he has
chosen to him for his inheritance.

We make the fundation of faith to be the free promise of God, because faith
proprely stays upon it. For though faith do believe God to be true in all
things, whether he command or forbid, whether he promise or threaten, and
also obediently receives his commandments, and bewareth of things that he
prohibeteth, and has regard to his threatenynges, yet properly it begins at
the promise, and therein continues, and thereupon ends. For faith seeks for
life in God, which is not found in commandments or declaratio^s of
penalties, but in promise of mercy, and in no other promise, but such as is
freely given. For the conditional promise, by which we are sent to our own
works, does no otherwise promise life, but if we perceive it to stand in our
selves. Therefore if we will not have our faith to tremble and waver, we must
stay it with that promise of salvation, which is willingly and liberally offered
us of the lord, rather in respect of our misery, To. x.viii.
tha^ of our worthiness. Wherefore the Apostle bears this witness of the
gospel, that it is the word of faith: which name he takes both from the
commandments and also from the promises of the law, because there is
nothing that can stablish faith, but that liberal embassage, by which God
reco^cileth the world to himself. Therefore the same Apostle oftentimes makes a
relation of faith and the Gospel together, To. i.vi. and ^v^.xvij.
when he teaches that the ministry of the gospel was committed to him unto
the obedience of faith: that the same is the power of God, to salvation to
every one that believes: that in it is reveled the righteousness of God from
faith to faith. And no marvel. For sith the gospel is the ministry of
reconciliation, ij. Cor. v.xviij.
there is no other testimony sure enough of Gods good will toward us, the
knowledge whereof faith requires. Therefore when we say that faith must rest
upon free promise, we do not deny but that the faithful do every way embrace
and receive the word of God, but we apoint the promise of mercy to be the
propre mark of faith. Even as the faithful ought in deed to acknowledge God
to be the judge and punisher of wicked doings and yet they properly have
regard unto his merciful kindness: for as much as he is described to them to
be considered such a one as is loving and merciful, Ps. lxxxvi.v. and
ciii.lxixi.v.
far from wrath, of much goodness, gentle unto all, pouryng forth his mercy
upon al his works.

Heb. xi.vii
that Noe feared the destruction of the world, when it was not yet seen. If
the fear of a punishment shortly to come, was the work of faith, then ought
not the threatenynges to be excluded out of the definition of faith. This is in
deed true. But the cauillers do unjustly accuse us, as though we denied that
faith has respect to all the parts of the word of god. For our meaning is
only to show those two things, first, that faith never steadfastly stands
until it come to the free promise: and then that we are no otherwise by it be
reconciled to God, but because it coupleth us to Christ. Both those points are
worthy to be noted. We seek such a faith, which may make difference between y^
children of God and the reprobate, between the faithful and the unbelieving. If
a man do believe that God both justly commands all that he commands, and
truly threatens, shall he be therefore called faithful? Nothing less.
Therefore there can be no steadfast stay of faith, unless it be grounded upon
the mercy of God. But now to what end do we dyspute of faith? Is it not that
we may learn the way of salvation? But how does faith bring salvation but in
respect yt it graffeth us into the body of Christ? Therefore there is no
inconvenience, if in the definition we de enforce the principal effect thereof,
and do join unto the gerall name, instead of a difference that mark that
seuereth the faitfull from the unbelieving. Finally, the malicious have nothing
to find fault withal in this doctrine, To. x.vi^^.
but they must wrappe up Paul with us in the same blame, which calls the
Gospel proprely the word of faith.

But hereupon again we gather that which we have before declared, Psa. ix.xi.
because none other (as David testifies) can trust in the Lord, but they that
know his name. But this knowledge is not according to every man's imagination,
but so far as God himself is witness of his own goodness. Which the same
Prophet confyrmeth in an other place, Psa. cix.xliv.
saying: Thy salvation is according to thy word. Again. I have trusted in
thy word, save me. Where is to be noted the relation of faith to the word, and
then how salvation follows. And yet in the mean time we do not exclude ye
power of God, with beholding whereof, unless faith sustain it self, it can
never give unto God his due honor. To. iiii.xxi
Paul seems to rehearse a certain sclender and common thing of Abraham, that
he believed that God which had promised him the blessed seed, was able to
perform it. Again in an other place, ij. Tim. i.xviii.
speaking of himself: I know whom I have believed, and I am sure that he is
able to keept that which I have left with him until that da^e. But if a man
weie with himself how many doubtinges of the power of God do oftentimes
creep into man's mind, he shall well perceive that they which do highly
esteem it as it is worthy, have not a little profited in faith. We all will
confess that God is able to do whatsoever he will, but when even the least
tentation throws us down with fear, and amaseth us with horroure, thereby
appears plainly, that we diminish the estimation of Gods power, when we
prefer above it those things, that Satan threatens against Gods promises.
This is the reason why Esaias, meaning to print into ye hearts of the people the
assuredness of salvation, does so honorably entreats of the infinite power
of God. It seems often that so sone as he has begone to speak of the hope
of pardon and reconciliation, he by and by tourneth to an other thing, and
wandereth about in long and superfluous circumstances, rehersinge how
maruelously the Lord governs the frame of heaven and earth and the whole
order of nature: yet is there nothing that serves not fittly for the
circumstance of the matter that he speaks of. For unless the power of God
whereby he is able to do all things be presently set before our eyes, our ears
will hardly hear the word, or will not esteem it so much as it is worth. Beside
that, her is declared his effectual power, because godliness (as we have
already showed in an other place) does alwaie apply the power of God to use
and work, specially it sets before it self those works of God, whereby he
has testified himself to be a father. Hereupon comes that in the Scriptures
is so often mention made of, the redemption, whereby the Israelites might have
learned that God which was ones the author of salvation, will be an
everlasting preserver thereof. And David puts us in mind by his own
exaumple, that those benefits which God has particularly bestowed upon
every man, do afterward avail to the confyrmation of his faith. Yea when
God seems to have forsaken us, it behooves us to stretche our wits
further, that his aunciente benefits may recomforte us, as it is said in an
other Psalm: I have been mindful of old days, I have studied upon all thy
works. Ps. c.xliii. ^s. lxxvii.xi.
etc. Again. I will remember the works of the Lord, and his meruelles from
the beginning. But because without the word all quickly vanishes away that we
conceive of the power of God and of his works, therefore we do not without
cause affirm that there is no faith, unless God give light unto it with
testimony of his grace. But here a question might be moved, what is to be
thought of Sara and Rebecca, both which being moved as it seems with zele of
says, Ge. xvi.v.
passed beyond the bonds of the word. Sara, when she fervently desired the
promised issue, gave her bondmaide to her housbande. It can not be denied but
that she many ways sinned: but now I touch only this fault, that being
carried away with her zele, she did not restrain herself within the bonds
of Gods word, yet it is certain that that desire proceeded of faith. Ge. xxvi.
Rebecca being certified by the oracle of God of the election of her son
Jacob* procured his blessing by evil crafty means: she deceued her husband
the witness and minister of the grace of God: she compelled her son to lie:
she by diverse guiles and deceites corrupted the truth of God. Finally in
making a scorn of his promise, she did as much as in her lay, destroy it.
And yet this act, how much soever it was evil, and worthy of blame, was
not without faith, for it was necessary that she should overcome many
offenses, that she might so earnestly endeavor to atteine that which without
hope of earthly profit was full of great troubles and dangers. As we may not
say that the holy Patriarche Isaac was altogether without faith, because he
being by the same oracle of God admonished of the honor transferred to the
younger son, yet cessed not to be more favorably bente to his first
begotten son Esau. Truly these examples do teach, that oftetimes erroures
are mingled with faith: but yet so that faith if it be a true faith, has
alwaie the upper hand. For as the particular error of Rebecca did not make
void the effect of the blessing, so neither did it make void her faith which
generally reigned in her mind, and was the beginning and cause of that doing.
Nevertheless therein Rebecca uttered how ready man's mind is to fall so sone
as he gives him self never so little liberty. But though man's defaut and
weakness does darken faith, yet it does not quench it: in the mean time it
puts us in mind, how carefully we ought to hang upon the mouth of God,
and also confyrmeth that which we have taught, that faith vanysheth away,
unless yt be vpholden by the word: as the minds boothe of Sara, and Isaac
and Rebecca had become vain in their crooked wanderinges out of the way,
unless they had been by Gods secret bridle holden in obedience of the word.

Again, not without cause we include all the promises in Christ, forasmuch
To. i.xvii. ii. Cor. ^.xx
and in an other place he teaches, that all the promises of God are in him,
yea and Amen. The reason whereof is ready to be showed. For if God promise any
thing, he therein shows his good will: so that there is no promise of his,
that is not a testimony of his love. Neither makes it any matter that the
wicked when they have great and continual benefits of Gods liberality heaped
upon them, do thereby wrappe themselves in so much the more grievous judgment.
For sith they do neither think nor acknowledge yt those things com unto them
from ye hand of God, for if they acknowledge it, they do not with themselves
consider his goodness, therefore they can not thereby be better taught of his
mercy than brute beasts, which according to ye measure of their estate, do
receive the same fruit of Gods liberality, and yet they perceive it not.
Neither does it any more make against us, that many times in refusing the
promises appointed for them, they do by that occasion procure to them selves the
greater vengeance. For although the effectual workinge of the promyses do then
only appear, when they have found faith with us, yet the force and natural
propretie of them is never extinguyshed by our unbelief or unthankfulness.
Therefore when the Lord by his promyses does provoke man not only to receive,
but also to think upon the fruits of his bountifulness, he does therewith all
declare unto him his love. Whereupon we must return to this point, that
every promise is a testifieng of Gods love toward us. Matt. iii.xvii.
But it is out of question, that no man is loved of God but in Christ, he is
the beloved Son, in whom the love of the Father abides and rests, and
then from him pours it self abroad unto us: Ephesians. i.vii.
as Paul teaches, that we have obtained favor in the beloved one.
Therefore it must needs be deryued and come unto us by mean of him. Ephesians.
ii.xiiii
For this cause the Apostle in an other place calls him our peace: in an
other place he sets him out as a bond, whereby God is with fatherli
natural kindenes bound unto us. It follows then that we must cast our eyes
upon him, so often as any promise is offered us. To. viii.iii and xv.viii.
And that Paul teaches no absurdity, that all Gods promyses whatsoever they
be, are confyrmed and fulfilled in him. There be certain exaumples that make
for the contrary. For if is not lykely that Naaman the Syrian, Act. x.viii.
when he required of the Prophet the manner how to worship God arighte, was
instructed concerning ye Mediator: Act. viii.ii. ^in. v.xvii.
yet his godliness is praised. Cornelius a Gentile and a Roman, could
scarcely understand yt which was known not to al ye Jews, yea and that very
darkely: yet his alms and prayers were acceptable to God. ii. To. v.xvii. Act.
viii.xiii.
And ye sacrifice of Naaman, by the Prophets answer allowed. Which thing
neither of them could obtain but by faith. Likewise yt may be said of the
Ennuche to whom Philppe was carried, why, the if he had not had some faith,
would not have taken upon him the travail and exspenses of so long a
journey, to worship. Yet we see, when Philippe examined him, how he bewrayed
his ignorance of the Mediator. And truly I grant that their faith was (...)
unexpressed, not only concerning Christ's person, but also concerning his
power and the office committed unto him of the Father. Yet in the mean time it
is certain, that they were instructed in such principles, as gave them some
taste of Christ, although but very small. Neither ought this to seem
strange. For neither would the Eunuche have come in haste to Jerusalem from a
far country to worship an unknown God, neither did Cornelius when he had
ones embraced the Jewish religion spend so much time, without being acquainted
with the first grounds of true doctrine. As for Naaman, it had been to fond an
absurdity for Elyzeus when he taught him of small things, to have said
nothing of the principal point. Therefore although there were among them a
dark knoweledge of Christ, yet it is not likely that there was no knowledge
because they did use them selves in the sacrifices of the law, which must
have been discerned by the very end, of them that is Christ, from the false
sacrifices of the Gentiles.

ii. Ti. i.xiiii. Ga. iii.ii.
That good thing (says Paul) which was committed to thy keeping, keep in the
holy ghost which dwells in us. But how Paul says that the holy ghost is
given by the hearing of faith, we may easily dissolve it. If there had been
but one only gift of the holy ghost, then it had been an absurdity for him
to call the holy ghost the effect of faith, which is the author and cause of
faith. But when he makes report of the gifts wherewyth God garnysheth his
Church, and by encreasinges of faith brings it to perfection, it is no
meruell if he ascribe those things to faith which makes us fit to receive
them. This is reckened a most strange conclusion, when it is said, that no
man but he to whom it is given, can believe in Christ. But that is partly
because they do not consider either how secret and hye the heavenly wisdom
is, or how great man's dullness is in conceiuinge the mysteries of God: and
partly because they look not unto that assured and steadfast constantnesse of
heart, that is to say, the chief part of faith.

i. Co. ii xi.
but the spirit of man that is within him, then how should man be sure of
the will of God? And if the truth of God be uncertain among us, in those
things that we presently behold with our eye, how should it be assured and
steadfast among us there where ye lord promises such thing as neither eye sees
nor wit comprehends? But herein man's sharpness of understanding is so
overthrown and fails, that the first degrees of profitinge in Gods school,
is to forsake his own wit. For by it as by a veil cast before us, we are
hyndred that we can not atteine the mysteries of God, Mat. xi.x^ Luc. x.xxi.
Mat. xvi.xvii. i. cor. ii.xiiii Romans xi.xxxiiii i. Cor. ii.x
which are not disclosed but to little ones. For neither does flesh and blood
disclose, nor natural man perceive those things that are of the Spirit, but
rather to him the learning of God is foolishness, because it is spiritually to
be judged. Therefore herin ye help of ye holy ghost is necessary, or rather
herein his force only reigns. There is noman that knows ye mind of God, or
has been his counselor: but the holy Spirit searches out all things, even ye
deep secrets of God, by whom it is brought to pass, that we know the mind
of Christ, No man (says he) can come to me, Ihon. vi.xliii.
unless my father yt sent me, draw him. Every one therefore that has heard
and learned of my father, comes. Not yt any man has seen ye father, but he
that is sent to God. Even as therefore we can not come unto Christ, but being
drawn by ye Spirit of God: so when we be drawn, we are lifted up in wit and
mind above our own understanding. For the soul enlightened by him, takes as
it were a new sharpnes of understanding, wherewith it may behold heavenly
mysteries, with brightness whereof it was before daseled in it self. And so man's
understanding receiving brightness by the light of the holy ghost, does never
till then truly begin to taste of those things that belong to ye kingdom
of God, being before altogether vnfauourie and without judgment of taste to take
assay of them. Lu. xxiiii.xxvii. and xiv
Therefore when Christ did notably set out unto two of his Disciples the
mysteries of his kingdom, yet he nothing prevailed, until he opened their
senses that they might understand the Scriptures. Ihon. xvi.xv.
When ye Apostles wear so taught by his Godly mouth, yet the Spirit of truth
must be sent unto them, to pour into their minds yt same doctrine which they
had heard with their ears. The word of God is like unto the sun that
shines unto all them to whom it is preached, but to no profit among blind
men. But we are al in this behalf blind by nature, therefore it can not pearce
into our mind but by the inward master the holy ghost, making by his
enlightening an entry for it.

In an other place, when we had to entreat of ye corruption of nature, ii. Cor.
iiii.xiii.
Let this be sufficient yt the spirit of faith, is called of Paul faith it
self, which the spirit gives us, but not which we have naturally. Therefore he
prays yt god fulfill in ye Thessalonians al his good pleasure, ii. These. ^.xi.
and ye work of faith in power. Wherein calling faith the work of God, and
giving it yt title for a name of addition, and calling it by figure of
appositio^ Gods good pleasure, he denies yt it is of man's own motion: and not
contented therewith he adds further, that it is a declaration of Gods power:
writing to ye Corynthians, where he says, that faith hangs not upon the
wisdom of men, but is grounded upon the power of the holy ghost. He speaks
in deed of outewarde miracles: but because the reprobate are blind at the
beholding of them, he comprehends also that inward seal, whereof he makes
mention in an other place. And God, the more gloriously to set forth his
liberality in so noble a gift, vouchesaueth not to grant it to al
universally without difference, but by singular privilege gives it to whom he
will. For proof whereof we have alleged testimonies before. Of which Augustine
being a faithful expositor, cries out that it would please the savior to
teach him, and that the very believing it self, is of gift and not of
deserving. Noman (says he) comes to me, unless my father draw him, and to
whom it is given of my father. It is marvelous that two do hear, the one
despyseth, the other ascends up. Let him that despises, impute it to
himself: let him that ascend not, yt arrogantly assign to himself. In an
other place. Why is it given to one and not to an other? It greueth me not to
say it, this is the depth of the cross. Out of I wot not what depth of the
judgments of God which we mate not search, proceeds all that we can. What I
can, I see: whereby I can, I see not, sauinge that I see thus far, that it is
of God. But why him, and not him? That is much to me. It is a bottomless
depth, it is the depth of the cross. I may cry out with woundering, but not
show it in disputing* Finally the sum comes to this, that Christ when he
enlightneth us unto faith by the power of his spirit, does there withal
graffe us into his body, that we may be made partakers of all good things.

Ephesians. i.xiii
Sith ye believed (says the Apostle) ye are sealed up with the holy Spirit of
promise, which is the earnest of our inheritance. See you not how he teaches
that by the spirit the hearts of the fathfull are graven as with a seal? and
how for the same reason he calls him the Spirit of promise, because he
ratifieth the Gospel unto us? Likewise to the Corynthians he says: God
which anointed us, ii. Cor. i.xxii. and v.v.
which has also sealed us, and given the earnest of his Spirit in our
hearts. And in an other place when he

Neither yet have I forgotten that which I said before, the remembrance
whereof experience continually renews, that is, that faith is tossed with
diverse doubtynges, so that the minds of the godly are seldom quiet, or at
least do not alwaie enjoy a peafable state: but with what soever engine they
be shaken, either they rise up out of the very gulf of temptations, or do
abide fast in their standing. Truly this assuredness only nourishes and
defends faith, when we hold fast that which is said in the Psalm: Ps.
xlvi.iii.
The Lord is our protection, our help in trouble, therefore we will not
fear, when the earth shall tremble, and the mountains shall leap into the
heart of ye sea. Also this most sweet quietness is spoken of in an other
place: I lay down and slepte, Ps. iii.vi.
and rose again, because the Lord has sustained me. It is not meante
thereby that David was alwaie with one undisturbed course framed to a merry
cherefulnesse: but in respect that he tasted the grace of God, Esa. xxx.i
Psalm. xxxi.vii. Heb. x.xvi
according to his proportion of faith, therefore he gloryeth that he without
fear despises all that ever might disquiet the peace of his mind. Therefore
ye Scripture meaning to exhort us to faith, bids us to be quiet. In Esaie it
is said: In hope and silence shall be your strength. In the Psalm: Hold thee
still in the Lord, and wait for him. Wherewith agrees that saying of the
Apostle to the Hebrews: Patience is needful. etc.

Hereby we may judge how pestilent is that doctrine of the Scholemen, Eccl. ix.^
Noman knows whether he be worthy of hatred or love. For (to speak nothing
how this place is in the common translation corruply turned) yet very children
can not be ignorant what Solomon means by such words: that is, that if any
man will judge by the present state of things, whom God hates, or whom God
loves, he laboreth in vain, and troubles himself to no profitte for his
peines: sith all things happen alike, both to the righteous and ye wicked, to
him that offreth sacrifices and him that offreth none. Whereupon follows, that
God does not always witness his love to them to whom he makes all things
happen prosperously, nor does always utter the hatred to them whom he
punishes. Eccl. iii.ix
And that he does to condemn the vanity of man's wit, since it is so dull in
things most needful to be known. As he had written a little before, that
it can not be discerned what ye soul of a man differs from the soul of a
beast, because it seems to dye in like manner. If any manne will gether
thereof, that the opinion that we hold of the immortality of souls,
stands upon conjecture: may he not worthyly be compted a mad manne? Are
they then in their right wits which gather that there is no certainty of
Gods grace, because we can conceive none by the carnal beeholdynge of present
things?

i. Cor. ii. x^j.
But when we symply say with Paul, that we have received not the spirit of
this world, but the Spirit that is of God, by whose teachinge we may know
those things that are given us of God, what can they bark against it, but
they must slanderously speak against ye Spirit of God? But if it be a
horrible robbery of God to accuse the revelation that comes from him, either
to be lyeng, or unassured or doubtefull, what do we offend in affyrminge that
it is assured? But they say, that this also is not without great
presumptuousnesse, that we dare so glory of the Spirit of Christ. Who would
think that their dullness were so great that would be compted masters of
the world, that they so fowly stumble in the first principles of religion?
Surely I would not think it credible, unless their own wrytynges that are
abroad did testify yt. Rom viii.xiiii.
Paul pronounces yt they only are the children of God, that are moved with
his spirit: and these men would have them that be the children of God, to
be moved with their own spirit, and to be without the Spirit of God. Paul
teaches that we call God our Father, Romans viii.xvi.
as the holy ghost ministers that word unto us, which only can bear
witness to our spirit that we are the children of God: These men, although
they forbydde us not to call upon God, yet do take away his Spirit, by whose
guydinge he should have been rightly called upon. Paul denies that they are
the servants of Christ, that are not moved with the Spirit of Christ: these
men feign a Christianity that needs not the Spirit of Christ. Romans viij.xi.
Paul makes no hope of the blessed resurrection, unless we feel the holy
ghost abiding in us: they forge a hope without any such feeling. But
peradventure the will answer, that they do not deny yt we ought to be endued
with it, but y^ it is a point of modesty and humility not to acknowledge it.
What means he then, when he bids the Corynthians to try whether they be
in the faith, ii Cor. xiij.v.
to prove themselves whether they have Christ, whom unless a man do
acknowledge to be dwelling in him, he is a reprobate? But by the Spirit that
God has given us (says Ihon) we know that he abides in us. i. Iho.
iii.xxiiii.
And what do we else but call the promises of Christ in dout, when we will be
compted the servants of God without his Spirit, which he has openly
declared, Esa. xxx*iii iii.
that he would pour out upon all his? Biside that, we do wrong to the holy
ghost, which do separate from him faith that is his peculiar work. Sith
these are the first lessons of godly religion, it is a token of miserable
blindness, to have Christians noted of arrogancy, that dare glory of the
presence of the holy ghost, without which glorieng Christianity it self
does not stand. But they declare by their example how truly Christ said,
that his Spirit is unknown to the world, Ioh. xiiii.xvii.
and is only known of them with whom he abides.

we may gather a judgment of ye grace of God, yet ye knowledge of perseverance
to ye end abides in suspense. A goodly confidence of salvation forsoothe is
left unto us, if we judge by moral conjecture, yt for a present moment we be
in favor, and what shall become of us to morrow we can not tell. Rom
viii*xxxviii.
The Apostle teaches far otherwise: I am surely persuaded (says he) that
neither angeles, nor powers, nor principalities, neither death, nor life,
neither present things nor things to come, shall sever us from ye love wherewith
ye lord embraces us in Christ. They seek to escape with a trifling solutio^,
pratinge yt the Apostle had yt by special revelation. But they are holden to
hard to slip away so. For there he entreats of those good things yt commonly
come by faith to the faithful, not those yt he himself specialli feleth. i.
cor. x.xii
But ye same Paul in an other place puts us in fear with mention of our
weakness and unsteadfastness: Let him yt stands (says he) beware yt he fall
not. It is true, but not such a fear whereby we should be overthrown, but
whereby we may learn to humble our selves under ye mighty hand of God, i. Pet.
v.vi.
as Peter expounds it. Then how against order and truth is it to limite ye
assurednes of faith to a moment of time, whose propretie is to pass beyond the
spaces of this life, and extend further to immortality to come? Sith
therefore the faithful do impute it to ye grace of God, yt being lightened with
his spirit they do by faith enjoy ye beholding of ye heavenly life: so far is
such glorieng from presumptuousnesse, yt if any man be ashamed to confess it,
he does therein more bewraie his extreme unthankfulness, in unkindly hiding
Gods goodness, than he does declare his modesty or submissio^.

Because it seemed yt the nature of faith could not otherwise better or Heb.
xi.i.
yt he applies to his discourse, where he says yt faith is a substance of
things to be hoped for, and a certainty of things yt are not seen. For by
this word Hypostasis substance (for y^ term he uses) he means as it were, an
upholding stay, whereupon ye godly mind leans and rests. As if he should
say ye faith is a certain and assured possession of those things yt are
promised us of God, unless a man had rather to take Hypostasis for affiance,
which I mislike not, albeit I follow y^ which is more commonly received. Dan.
viix.
Again, to signify ye even to ye last day when ye books shall be opened, they
are hier than those things yt may be perceived with our senses, or seen with our
^ies, or handled with our hands, and that ye same are no otherwise possessed
by us, but if we go beyond ye capacity of our own wit, and bend our
understanding above all things yt are in ye world, yea and climb above our
selves, he has therefore added yt this assuredness of possession, is of things
yt lie in hope, and therefore are not seen. Romans v^i.xxiiii.
For plain appeara^ce (as Paul writes) is not hope, neither hope we ^or
those things y^ we see. And when he calls it a certainty or proof (or as
Augustine has often translated it) a conjunction of things not present: Aug.
Hom. in Joan. 7.95.
for in Greek it is Elenchos, he says as much as if he did say, that it is an
euidente shewinge of things not appearinge, a seeinge of things not seen, De
peccal merit. and remiss. lib. cap. 31.
a plainness of dark things, a presence of things absente, an open shewinge
of hidden things. For the mysteries of God, such as they be that pertain to
our salvation, can not be seen in them selves and in their own nature as they
call yt: butte we behold them only in his word, of whose truth we ought
to be so fully persuaded, that we ought to hold all that he speaks as it
were already done and fulfilled. But how can the mind lift up it self to
receive such a taste of Gods goodness, but yt it must needs be therewyth
wholly kyndled to love God again? For that flowing plenty of sweetness which
God has laid up in store for them that fear him, can not be truly
known, but that it must therewythall vehemently mo^e affection: and whose
affection it ones month, it utterly rauisheth and carries him beyond
himself. Therefore it is no marvel, if into a perverse and crooked heart
never enters this affection, by which being conveyed up into the very
heaven, we are suffered to com to thee most secretly hidden treasures of God,
and the most sacred privy places of his kyngedome, which may not be defiled
with the entrance of an unclean heart. Lib. 3. Sen. disl. 25. and sepius.
For that which the Scholemen teach, that charity is before faith and hope,
is a mere madness. For it is faith only that first engenders charity in
us. How much more ryghtly does Bernarde teach: Ser. 1. in Annuntiatione.
I believe (says he) that the testimony of conscience, which Paul calls
the glory of the godly, consists in three things. For first of all it is
necessary to believe that thou can not have forgiveness of sins, ii. cor.
i.xii
but by the pardon of God: then that thou can have no good work at all,
unless he also give it: last of all that thou can by noe works deserve
eternal life, unless it also be given freely. A little after he adds that
these things suffice not, but that there is a certain beginning of faith,
because in believing that sins can not be forgeuen but of God, we ought also
to believe that they are not forgeuen us, till also we be persuaded by the
testimony of the holy ghost, that salvation is laid up in store for us:
because God forgeueth sins, he himself gives merits, and he himself also
gives rewards, that we may not stay still in this beginning. But these and
other things shall be to be entreated of in places fit for them. Now let it
only suffice to know what faith is.

our faith must with pacient hope and expectation be sustained and
cherished, that it fall not as faintinge for wearines. For which reason Paul
does well place our salvation in hope. Romans viii.xxiiii.
For hope, while it in silence looks ^or ye lord, restrains faith that it
fall not hedlong with to much haste: hope strengthens faith, that it waver not
in Gods promise, nor begin to doubt of the truth of them: hope refreshes
faith that yt ware not weary: Hope stretches faith to the vttermoste bond,
that it fainte not in the midde course or in the very beginning. Finally, hope
by continually renewinge and restoringe, it makes it now and then to rise up
fressher than it self to continuance. But how many ways the helps of hope
are necessary to the strengthening of faith, shall better appear, if we
consider with how many sorts of temptations they are assailed and shaken,
that have embraced the word of God. First the Lord in differring his promises
does oftentimes hold our minds longer in suspense than we would wish: here
it is the office of hope to perform, Heb. ii.iii
that which the Prophet commands, that though his promises do tarry, yet
we should wait still for them. Sometime he suffers us not only to faint, but
also seems to be hiely displeased: here it is much more necessary to have
hope to help us, Esa. viij.xvii. ii. Pet. iij.iiii.
that according to the saying of an other Prophet, we may still look for the
Lord that has hidden his face from Jacob. There rise up also scorners (as
Peter says) that ask: where is his promise or his coming? forasmuch as sins
the fathers slept, all things so continue from the beginning of the creation,
yea the flesh and the world do wisper the same thing in our ears. Psa.
x^xix.iiii.
Here must faith stay with suffera^ce of hope be holden fast fixed in
beholding of eternity that it may account a thousand years like as one day.

For this conioyning and aliance the scripture sometime confounds ii. Pet.
iii.viii. i. Pet. i.v.
For when Peter teaches that we are by the power of God preserved through
faith, unto the disclosinge of salvation, he gives that unto faith which
dyed more fittely agree with hope, and not without cause, for as much as we
have already taught, that hope is nothing else but the nourishment and strength
of faith. Sometimes they are joined together: as in the same epistle That your
faith and hope should be in God. Ph^^. i.^^
But Paul to the Philippians out of faith deriueth expectation, because in
pacientli hoping, we hold our desires in suspense, till Gods convenient
opportunity be opened. All which matter we may better understand by the
tenth chapter to the Hebrews, Gal. v.v.
which I have already alleged. Paul in an other place, although he speak
vnproprely, yet means ye same thing in these words: We look in the spirit
through faith for hope of righteousness, even because we embracing the
testimony of the Gospel concerning his free love, do look for the time when
God shall openly show that which is now hidden under hope. And now it is
plain how folishly Peter Lomberd lays two foundations of hope, yt is the
grace of God, and the deserving of works. Hope can have no other mark to be
directed unto but faith: and we have already declared yt faith has one only
mark the mercy of God, to which it ought to look (as I may so speak) with
both eyes. But it is good to hear what a lively reason he brings. If (says
he) thou dare hope for any thing without deseruinges, y^ shall not be worthy to
be called hope, but presumption. Who (gentile reader) will not worthyly
abhor such beasts, that say, it is a rash and presumptuous deed, if a man
have confidence that God is true of his word? For where the Lord wills us to
look for all things at his goodness, they say it is presumption to lean and
rest upon it. A master meet for such scholars as he found in the mad
schole of filthy babblers. But as for us, when we se that we are commanded by
the oracles of God to conceive a hope of salvation, let us gladly presume so
much upon his truth, as trusting upon his only mercy, casting away the
confydence of works, to be bold to hope well. He will not deceive that said:
Be it unto you according to your faith. Matt. ix.xxix,


The third Chapter. That we are regenerate by faith. Wherein is entreatch of
Repentance.
ALbeit we have already partly taught how faith possesses

Mat. iii.ix Mat. iiii.vii.
and then they afterward say that ye kingdom of heaven is at hand. Such
commandment to preach, ye Apostles received such order, Paul followed, as
Luke reports. But while they superstitiously stick upon ye ioining together
of syllables, Act. xx.xxi
they mark not in what meaning ye words hang together. For when ye lord Christ
and Iho^ do preach in this manner: Repent ye, for ye kingedome of heaven is
come near at hand: do they not fetch the cause of repentance from very grace
and promise of salvation. Therefore their words are as much in effect as if
they had said: because ye kingdom of heaven is com nere at hand, therefore
repent ye. For Matthewe, when he has showed that Ihon so preatched, says
that in him was fulfilled the prophecy of Esaie, Esa. xl.iii
concerning the voice cryeng in the wilderness, Prepare the way of the
Lord, make straight the paths of our God. But in the Prophet that voice is
commanded to begin at comfort and glade tydinges. Yet when we refer the
beginning of repentance to faith, we do not dream a certain mean space of
time, wherein it brings it out: but we mean to show that a man can not
earnestly apply him self to repentance, unless he know him self to be of
God. But no man is truly persuaded that he is of God, but he that has first
received his grace. But these things shall be more plainly dyscussed in the
process following. Paraduenture this deceived them, that many are first by
terroures of conscience tamed, or framed to obedience, before that they have
throughli disgested, yea before they have tasted the knowledge of grace. And
this is the fear at the beginning, which some account among virtues, because
they see that it is nere to true and just obedience. But our question is not
here how diversely Christ draws us unto him, or prepares us to the endeavor
of godliness: only this I say, yt there can be no uprightness found where
reigns not that Spirit which Christ received to communicate the same to his
members. Then according to that saying of the Psalm: Psa. c.xxx iiii.
With thee is mercifulness, that thou may be feared. Noe man shall ever
reverently fear God, but he that trusts that God is merciful unto him: no
man will willingly prepare himself to the kepinge of the law, but he that is
persuaded that his services please him: which tenderness in pardoning and
bearing with faults, is a sign of fatherly favor. Which is also showed by
that exhortation of Osee, Ose. vi.ii
Come, let us return to the lord, because he has plucked us, and he will
heal us: he has stricken us, and he will cure us* because the hope of pardon is
used as a prick to make the^ not to lie dull in their sins. But their doting
error is without all color of reason, which to begin at repentance, do
apoint certain days to their new co^uertes, during the which they must
exercise themselves in penance: and when those days are ones past, they admit
them to the communion of the grace of the Gospel. I speak of many of the
Anabaptists, specially those that maruelously rejoice to be compted
spiritual, and their companions the Jesuits, and such other dregs. Such
fruits forsoothe ye spirit of giddiness brings forth, to determine
repentance within compass of a few days, which a Christian man ought to
extend in continuance throughout his whole life.

But certain learned men, even long before these times, meaning to then he
trembles, humbled and cast down, then he is discouraged and despeireth. This
is the first part of repentance, which they have commonly called Contrition.
Uiuification they expound to be the comfort that grows of faith, when a man
overthrown with conscience of sin, and stricken with fear of God, loking
afterward unto the goodness of God, unto the mercy, favor in salvation
that is through Christ, raises up himself, takethe breath again,
recouereth courage, and returns as it were from death to life. And these
words, if they have a right exposition, do aptly enough express the nature
of repentance. But where they take Uiuification for the cherefulnesse, which
the mind receives being brought into quietness from trouble and fear,
therein I agree not with them: forasmuch it rather signifies a desire to live
holyly and godly, which grows of regeneration, as if it were said, that man
dies to himself, to begin to live to God.

Ge. iiii.xii i. Kin. xv.xxx. Mat. xxvii iiii.
Cain, Saul, and Judas. Whose repentance when the Scripture reherseth unto us,
it means that they acknowleginge the greuousnesse of their sin, were
afraid of the wrath of God, but in thinking upon God only as a revenger and
judge, they fainted in that feeling. Therefore their repentance was nothing else
but a certain entry of hell, wherinto they being entered in this present life
began already to suffer punishment, from the face of the wrath of Gods
majesty. The repentance of the Gospel, we see in all them, that being galled
with the spur of sin in themselves, but reco^forted and refreshed with
confidence of the mercy of God, are turned unto the lord. iiii. ^e xx. Es.
xxxviii
Ezechias was stricken with fear, when he received the message of death: but he
prayed weping, and loking unto the goodness of God, he took again good
confidence unto him. The Ninevites were troubled with the horrible threatening of
destruction. Ion. iii.v.
But they clothed them selves in sakcloth and ashes and prayed, hoping that ye
Lord might be turned to them, and turned from the furor of his wrath. David
confessed that he had to much sinned in nombring the people: ii. Re. ii.
but he said further, Lord take away ye wickedness of thy servant. He
acknowledged his offense of adultery, ii. Re. xii.xiii.^v^.
when Nathan rebuked him, and did cast himself down before the Lord, but
therwithal he also looked for pardon. Such was ye repentance of them yt at the
preachinge of Peter were pricked in their heart: but trustinge upon the
goodness of God, Ac. ii.xxxvi
they said furthermore: Ye men or brothren, what shall we do? And such was
the repentance of Peter himself, which wept in deed bitterly, but he cessed
not to hope well.

For where they comprehend faith under repentance, it disagreeth with that
which Paul says in the Acts, Act. xx.xxi
that he testified to the Jews and Gentiles repentance unto God and faith in
Jesus Christ. Where he reckeneth repentance and faith as two diverse
things. What then? Can true repentance stand without faith? No. But though
they can not be severed, yet they must be distinguished. As faith is not
without hope, and yet faith and hope are diverse things: so repentance and
faith, although they hang together with one perpetual bond, yet they rather
would be conjoined than confounded. And truly I am not ignorant, that under the
name of repentance is comprehended the whole tourning unto God, whereof faith
is not the least part: but in what meaning it is so comprehended, shall most
easyly appear when the force and nature thereof shall be declared. The name of
repentance in Hebrew is derived of co^uerting or returning, in Greek of
changing of the mind or purpose, and the thing it self does not ill agree
with either deriuations, whereof the sum is, that we departing from our
selves should turn unto God, and puttinge of our old mind, should put in
a new. Wherefore in my iudgmente, repentance may thus not amysse be defined:
that it is a true turninge of our life unto God, proceedinge from a pure and
earnest fear of God, which consists in the mortifyeng of the flesh and of
the old man, and in the quyckening of the spirit. In this sense are to be
taken all the preachinges wherein either the Prophets in old time, or the
Apostles afterward exhorted the men of their time to repentance. For this only
thing they travailed to persuade, that confounded with their own sins, and
pricked with fear of the Lords judgment, they should fall down and be
humbled before him, against whom they had offended, and with true amendment
return into his right way. Mat. iii.i^. 1. Sa. vii.
Therefore these words, To be turned or return unto the lord, To repent, or
do penance, are among them used without difference in all one signification.
And therefore also the holy history says, that men repent after the Lord,
when they that lived wantonely in their own lusts, not regardinge him, do
begin to follow his word, and are ready at their captains commandment to
go whether he calls them. Lu. iii.vii^ To. vi.iiii Act. xxvi.xx.
And Ihon and Paul used these words, to bring forth fruits worthy of
repentance, for, to lead such a life as may represent and testify such an
amendment in all their doings.

But before we go any further, it shall be profitable that we do more Eze.
xv^^^.xxxi.
Which when the prophet goes about to express, he commands them whom he
calls to repentance, to make them a new heart. Therefore Moses oftentimes
meaning to show how the Israelites might repent, and so be rightly turned unto
ye Lord, teaches yt it be done with all their heart, and with al their soul
(which manner of speaking we see often repeted of ye Prophets) and naming it ye
circumcising of ye heart, he shakes away all inward affections. But there is
no place whereby a man may better perceive what is the natural propretie of
repentance than the fourth Chapter of Iereme. Ier. iiii.iij
If thou return to me, O Israel, (says the Lord) return to me, plowe up
your arable land and sow not upon thorns. Be circumcised to the Lord, and
take away the uncircumcised skins of your hearts. Se how he pronounces that
they shall nothing prevail in taking upon them the following of
righteousness, unless wickedness be first plucked out of the bottom of
their hearts. And to move them thoroughly, he warns them that they have to
do with God, with whom there is nothing gotten by dalying, because he hates
a double heart. Therefore Esaie laugheth to scorn the foolish endeuoures of
hypocrites, Esa. lxv.ij vi.
which did in deed busily go about an outward repentance in ceremonies, but in
the mean time they had no care to loose the bundles of wickedness wherewith
they held poor men fast tied. Where also he very well shows in what duties
unfeigned repentance proprely stands.

Ie. iiii.iii Act. xvii.xxx.
makes mention of the judgment: as in Iereme: least peradventure my wrath go
out as fire, and there be none to quench it, because of the naughtiness of
your works. In Paul's sermon to the Athenians: And whereas hitherto God has
borne with the times of this ignorance, now he gives warning to men, that al
men every where may repent them, because he has appointed the day wherein he
will judge the world in equity. And in many other places. Sometime it
declares by the punishments already extended, that God is a judge, that
sinners should think with them selves, that worse things hang over them if
they do not repent in time. You have an example thereof in the xxix. of Exodus.
But because the turning begins at the abhorring and hatred of sin, ii. Co.
vii.x.
therefore the Apostle makes sorrowfulness, such as is according to God,
the cause of repentance. And he calls sorrowfulness according to God, when
we are not only afraid of punishment, but do hate and abhor sin it self,
for as much as we understand that it displeases God. And no marvel. For
unless we be sharply pricked, the slothfulness of our flesh could not be
corrected, yea prickinges would not suffice for the dullness and
slothfulness thereof, unless God in stretching out his rods should pearce
more depely. This is also an obstinatie which must be beaten down as it were
with beetles. Therefore the perverseness of our nature enforces God to the
severity that he uses in threatening, because he should in vain call us
alluringly with fair speech while we lie a sleep. I recite not the
testimonies that commonly offer them selves to be found. The fear of God is
in an other manner also the beginning of repentance. For though man's life were
absolutely furnished with all points of virtues, if it be not applied to the
worshipping of God, it may in deed be praised of the world, but in heaven it
shall be mere abomination, for as much as the chief part of our righteousness
is to give God his due right and honor, whereof he is wickedly robbed, when we
bend not our selves to yield us subject to his government.

Thirdly, it remains that we declare what is meant by this that we say, that
Repentance consists in two parts, that is to say, mortifiyng of the flesh,
and quickenyng of the spirit. The Prophets do plainly express it, although
somewhat simply and grossly, according to the capacity of the carnal people, Ps.
xxxiiii.xv. Esa. i.xvi,
when they say: Cesse from euel and do goodness. Again. Be washed, be clean,
take away ye euel of your works from mine eyes: Cesse to do peruersly, learn
to do well, seek judgment, help the oppressed, etc. For when they call men
away from wickedness, they require the death of the whole flesh, which is
stuffed full of wickedness and perverseness. It is in deed an uneasy and hard
thing to put of our selves, and to depart from our natural disposition. Neither
ca^ it be thought that the flesh is thoroughly dead, unless all that we have of
our selves be abolished. But for as much as all the affection of the flesh is
enemy against God, To. viii.iiii.
the first entree to the obeying of his law, is the forsaking of our own
nature. Afterward they express the renewyng by the fruits that follow thereof,
as righteousness, judgment and mercy. For it were not enough to do those
duties rightly, unless the mind it self and the heart have first put on the
affection of righteousness, judgment and mercy. That is done when the spirit
of God has so soked in new thoughts and affections, our souls first washed
with his holiness, that they may rightly be compted new. And truly as we are
naturally turned away from God, so unless ye forsaking of our selves do go
before, we can never go toward that which is right. Therefore we are so often
commanded to put of the old man, to forsake the world and flesh, to bid our
lusts farewell, and to be renewed in the spirit of our mind. Morouer the very
name of mortificatio^ does put us in mind how hard it is to forget our former
nature: because we thereby gather that we are not otherwise framed to the fear
of God, nor do learn the principles of godliness, but when we are violently
slain with the word of the Spirit, and so brought to naught: even as though
God should pronounce, that to have us to be accounted among his children,
there needs a death of all our commune nature.

Both these things do happen unto us by the partaking of Christ, To. vi.vi*
and the body of sin dies that the corruption of our former nature may live
no more. If we be partakers of his resurrection, by it we are raised up into a
newness of life, yt may agree with the righteousness of God. In one word I
expound repentance to be regeneration, which has no other mark whereunto it is
directed, but yt the image of God which was by Adams offense fowly defaced and
in a manner vitterly blotted out, may be renewed in us, So the Apostle
teaches, ij. Cor ^^^.xviii.
when he says: but we representyng the glory of God with uncovered face are
trans^ormed into the same image, out of glory into glory, Ephesians. iiij.xxiij.
as by the spirit of the Lord. Again. Be ye renewed in the spirit of your
mind and put on the new man, which is created according to God in
righteousness and holiness of truth. Again in an other place: Col. iij.x.
puttyng on the new man, which is renewed after the knowledge and image of him
that created him. Therefore by this regeneration we be by the benefit of Christ
restored into the righteousness of God, i. Cor. vij.xij.
from which we were fallen by Adam. After which manner it pleases the lord
wholly to restore all those whom he adopteth into the inheritance of life. And
this restoryng is fulfilled not in one moment, or one day, or one year, but by
continual, yea and sometimes slow procedynges God takes away the
corruptions of the flesh in his elect, cleanses them from filthiness, and
consecrateth them for temples to himself, renewyng all their senses to true
pureness, that they may exercise themselves all their life in repentance, and
know that this war has no end but in death. And so much the greater is the
lewdenesse of that filthy rayler and apostata Staphylus, which foolishly says
that I confound the state of this present life with the heavenly glory, ii.
Cor. iiii.xii.
when I expound by Paul the image of God to be holiness and true
righteousness. As though when any thing is defined, we should not seek the
whole fullness and perfection of it. And yet we deny not place for encreasces:
but I say that how nere any man approaches to the likeness of God, so much
the image of God shines in him. That the faithful may atteyne hereunto, God
assigns them the race of repentance wherein to run all their life long.

^
which has faithfully and with great diligence gathered al their judgments.
Therefore let y^ readers gather out of him, such certainty as they shall desire
to learn of the opinion of antiquity. But there may seem to be this
difference between him and us, that he when he grants that the faithful so
long as they dwell in a mortal body are so holden bound with lusts, that they
can not but lust, yet dares not call that disease sin: but being content to
express it by the name of weakness, he teaches that then only it becomes
sin, when either work or consent is added to conceit or receiuyng, that is,
when will yeldeth to the first desire: but we account the very same for sin,
that man is tickled with any desire at al against the law of God: Yea we
affirm that the very corruption that engenders such desires in us, is sin.
We teach therefore that there is always sin in the holy ones, until they be
unclothed of ye mortal body, because there remains in their flesh that
perverseness of lustyng that fights against uprightness. And yet he does not
always forbear to use the name of Sin, Sermon. 6. da uerbis Ap^^^
as when he says: This Paul calls by the name of sin, from whense spryng
all sins unto a fleshly concupiscence. This, as much as perteyneth to the holy
ones, loses the kingdom in earth, and perishes in heaven. By which words he
confesses, that the faithful are gilty of sin, in so much as they are
subject to the lusts of the flesh.

But this that it is said, that God purges his church from al sin, Ephesians.
v.xxvi.
and fulfilleth it in his elect, we refer rather to the giltinesse of sin,
tha^ to the very matter of sin. God truly performs this by regeneratyng
them that be his, that in them the kingdom of sin is abolished (for the holy
ghost ministers the^ strength, whereby they get the upper hand and are
conquerors in the battle) but it cesseth only to reign and not so to ^well in
them. To. vi.vi.
Therefore we so say, that the old man is crucified, and the law of sin
abolished in the children of God, that yet there remain some leauynges, not to
have dominion in them, but to humble them by knowledge in conscience of their
own weakness. And we confess that the same are not imputed, as if they
wear not: but we affirm that this comes to pass by the mercy of God, that
the holy ones are delivered from this giltinesse, which otherwise should
justly be reckened sinners and gilty before God. And this sentence it shall not
be hard for us to confirm, for as much as there are evident testimonies of the
scripture upon their matter. For what would we have more plain, than that which
Paul cries out to the Romans chap. vii. To. vij.vi.
First both we have in an other place showed, and Augustine proves by strong
reasons, that Paul there speaks in the person of a man regenerate. I speak
not of this, that he uses these words, Evil and Sin, that they which will
speak against us may not cauil against those words: but who can deny, that a
striving against the law of God is evil: who can deny a withstanding of
Justice to be sin? Finally, who w^ll not grant yt there is a fault, where
is a spiritual misery? But al these things are reported of this disease by
Paul. Again, we have an assured demonstration by the law, by which this
whole question may easily be discussed. For we are commanded to love God with
all our heart, with all our soul, with all our powers. Sith all the parts of
our soul ought so to be occupied with ye love of God, it is certain, that
they satisfy not the commandment that conceive in their heart any desire, be
it never so little, or suffer any such thought at all to enter into their mind,
as may withdraw them from the love of God into vanity. For what? are not
these the powers of ye soul, to be affected with sodeine motions, to
comprehend with wit, to co^ceyue with mind? Therefore, when these do open a way
for vain or corrupt thoughts to enter into them, do they not show that they
are even so much void of the love of God? Wherefore, who so confesses not that
all the lusts of the flesh are sins, and that the same disease of lusting
which they call a fedyng, is the well spryng of sin, he must needs deny
that the transgression of the law is sin.

Ad Boni^a.
And Augustine does not so much vary from this doctrine as he appears in
show, while he somewhat to much fears the envy that the Pelagians labored to
bring him into, he sometime forbeareth to use the name of sin: Yet where he
writes that the law of sin still remaynyng in the holy ones, the only
giltinesse is taken away, he plainly shows that he does not so much
disagree from our meaning.

To. vi.xij.
If in ye flesh thou serve the law of sin, do yt which the Apostle himself
says: let not sin reign in your mortal body to obey the desires thereof. He
says not, let it not be, but let it not reign. So long as thou live, sin
must needs be in thy me^bres: at least let Reign be taken from it. Let not
that be done which it commands. They that defend that lust is no sin,
are wont to obiecte that saying of James: Iac. i.^^.
Lust, after that it has conceived, brings forth sin. But this is easily
confuted. For unless we think that he speaks of only ill works or actual
sins, evil will it self, shall not be accounted sin. But where he calls
mischeuous deeds and wicked offenses the ofsprynges of sin, and gives unto
them the name of sinnne, it does not by and by follow thereof, but that to
lust, is an evil thing and damnable before God.

Certain Anabaptists in this age, devise I wot not what phre^tike which
obedience can not stand, unless lusts be tamed and subdued, whereunto these
men would give the bridle at liberty. Secondly we are taught that we are so
cleansed by his sanctification, that we are still besieged with many vices and
much weakness, so long as we are enclosed in the burden of our body:
whereby it comes to pass, that being far distant from perfection, we have
need always to increase somewhat, and being enta^gled in vices, we have need
daily to wrestle with them. Whereupon also follows, that shaking of sloth
and carelessness, we must watch with heedeful minds, that we be not
compassed unware with the snares of our flesh. Unless paraduenture we think
that we have proceeded further than the Apostle, ii. Cor. xii.xv. To. vii.vi.
which yet was weried of the Angel of Satan, that his strength might be made
perfect with weakness: and which did unfeignedly represent in his flesh
that division of the flesh and of the spirit.

i. ^^^. vii.^i.
he does that of a very good cause: and these they be: endeavor or
carefullnesse, excusing, indignation, fear, desire, zele, punishment. Neither
ought it to seem any absurdity, that I dare not certainly determine whether
they ought to be compted causes or effects. For both may be defended in
disputation. They may be also called affections joined with repentance: but
because, leaving out those questions, we may understand what Paul means,
we shall be content with a simple declaration of them. He says therefore, that
of the heaviness which is according to God, arises carfulness. For he
that is touched with an earnest feeling of displeasure because he has sinned
against his God, is therewithal stirred up to diligence and heedefulnesse, to
wind himself clearly out of the snares of the Deuell, to take better heed of
his snares, to fall no more from the governance of the holy ghost, not to be
oppressed with security. Next is Excusing, which in this place signifies
not the defense, whereby a sinner to escape the judgment of God, either does
deny that he has offended, or diminishes the heinousness of his fault, but
a purgation which stands rather in crauyng of pardon, than in defense of his
cause. Like as the children that are not reprobate when they acknowledge and
confess their faults, do yet use entreatynge, and that it may take place,
they protest by all means that they can, that they have not cast away the
reverence that they owe to their parents. Finally they so excuse them, as they
go not about to prove themselves righteous and innocent, but only that they
may obtain pardon. Then follows Indignation, whereby the sinner fretteth
inwardly with himself, quareleth with himself, is angry with himself, when
he records his own perverseness and his own unthankfulness to God. By the
name of fear, he means that trembling that is stryken into our minds so
often as we think both what we have deserved, and how horrible is the
severity of Gods wrath against sinners. For we must needs then be vexed
with a marvelous unquietness, which both instructs us to humility, and
makes us more ware against the time to come. Now if out of fear do spring
that carfulness, whereof he had spoken before, then we see with what lynkyng
they hang together. It seems to me that he has used this word Desire ^or
diligence in our duty and ready cherefulnesse to obey, whereunto the
acknowledgynge of our own faults ought chiefly to provoke us. And thereunto
also belongs zele, which he joins immediately next unto it. For it
signifies a feruentnesse, wherewith we be kindled when we be spurred forward
with these pryckyng thoughts: what have I done? whether had I thrown my self
hedlonge, if the mercy of God did not help me? The last of all is punishment,
for the more rigorous that we be to our selves, and the streightlier that we
examine our own sins, so much ye more we ought to trust that God is
favorable and merciful unto us. And truly it is not possible, but that the
soul being stricken with horror of the judgment of God, must needs do some
execution in the punishyng of it self. Truly the godly ho^^e what punishme^tes
are shame, confusion, mourning, lothyng of themselves, and other affections
that spring out of earnest acknowleging of sins. But let us remember that
there is a measure to be kept, that sorrow do not swallow us up, because
nothing more redily happens to fearful consciences than falling to
despeire. And also by yt crafty mean whom so ever Satan finds overthrown
with dread of God, he more and more drowneth them in the gulf of sorrow,
that they may never rise up again. Truly the fear can not be to great which
ends with humility, and departs not from hope of pardon. But always (as
the Apostle teaches) the sinner must beware, Heb. xij.ii^
that while he move himself to the lothyng of himself, he despeire not,
oppressed with to great fear, for so do we flee away from God which calls
us in him by repentance. Sermon 11* in Cant.
Upon which point this lesson of Bernarde is very profitable: Sorrow for
sins is necessary, if it be no^ cont^nuall. I counsel you sometime to
return your fault from g^^nous and paynefull remembrance of your own ways,
and to (...) up to the plain ground of cherefull remembrance of benefits of
God. Let us mingle honye with worm^ wood, that the wholesome ^^tternesse may
bring us health, when it shall be drunk tempered w^^^ sweetness. And if ye
think of your selves in humility, think also of the Lord in goodness.

Now it may be also perceived what be the fruits of repentance, because God
looks upon the heart: who so ever is even meanly exercised in the scripture,
shall perceive of himself without any other ma^s puttyng in mind, Joel.
that when we have to do with God, we labor in vain, unless we begin at
the inward affection of the heart. And the place of Joel shall not a little
help to the understanding of the rest, Joel. ij.xiij.
where he says: Tear your hearts and not your garments. Also both those
points are expressed in these words of James: Iac. iiij.viij.
Ye wicked doers, cleanse your hands: ye double men, purge your hearts. Where
in deed there is an addition joined to ye first part, but after is showed the
very fountain and beginning that they must wipe away their secret
filthynesse, that there may be an altar set up to God in the very heart. Biside
this there are also certain outward exercises which we use privately as
remedies to humble our selves or to tame our flesh, and publicly for the
declaration of repentance. And they proceed from that punishment of which
Paul speaks, ^. Cor. vij.xi.
for these are the propreties of an afflicted mind, to be in lothesomnesse,
mournyng and weping to, fly gorgeousness and al trimmyng, and to forsake al
delites. Then he that feleth how great an evil is the rebellion of the flesh,
seeks al remedies to bridle it. Moreover he that well bethinketh him how
grievous a thing it is to have offended the justice of God, can not rest until
he have in his own humility given glory to God. Such exercises the old
writers do oftentimes rehearse, when they speak of the fruits of repentance.
But albeit they do not place the whole force of repentance in them, yet the
readers shall pardon me, if I speak what I think: it seems unto me that they
stand to much upon them. And if any man will wisely weye it, I trust he will
agree with me, that they have two ways gone beyond measure. For when they so
much enforced, and with inmesurable commendations advanced that bodyly
discipline, this in deed they obtained, that the people did the more earnestly
embrace it, but they in a manner darkened that, which ought to have been of
much greater importance. Secondely, in giving punishments they were somewhat
more rigorous than ecclesiastical mildness may bear, as we shall have
occasion to show in an other place.

Joel. ij.xij
both often in other places and specially in Joel, they measure the chief
part of repentance by fasting and weeping: therefore their error is to be taken
away. That which is there spoken of the turnyng of the whole heart to the
lord, of cuttyng their hearts and not their garments, is proprely belonging
to repentance: but weping and fasting are not joined as continual or necessary
effects thereof, but are spoken of in respect of a special circumstance.
Because he had prophesied, that there hanged over the Jews a most grievous
destruction, therefore he counsels them to prevent the wrath of God, not
only in repenting, but also in vtteryng tokens of their sorrow. For as a man
standing to be arrayned, uses humbly to abace himself with an ouergrowen
bearde, vncombed hear and black apparel, to move the judge to pity: so it
behooved them when they stood accused before the judgment seat of God, in
piteous array to beseech him not to extend his rigor. But although ashes and
sackcloth did paraduenture more fitly agree with those times. Yet it is
certain, that weeping and fasting should be to a very convenient good use
among us, so often as the Lord seems to threaten us any plague or calamity.
For when he makes any danger to appear, he does after a certain manner give
warning, that he is prepared or armed to revenge. Therefore the prophet did well,
when he exhorted his contreemen to weeping and fasting, that is to the sorrowful
manner of accused men, whose offenses he said a little before, were had in
examination. Even as the Pastors of the Church should not do ill at this day,
if when they see any ruin hangyng over the necks of their people, they would
cry out upon them to make have to fasting and weping: so that they would with
greater and more inward care and diligence, always enforce that which is the
principal point, that they must cut their hearts and not their garments. It
is out of doubt, that fasting is not always joined with repentance but is
appointed peculiarly for times of miserable plagues: and therefore Christ
joins it with wayling, Matt. ix.xv.
when he acquiteth the Apostles from need thereof, until the time that being
spoiled of his presence, they should be tormented with grefe. I speak of
solemn fasting. For the private life of the godly ought to be te^pered with
honest sparyng and sobriety, that in the whole course thereof there may appear
a certain kind of fasting. But because all this matter shall be to be declared
again in the place where we shall entreat of the discipline of the Church,
therefore I do now the more sclenderly touch it. But this one thing I will
add here by the way: when the name of repentance is applied to this outward
profession, then it is vnproprely turned from the natural meaning which I
have above set forth of it. For it is not so much a turnyng unto God as a
confession of fault, with a besechyng of God not to charge them with the pain
and giltinesse. So to do penance in ashes and sackcloth is nothing else, Matt.
xi.xxi. Luc. x.xiij.
than to utter a displeasednesse when God is angry with us for grievous
offenses. And this is a public kin of confession, whereby we condemning our
selves before the Angeles and the world, do prevent the judgment of God. 1.
Cor. xi, iij.
For Paul rebukyng their slothfulness that tenderly bear with their own
faults, says: If we did judge our selves, we should not be judged of God.
But it is not always necessary to make men openly of counsel and witnesses of
our repentance: but to confess privately to God is a part of true repentance
which can not be omitted. For there is nothing more unreasonable than to look
to have God to pardon us the sins in which we flatter our selves and do hide
them by Hipocrisye, least he should bring them to light. And it behooves us not
only to confess those sins which we daily commit, but more grievous
offenses ought to draw us further, and to call again into our remembrance
things that seem long ago buried. Which lesson David gives us by his
example. Ps. li.vij.
For being touched with shame of his newly committed fault, he examineth
himself even to the time when he was in his mothers womb, and confesses that
even then he was corrupted and infected with the filthiness of the flesh. And
this he does not to diminish the haynousnesse of his fault, as many hide
themselves in the multitude, and seek to escape punishment by wrappyng other
with them. But David does far otherwise which with simple plainness enforces
his fault in saying, that being corrupt from his first infancy, he has not
cessed to heap euels upon euels. Also in an other place he likewise so
examineth his passed life, Ps. xxv.ix
yt he craves the mercy of God for yt sins of his youth. And truly the^
only shall we prove our drowsinesse to be shaken away from us, if gronyng under
our burden and bewayling our euels, we ask reli^se of God. It is moreover to
be noted, that the repentance which we are commanded continually to apply,
differs from that repentance, that lifts up as it were, from death them
that either have filthily fallen, or with unbridled licentiousness have
thrown forth themselves to sin, or after a certain manner of rebellions
reuoltyng, have shaken of the yoke of God. For the Scripture oftentimes, when
it exhorts to repentance, means thereby as it were a passage or rising
again from death into life:and when it reherseth that the people did penance,
it means that they were turned from their idolatry and other grol^e
offenses. And in like manner Paul threateneth mourning unto sinners that have
not done penance for their wantonness, ^^ Cor. xij.^^i.
fornication and unchastity. This difference is to be diligently marked, least
while we hear yt few ar called to penance, a more tha^ careless assuredness
should crepe upon us as though the mortifieng of the flesh did no more belong
unto us, the care whereof the corrupt desires yt always tickle us, and the vices
that commonly budde up in us, do not suffer us to release. Therefore the
special repentance which is required but of some, who^ the Deuell has
violently carried away from the fear of God, and fast bound with damnable
snares, takes not away the ordinary repentance which the corruptnesse of
nature co^pelleth us to apply throughout all ye whole course of our life.

Man. xi.x. Mat. iij.ij
John the Angel sent before ^ face of Christ to prepare his ways, preached:
Repent ye, for the kingdom of heaven is come nere at hand. In calling them to
repentance, he did put them in mind to acknowledge themselves sinners, and all
that was theirs, to be damnable before the Lord, that they might with all their
hearts to desire the mortif^eng of their flesh and a new regeneration in the
Spirit. In tellyng them of the kingdom of God, he called them to faith. For by
the kingdom of God which he taught to be at hand, he meant forgiveness of
sins, salvation, and life, and all that ever we get in Christ. Wherefore in
the other Evangelists it is written, (...) i.iiij (...)
John came preaching the Baptism of repentance unto ^orgeuenesse of sins.
And what is that else, but that they being oppressed and weried with the burden
of sins, should turn to the Lord, and conceive good hope of forgiveness and
salvation? So Christ also began his preachynges: ^
The kingdom of God is come nere at hand: repent ye and believe the Gospel.
First he declares that the treasures of Gods mercy are opened in him, and
the^ he requires repentance, and last of all confidence in the promises of
God* Therefore when he meant briefly to co^prehe^d the whole sum of the
gospel, (...). ^iiij.^^v^.
he said, that he must suffer and rise again from the dead, and that
repentance and forgiveness of sins must be preached in his name. The
Apostles also preached the same after his resurrection, that he was raised up
by God, to give to Israel repentance and forgiveness of sins. Repentance is
preached in the name of Christ, when men do hear by the doctrine of the
gospel that al their thoughts, their affections, and their endeavors are
corrupt and faulty, and that therefore it is necessary that they be borne
again if they will enter into the kingdom of God. Forgiveness of sins is
preached when men ar taught that Christ is made to them redemption, To. i.xxi.
righteousness, salvation and life: in whose name they are freely accounted
righteous and innocent in the sight of God, whereas both these graces are
received by faith, as I have in an other place declared: yet because the
goodness of God whereby sins are forgeuen, is the proof object of faith,
therefore it shall be good that it be diligently distinguished from repentance.

Now as the hatred of sin, which is the beginning of repentance, Esa. lx^.^,
Mat. xi.v, Luc. iiii.xviij. Matt. ix.xxii. Act. iii*xxvi. and. v* xxxi.
which groan, labor, are laden, are hungry and thirsty, and pine away with
sorrow and misery: so must we endeavor toward repentance, throughout all our
life apply it, and follow it to the end, if we will abide in Christ. For he
came to call sinners, but to repentance: he was sent to bless the unworthy, but
so that every one should turn himself from his wickedness. The Scripture is
full of such sayenges. Wherefore when God offreth forgiveness of sins, he
likewise uses to require on our part repentance, secretly declaryng thereby,
that his mercy ought to be to men a cause to repent them. Esa. lvi.i. and
lix.xx. and lv.vi.
(Do says he) judgment and righteousness, because salvation is come nere at
hand. Again. There shall come to Sion a Redemer, and to them that in Jacob
repent from their sins. Again. Seek the Lord while he may be found: call upon
him while he is nere. Let the wicked leave his way and the wickedness of his
thoughts, and be turned to the Lord, Act. ii.xxxviii.
and he shall have mercy on him. Again. Turn ye and repent, that your sins
may be done away. Where yet is to be noted, that this condition is not so
annexed as though our repentance were a fundatio^ to deserve pardon, but rather
(because the Lord has determined to have mercy upon men to this end yt they
should repent) he teaches men whether they shall travail if they will obtain
grace. Therefore so long as we shall dwell in the prison of our body, we must
continually wrestle with the vices of our corrupt flesh, yea with our own
natural soul. ^
Plato says in certain places, that the life of a Philosopher is a meditation
of death. but we may more truly say, that the life of a Christian man is a
perpetual study and exercise of mortifieng the flesh, till it being utterly
slayue, the Spirit of God get the dominion in us. Therefore I think that he
has much profited, that has learned much to mislyke himself: not that he
should stick fast in that mire and go no further, but rather that he should
haste and long toward God, that being graffed into the death and life of
Christ, he should study upon a continual repentance: as truly they can not
otherwise do, that have a natural hatred of sin: for no man ever hated
sin, unless he were first in love with righteousness. This doctrine, as it
was most simple of all other, so I thought it best to agree with the truth of
the Scripture.

Act. xi.xviii.
Therefore the church prayseth and has in admiration the benefit of God, that
he has given the Gentiles repentance unto salvation. i^. Tim. ij.xiv.
And Paul commaundyng Timothee to be patie^t and mild toward the unbelievers,
says: If at any time God give them repentance that they may repent from the
snares of the Deuel. God in deed affirms that he wills the conversion of
al me^, and directs his exhortations generally to all men: but the effectual
workyng thereof hangs upon the Spirit of regeneration. Because it were more
easy to create us men, than of our own power to put on a better nature. Ephesians.
ij.x.
Therefore in the whole course of regeneration we are not without cause called,
the work of God created to good works, which he has prepared that we should
walk in them. Whom soever the lords will is to deliver from death, those he
quickens with the Spirit of regeneration: not that repentance is properly the
cause of salvation, but because it is already seen that it is inseperable from
faith and from the mercy of God: Esa. lix.xx
sith (as Esaye testifies) there is a redemer come to him, and to those that
in Jacob are returned from their wickedness. This truly stands steadfastly
determined, that were so ever lives the fear of God, there the Spirit has
wrought unto the salvation of man. Esa. lxiij.xvij.
Therefore, in Esaie, when the faithful complain and lament that they are
forsaken of God, they reckon this as a token of being reprobates, that their
hearts were hardened by God. The Apostle also meaning to exclude apostataes
from hope of salvation, Heb. vi.vi
apointeth this reason, that it is impossible for them to be renewed unto
repentance: because God in renewyng them whom he will not have perish, shows a
toke^ of his fatherly favor, and in a manner draws them unto him with the
beams of his cherefull and merry contena^ce: on the other side with hardenyng
them, he thundereth against the reprobate, whose wickedness is unpardonable.
Which kind of vengeance the Apostle threateneth to wilful apostataes, Hebr.
x.xxix.
which when they depart from the faith of the Gospel, do make a scorn of
God, reprochefully despise his grace, and defile and tread under feet the
blood of Christ, yea as much as in them is they crucify him again. For he
does not (as some fondly rigorous men would have it) cut of hope of pardon from
all wilful sins: but teaches that apostasy is unworthy of all excuse: so
that it is no marvel that God does punish a contempt of himself so full of
sacrilege, with unappeasable rigor. For he says yt it is impossible, Hebr.
vi.iiij.
that they which have ones ben enlightened, have tasted of the heavenly gift,
have been made partakers of the holy ghost, have tasted of the good word of God
and the powers of the world to come, if they fall, should be renewed to
repentance, crucifiyng again of new, and making a scorn of the son of God.
Again in an other place: Heb. x.xxv
If (says he) we willingly sin after knowledge of the truth received, there
remains no more sacrifice for sins, but a certain dreadful expectation of
judgment, etc. These also be the places, out of the wrong understanding
whereof, the Nouatians in old time have gathered matter to play the mad men:
with whose rigorousnesse certain good me^ being offended, believed this to be a
counterfeit Epistle in the Apostles name, which yet in all parts does truly
favor of an Apostolic spirit. But because we contend with none but with the^
that allow it, it is easy to show, how these sentences do nothing maintain
their error. First it is necessary that the Apostle agree with his master,
which affirms that all sin and blasphemy shall be forgiven, except the
sin against the holy Ghost, which is not forgeuen neither in this world, nor
in the world to come. It is certain (I say) that the Apostle was contented
with this exception, unless we will make him an adversary to the grace of
Christ. Whereupon follows, that pardon is denied to no special offenses, but
only to one, which procedyng of a desperate rage, can not be ascribed to
weakness, and openly shows that a man is possessed of the Deuell.

But to discuss this, it behooves to enquire what is that same so Mat.
x^^.xxxij. Marc. iij.xxix. Lu. xij.x.
For Christ meaning to expound that which he had said, immediately adds:
He that speaks a word against the son of man, it shall be forgiven him: but
he that blasphemeth against the holy ghost, shall not be forgeuen. And Matthew,
for the blasphemy against the holy Spirit, puts the spirit of blasphemy.
But how can a man speak a reproach against the Son, but it is also spoken
against the holy ghost? They that stumble unware against the truth of God, not
knowing it, which do ignorantly speak evil of Christ, having yet this mind,
that they would not extinguish the truth of God disclosed unto them, or ones
with one word offend him, whom they had known to be the lords anointed:
these men sin against the father and the son. So there are many at this
day, that do most hatefully detest the doctrine of the Gospel, which if they
did know it to be the doctrine of the Gospel, they would be ready to worship
with all their heart. But they whose conscience is convinced, that it is the
word of God which they forfake and fight against, and yet cesse not to fight
against it, they are said to blaspheme the holy ghost: for as much as they
wrestle against the enlightening that is the work of the holy ghost. Such were
many of the Jews, which when they could not resist the Spirit that spoke by
Stephen, Act. vi.x*
yet endeavored to resist. It is no doubt but that many of them were carried
unto it with zele of the law, but it appears that there were some other that
of malicious wickedness did rage against God himself, that is to say,
against the doctrine, which they were not ignorant to be of God. And such
were those Pharisees, Matt. ix.^^^iiij. ^ xii (...).
against who^ the Lord inueyeth, which to overthrow the power of ye holy ghost,
defamed him with the name of Beelzebub. This therefore is the Spirit of
blasphemy. when man's boldness of (...) purpose, leapeth forth to reproach of
the name of God. Which Paul signifies when he says, i. Tim. i.xiii.
that he obtained mercy, because he had ig^ora^tly committed those things
through unbelief, for which otherwise he had been unworthy of Gods favor. If
ignorance joined with unbelief was y^ cause that he obtained pardon, thereupon
follows, yt there is no place for pardon, where knowledge is joined to unbelief.

ii Ih. i.xix
do feel God unappeasable. For he directs his speech against them, that
imagined, that they might re^urue to the Christian religion, although they had
ones departed from it: and calling them from this false and pestilent opinion,
he says that which is most true, that there is no way of return open for
them to the communion of Christ, that wittingly and willingly have cast it
away: But they cast it not away, that only in dissolute licentiousness of
life transgress the word of the lord, but they that of set purpose cast away
his whole doctrine. Therefore the deceit is in these words of falling and
sinning. Because the Nouatians expound Falling to be, if a man being taught by
the law of the Lord, yt he ought not to steal or to commit fornication,
absteineth not from stealing or fornication. But co^trarywise I affirm, yt
there is a secret comparison of contraries, wherein ought to be repeted
althinges contrary to that which was first spoken, so yt here is expressed not
any particular fault, but the whole turning away from God, and (as I may so call
it) the Apostasy of the whole man. Therefore when he says, Hebr. vi.iiij.
they which have fallen after that they have ones ben enlightened, and have
tasted the heavenly gift, and ben made partakers of the holy ghost, and also
tasted the good word of God and the powers of the world to come: it is to be
understood of them yt with advised ungodliness have choked ye light of ye
holy spirit, have spit out again the taste of the heavenly gift, have
enstra^ged themselves from the sanctification of the holy ghost, have trodden
under foot the word of God and the powers of the world to come. And the more
to express that advised purpose of wickedness, in an other place afterward
he adds this word by name, ^eb. x. xvi
Wilfully. For when he says, that there is left no sacrifice for them that
sin willingly after knowledge of the truth received, he does not deny, y^
Christ is a continual sacrifice to purge the iniquities of the holy ones (which
he expressly cries out almost in ye whole epistle, where he declares y^
priesthode of Christ) but he says, that there remains no other when that is
ones forsaken: and it is forsaken, when the truth of the gospel is of set
purpose renounced.

they can rise unto repentance, because they are by the just judgment of God
stricken with eternal blindness for their unthankfulness. And it makes
nothing to the contrary that afterward he applies to this purpose the example
of Esau, which in vain attempted with howling and weeping to recover his right
of the first begotten. And no more does that threatenyng of the Prophet, When
they cry, I will not hear. Zach. vij* xiij.
For in such phrases of speech is meante neither the true conversion, nor
calling upon God, but that carfulness of the wicked wherewith being bound,
they are compelled in extremity to look unto that which before they carelessly
neglected, that there is no good thing for them but in the Lords help. But
this they do not so much call upon, as they mourn that it is taken from
them. Therefore the Prophet means nothing else by Cryeng, and the Apostle
nothing else by Weping, but that horrible torment which by desperation fretteth
and vexes the wicked. This it is good to mark diligently: for else God should
disagree with himself, Eze. xviij* xxi.
which cries by the Prophet that he will be merciefull so sone as the sinner
turns. And as I have already said, it is certain that the mind of man is not
turned to better, but by Gods grace preuentyng it. Also his promise concerning
calling upon him, will never deceive. But that blind torment wherewith the
reprobate are diversely drawn, when they see that they must needs seek God,
that they may find remedy for their euels, and yet do flee from his presence,
is improperly called Conversion and prayer.

But a question is moved, whereas the Apostle denies that God i. Reg.
xxviii.xxix.
how Achab obtained pardon and turned away the punishment pronounced upon him,
whom yet it appears by the rest of the course of his life to have been only
stricken amassed with sodeine fear. He did in deed put on sack cloth,
scattered ashes upon him, lay upon the ground, and (as it is testified of him)
he was humbled before God: but it was not enough to cut his garments when his
heart remained thick and swollen with malice* yet we see how God is turned to
mercy. I answer that so sometimes hypocrites are spared for a time, but yet so
that ever the wrath of God lies upon them, and that is done not so much for
their sakes, as for common example. For whereas Achab had his punishment
mitigate unto him, what profit got he thereby, but that he should not feel it a
live in earth? Therefore the curse of God, although it were hidden, yet had a
fast abidyng place in his house, and he himself went into eternal
destruction. This same is to be seen in Esau. Genesis xxvi^ xviii.
For though he had a repulse, yet a temporal blessyng was granted him at his
weeping. But because the spiritual inheritance, by the oracle of God could not
rest but with one of the brethren, when Jacob was chosen and Esau refused, that
puttyng away did exclude the mercy of God: this comfort was left him as to a
beastly man, that he should be fat with the fat of the earth and the deaw of
heaven. And this is it that I said even now, that it ought to be referred to
the example of other, that we should learn the more cherefully to apply our
minds and endeavors to repentance, because it is not to be doubted that when
we are truly and heartily turned, God will be ready to forgive us, whose
mercifulness extends it self even to the unworthy, so long as they show
any grefe at al. And therwithal we be also taught, how terrible judgment is
prepared for all the obstinate, which now make it a sport with no less
shameless face than iron heart to despise and set naught by the threatenings
of God. After his manner he oftentimes reached out his hand to the children of
Israel, to releue their miseries, although their cries were counterfeit, and
their heart doble and false, as himself in the Psalm co^playneth, Ps.
lxxvi^^.xxxvi.
that they by and by returned to their nature, and so minded with so friendly
gentle dealing to bring the^ to earnest conversion, or to make the^
inexcusable. Yet in releasing punishments for a time, he does not bind
himself to a perpetual law thereby, but rather rises sometimes more rigorously
against Hypocrites, and doubleth their peines, yt thereby may appear how much
fayning displeases him. But (as I have said) he shows some examples of his
readiness to give pardon, by which the godly may be encouraged to ame^dement of
life, and their pride may be the more grievously condemned, that stubbornly
kick against the prick.

The fourth Chapter. That all that the Sophisters babble in their schools of
Penance, is far from the pureness of the Gospel. Where is entreated of
Confession and Satisfaction.
The first is out of Gregory, and is rehearsed Lib. 4. S^t. Did. 14. ca. 1,

The ij. out of Ambr. and reser. illie, and in D^^r. Did. 3. de p^^ni^e^t. c.
Poeni. priore.

The.3. out of August. reser^. ca Did. c. Poe^^t. post.

The 4. out of Ambr. resert. Did. 1. Poenit. c. Vera poeni.


Which I will run over in as few words as may be, because I mind not to go
through all, least this book, which I labor to draw into a short abridgment,
should grow to a huge greatness. And the Sophisters have enta^gled it in so
many volumes, being a matter otherwise not very hard, that a man shall hardly
find how to get out, if he ones fall into their dregs. First, in definyng it,
they show yt they never understood what repentance was. For they take hold of
certain sayenges of the old writers, which do nothing at al express ye
nature of repentance, as that to repent is to weep for sins passed, and not
to commit sins to be wept for: Again, that it is to lament euels passed, and
not to commit again other euels to be lamented. Again: that it is a certain
sorrowful revenge, punishing in himself that which he is sorry to have committed.
Again: that it is a sorrow of heart, and bitterness of soul, for the euels
that a man has committed or to which he has consented. But, to grant these
things well said of the fathers, (which a contentious man might easily enough
deny) yet they were not spoken to this intent to describe repentance, but only
to exhort the^ to whom they wrote, that they should not fall again into the
saine offenses, out of which they had been drawn. But if we list to turn all
such titles of commendation into definitions, then other may also be adjoined
as rightfully as they. As this of Chrysostom, Repentance is a medicine that
destroys sin, a gift given from heaven, a marvelous virtue, a grace
surmounting the force of the law. Yea and the doctrine which they afterward
teach, is somewhat worse than these definitions. For they stick so earnestly
in outward exercises, that a man can gather nothing else out of infinite
volumes, but that repentance is a discipline and rigorousnesse that serves
partly to tame the flesh, and partly to chastise and punish vices: but they
keep marvelous silence of the inward renewing of the mind that draws with
it correction of life. There is in deed much talk among them of Contritio^
and Attrition, they torment souls with many doubts, and do thruste into them
much troble and carfulness: but when they seem to have thoroughly wounded
the hearts, they heal ye bitterness with a light sprinkling of ceremonies.
Lib. 4. Sen..16. ca. 1. ^e po^. i. distri.1. c. psecta poenitentia.
And when they have thus curiously defined repentance, they divide it into
contrition of heart, confession of mouth, and satisfaction of work, no more
logically than they defined it, although they would seem to have wasted all
their age in framinge of syllogismes. But if a man will go about to prove by
the definition (which kind of argument is of force among logicians) that a man
may weep for his sins passed, and committ no more to be wept for, that he may
bewail his euels passed, and commit no more to be bewailed, and that he may
punish himself for that which he was sorry to have committed. etc. although he
do not confess with his mouth: how will they maintain their division? For if
that true penitent man do not confess, then repentance may be without
confession. But if they answer, that this division is referred to repentance,
in respect that it is a sacrament, or is meant of the whole perfection of
repentance, which they comprehend not in their definitions, then is there no
cause to blame me, but let them lay the fault in themselves that make not a
purer and plainer definition, I truly (according to my grossnesse) when any
thing is disputed of, do refer all things to the very definition, which is
the stay and ground of the whole disputation. But admit that to be their
masterlike license. Now let us particularly consider all the parts in order.
Whereas I do negligently leap over as trifles those things that they with
great gravity of countenance do publish for mysteries, I do it not
unwittingly, neither were it very painful for me to confute all that they
think them selves to have depely and suttlely disputed) but I would think it
against conscience to weary the readers with such trifles without any profit.
Truly it is easy to know by the questions which they move and toss, and
wherewith they miserably encomber themselves, that they prate of things that
they know not. As for example: whether the repentance of our sin pleases
God, when obstinacy endures in other. Again: whether the punishments laid
upon man by God, do avail to satisfaction. Again: whether repentance may be
oftentimes reiterate for deadly sins: where they fowly and wickedly define,
that penance is daily done but for venial sins. Likewise they very much
torment themselves with a gross error, upon the saying of Hierome, that
repentance is a second bourde after shipperack. Wherein they show that they
never waked from their brutish dullness, to feel so much as a far of the
thousandth part of their faults.

But I would the readers should note, that here is not a quarrel about mean, with
what law, upon what condition, with what easiness or hardness the
forgiveness of sins is obtained. If this knowledge stand not plain and
certain, the conscience can have no rest at all, no peace with God, no
confidence or assuredness, but continually trembles, wauereth, is troubled,
is tormented, is vexed, horriblye dreadeth, hates and flees the sight of God.
But if the forgiveness of sins hang upon those conditions to which they do
bind it, then nothing is more miserable, nothing in more lamentable case than
we. They make Contrition the first part of obteining pardon, and they require
that to be a due contrition, that is to say perfect and full: but in the mean
time they do not determine when a man may be assured, that he has to the full
measure perfectly performed this contrition. Truly I grant that every man
ought diligently and earnestly to enforce himself, with bitterly weping for
his sins, to whett himself more and more to a lothing and hatred of them.
For this is a sorrow not to be repented, y^ breeds repentance unto
salvation. But when there is such a bitterness of sorrow required as may
proportionally answer the greatness of the fault, and such as may in
balaunce counterpaise with the trust of pardon, here the pure consciences are
maruelously tormented and troubled, when they see them selves changed with a
due contrition of sins, and do not so atteine the measure of that due, that
they can determine with them selves, that they have duly performed so much
as they duly ought. If they say that we must do as much as lies in us,
then come we still to the same point that we were at before: for how dare any
manne assure himself that he has employed all his force to bewail his
sins? So when the consciences having long wrastled with them selves, and
long been exercised with battles, do at length find no heaven to rest in,
yet somewhat to ease them selves, they enforce them selves to a sorrow, and
wringe out tears to make perfect their contrition.

Mat. xi.xviij. Esa. lxi. Luc. iiii.xviii.
We have only put him in mind that Christ called the laboring and laden,
when he was sent to publish glad tidinges to the poor, to heal the contrite
in heart, to preach remission to captives, to deliver prisoners, and to
comfort them that mourn. From which should be excluded both ye Pharisees, that
filled with their own righteousness, do not acknowledge their own poverty,
and also the despisers that careless of Gods wrath do seek no remedy for their
euels. For such do not labor, nor are laden, nor contrite in heart, nor
bound nor captive. But there is great difference between teaching a man to
deserve forgiveness of sins with due and full contrition, which the sinner
can never perform: and instructing him to hunger and thirste for the mercy
of God, that by the acknowledging of his own misery, by his own
unquietness, weariness and captivity, it may be showed him, where he ought
to seek for relief, rest and liberty: and finally, he may be taught in the
humbling of himself, to give glory to God.

Concerning Confession, there has been alwaie great strife between Genesis i^.^
because Adam answered as if were by way of exception saying: The wife that
thou gave me. etc. but that both citations and exceptions received form
given them by the Civil law. But let us see by what arguments they prove
this confession, either formed or Unfourmed to be the commandment of God. The
Lord (say they) sent the leprous men to the priests. Matt. v^i^ ^^. Luc.
v.x^^^^ Deu. xixi.viii.
But what? Sent he them to confession? Who ever heard it spoken, that the
Leuiticall priests were appointed to hear confessions? Therefore they flee to
Allegories, and say: It was commanded by the law of Moses, that the priests
should discern between leprosy and leprosy: sin is a spiritual leprosy:
therefore it is the priests office to pronounce upon it. Before that I answer
them, I ask this by the way, If this place make the^ judges of ye spiritual
leprosy, why do they draw to them y^ knoweledge of natural and fleshely
leprosy? This forsoothe is not to mock with the Scriptures. The law gives
to the Leuiticall priests the knowledge of Leprosy, therefore let us take yt
upon us. Sin is a spiritual leprosy, therefore let us also be examiners
of sin. Now I answer: sith the preestehoode is removed, it is necessary
that the law be removed also. Heb. vii.^x
Al presthodes are removed to Christ, and fulfilled and ended in him,
therefore to him only all the right and honor of preesthoode is also removed.
It they love so well to follow Allegories, let them set Christ before them for
the only priest, and heap upon his judgment seat the free jurisdiction of al
things: this we can easily be content to suffer. Moreover their allegory is
very unfit, that sets among the ceremonies that law which is mearly
politic. Why then did Christ send the leprous men to the priests? That the
priests should not cavil that he did break the law that commanded the
man healed of the leprosy, to be showed before the preeste and purged with
offering of sacrifice: therefore he commanded the leprous men being cleansed,
to do that which belonged to the law. Go (says he) and show your selves to
the preeste, and offer the gift that Moses has commanded in the law that
it should be for a witness unto them. And truly this miracle should have been
a witness unto them, for they had pronounced them leprous, and now they
pronounce them healed. Are they not whether they will or no compelled to become
witnesses of Christ's miracles? Christ leaves to them his miracle to be
examined, Mat. xxuii xiiii. Matt. x.xviiii.
they can not deny it. But because they still dally with it, therefore this
work is for a witness unto them. So in an other place: This Gospel shall be
preached in all the world, for a witness to al nations. Again: ye shall be
led before kings and governors, for a witness to them. that is: that in
the iudgemen^e of God they may be more strongly convinced. Hom. 12. de muli^re
^hananaea.
But if they had rather follow Chrysostom: he also teaches that Christ did
this for the Jews sake, that he should not be accounted a breaker of ye law.
Albeit in so clear a matter I am ashamed to allege the witness of any man:
whereas Christ pronounces that he leaves the right of the law whole to the
priests as to the professed enemies of the Gospel, which were always bent to
carpe against it, if their mouth had not ben stopped. Wherefore that the popish
sacrificeng priests may still keep this possession, let them openly take
parts with them which must of necessity be restrained by force, yt they
speak not ill against Christ. For this nothing belongs to his true
ministers.

Ihou. xi.xliii.
The Lord commanded his Disciples, that when Lazarus was raised up, they
should unbind an loss him from his bonds. Here first the lie: for it is no
where read they ye Lord said this to the Disciples: and it is much more
likely that he said it to the Jews yt stood by him, that ye miracle might be
made the more evident without suspicion of fraud, and his power appear y^
greater, y^ without any touching, with his only word he raised up dead men.
For thus I expound it: that the Lord, to take away all wrongful opinion
from the Jews, willed them to roll away the stone, to fe^le the stink, to
behold assured tokens of death, to see him rising by the only power of his
word, and them first to feel him living. ^er. contra Iudes, Gentiles and
haer^ti^.
And this is the judgment of Chrysostom. But let us grant yt this was spoken
to the Disciples: what will they get thereby? That the Lord gave his Apostles
power to loose. But how much more fitly and more handesomely might these
things be applied by way of allegory, to say that by this sign ye lord
meanie to instruct his faithful, to loose them yt he had raised up: that is, yt
they should not call into remembrance those sins yt he had forgotten: that
they should not condemn them for sinners whom he had acquitted: that they should
not reproach men with those things that he had forgeuen: that they should not
be rigorous to punish, and lightly offended, where he is merciful and easily
entreated to spare? Truly nothing ought to move us more to readiness to
forgive, than the exaumple of ye Judge that threatens that he will be
unappeasable to them that be to rigorous and ungentle. Now let them go and
boaste of their allegories.

But now they join more nere hand with us, when they fight (as they think)
with open sentences. They that came to Ihons baptism, did confess their
sins, and James wills that we confess our sins one to an other. No
marvel if they that would be baptized did confess their sins, for it was
said before that Ihon preached the baptism* of repentance, and baptized in
water unto repentance. Whom should he then have baptized, but them that had
confessed themselves sinners? Baptism is a token of the forgiveness of
sins: and who should be admitted to this token but sinners, and they that
acknowledge themselves to be such? Therefore they confessed their sins, that
they might be baptized. And not without a cause does James bid us confess
one to an other. But if they did mark what follows next after, they would
understand, that this also makes little for them. Confess (says he) one to
an other your sins, and pray one for an other. He joins together mutual
confession and mutual prayer. If we must confess to prestes only, then must
we also pray for prestes only. Yea, What and if it might follow of the
words of James that only priests might confess? for when he wills that
we should confess one to an other, he speaks only to them that may hear the
confessions of other: his word is in greek Allelous, mutually,
enterchangeably, by turns, or (if they so like best to term it) by way of
reciprocatio^ one to an other. But so entercha^geably none can confess, but
they that are meet to here confessions. Which prerogative sith they
vouchesaue to grant only to prestes, we do also put over ye office of
confessing to the^ only. Therefore away with such trifelinges, and let us take
the very meaning of the Apostle which is simple and plain: yt is, y^ we should
lay our weakness one in an others bosom to receive mutual counsel, mutual
compassion and mutual comfort one of an other: then that we be naturally
privy to the weaknesses of our brothren, should pray for them to ye Lord. Why
do they then allege James against us, which do so earnestly require ye
confession of ye mercy of God? Gala. iii^ xxii.
but no man can confess Gods mercy, unless he have first confessed his own
misery. Ye we rather pronounce him accursed yt does not before God, To.
iij.ix.
before his Angels, before the Church, yea and before all men confess
himself a sinner. For the Lord has concluded al under sins yt al mouths
might be stopped, and all flesh humbled before God, and he only justified and
exalted.

But I marvel with what face they dare affirm, that the confession whereof
they speak, is of the law of God: the use whereof we grant in deed to be very
ancient, butte such as we are able to prove in old time to have been at
liberty. Truly even their own cronacles declare, that there was no certain
law or constitution of it before the times of Innocent ye third. Surely if
they had had a more ancient law, they would rather have taken hold thereof,
than have been contented with the decree of ye counsel of Laterane, and so
made them selves to be laughed at, This (...) the ^83. Pope.
even of children. In other things they stick not to come forged decrees,
which they father upon the most ancient Counsels, that they may with very
reverence of antiquity dasell the eyes of the simple. In this point, it came
not in their mind to thrust in such a false pack. Therefore by their own
witness, there are not yet passed three hundred years sins Innocent the third
laid that snare upon men, and charged them with necessity of Confession. But,
to speak nothing of the time: the very barbarousnesse of the words
minisheth the credit of that law. For where these good fathers command every
one of both kinds, male and female, ones every year to confess all his
sins to his own priest, pleasant men do merrily take exception, yt in this
commandment are contained only Hermaphrodites, and sat that it belongs not
such a one as is either male or female only. Sins yt time, a more gross
beastesnesse has bewrated it self in their scholars, that can not expound
what is meant By his own pressed. Whatsoever all the Popes hired bablers do prate,
we hold both that Christ was never the author of this law that compels men
to reckon up their sins, and also that there passed a thousand and two
hundred years from the resurrection of Christ before that any such law was
made. And so, that this tyranny was then first brought in, when all
godliness and learning being destroyed, the visors of Pastors had without
choice taken al licentiousness upon them. Moreover there are evident
testimonies both in hystories and other ancient writers, which teach that
this confession was a politic discipline redeemed by the bishops, not a law
made by Christ or his Apostles. I will allege but one out of many, which
shall be a plain proof thereof. Tripart. hist. lib. 9.
Sozomenus reports that this constitution of bishops was diligently kept in
all the west Churches, but specialli at Rome. Whereby he shows that it was no
universal ordinance of all Churches. But he says that there was one of the
priests peculiarly appointed to serve for this office. Whereby he does
sufficiently confute that which these men do falsely say of the keys given for
this use universally to the whole order of presthode. For it was not the common
office of all priests, but the special duty of some one that was chosen
thereunto by ye bishop. The same is he, whom at this day in all cathedral
Churches they call Penitentiarie, the examiner of heinous offenses, and such
whereof the punishment pertains to good example. Then he says immediately
after, yt this was also ye manner at Constantinople, till a certain woman
faining that she came to confession, was found so to have colored under that
pretense ye dishonest company that she used with a certain Deacon. For this
act, Nectarius a man notable in holiness and learning bishop of that Church,
took away ye custom of confessing. Here, here let these asses lift up their
ears. If auricular confession were the law of God, how durst Nectarius repelle
and destroy it? Will they accuse for an heretic and schismatike Nectarius a
holy man of God, allowed by the consenting voices of all the old fathers? But
by the same sentence they must condemn the Church of Constantinople, in
which Sozomenus affyrmeth that the manner of confessing was not only let
slype for a time, but also discontinued even till within time of his
remembrance. Yea let them condemn of apostasy not only the Church of
Constantinople, but also all the cast Churches which have neglected that law,
which (if they say true) is inviolable and commanded to all Christians.

Homil. 2. in Psalm. 50.
that it is marvel that these dare mutter to the contrary. Tell (says he)
thy sins that thou may do them away, if thou be ashamed to tell to any man
the sins yt thou have done, tell them daily in thy soul. I do not say,
Confess them to thy fellow servant, that may reproach thee: tell them to God
that takes care of them. Confess thy sins upon thy bed, yt there thy
conscience may daily recognize her euilles. Sermon de Poeniten. and confess.
Again. But now it is not necessary to confess when witnesses be present: let
the examination of thy sins be done with thy thought: let this judgment be
without witness: let only God se thee confessing. Homil. 5. de inco^prehen.
Dei natura, contra Ano maeos.
Again. I do not lead thee into a stage of thy fellow servants, I do not
compel thee to disclose thy sins to men, rehearse and utter thy conscience
before God. Show thy wounds to the Lord the best surgeo^, and ask salve of
him. Show to him that will reproach thee with nothing, but will most gently
heal thee. Again. Tell not man, Homil. 4. de Laz^ro.
least he reproach thee, for neither is it to be confessed to thy fellow
servant, that may utter it abroad, but to the Lord. To the Lord show thy
wounds which has care of thee, that is both gentle and a Phisitio^. Afterward
he brings in God speaking thus. I co^pel thee not to come into ye mids of a
stage, and call many witnesses, tell thy sin to me alone privately, that I may
heal thy sore. Shall we say that Chrysostom did so rashly, when he wrote this
and other like things, that he would deliver men's consciences from these
bonds wherewith they be bond by ye law of God? not so. But he dare not require
that as of necessity, which he does not understand to be commanded by the
word of God.

But that the matter may be made the plainer and easier, first we will Psar.
xli^*v.
In the voice of reioising and confession. But if such change may serve, then
we shall have what we list, proved by what we list. But seeing they are so
become past shame, let the godly reders remember that by the just vengeance of
God they have been cast into a reprobate mind, that their presumption should be
the more detestable. But if we will rest in the simple doctrine of the
Scripture, we shall not be in danger of any such deceites to beguile us. For
therein is appointed one order of confessing, that for as much as it is the Lord
yt forgeueth, forgets, and puts away sins, therefore we should confess
our sins to him for to obtain pardon, he is ye Phisician, therefore let us
show our diseases unto him. It is he that is grieved and offended, therefore let
us seek peace at his hand. He is the knower of hearts, and privy to al
thoughts, therefore let us make haste to pour out our hearts before him.
Finally it is he that calls sinners, therefore let us not delay to come to
him. Psalm. l^.v.
I have (says David) made my sin known unto thee, and have not hidden my
unrighteousness. I have said, I will confess against me my unrighteousness
to the Lord, and thou have forgeuen the wickedness of my heart. Such is the
other confession of David. Then, that even they that use it for their need,
should not be compelled by any commandment, or trained by any deceit, to
reckon up all their sins, but so far as they shall think it behouefull for
them, yt they may receive sound fruit of comfort. Faithful Pastors ought not
only to leave this liberty to the churches, but also to maintain it, and
stoutly stand in defense of it, if they will have tyranny absent from their
ministry, and superstition from the people.

Math. v.xxiii.
and there reme^brest that thy brother has any thing against thee, leave thy
gift there, and go, and first be reconciled to thy brother, and then come and
offer thy gift. For so charity that has been appeired by our fault, is to be
repaired by acknowleging and craving pardon of the offense that we have
committed. Under this kind is contained their confession that have sinned even
to the offending of the whole church. For if Christ makes so great a matter of
the private offense of one man, to forbid from holy mysteries all them that
have sinned against their brother, till they be with just amends reconciled:
how much greater reason is it, that he that has offended the church with
any evil example, should recover the favor of the church with acknowledging
his fault? ii. Cor. ii.vi.
So was the Corinthian received again to the communion, when he had yielded him
self obedient to correction. Also this form of confession was used in the
old church, as Ciprian makes mention. They do penance (says he) in due
time, and then they come to confession, and by laying on of the hands of the
bishop and the Clergy, they receive leave to come to the communion. Any other
order or form of confessing, the scripture utterly knows not, and it is not
our duty to bind consciences with new bonds, whom Christ most sharply
forbids us to bring in bondage. In the mean time I do so much not speak
against it that the sheep should present them selves to their shepeherd, when
they mean to be partakers of ye holy supper, that I would most gladly have it
every where observed. For both they that have an encombred conscience, may from
thence receive singular profit, and they that are to be admonished do by that
mean prepare place for admonishment, but so always that tyranny and
supersticion be away.

rightly, and with such order and religiousnesse as besemeth it. Likewise when
he that had in a manner estranged him self from the Church, receives pardon
and is restored into brotherly unity: how great a benefit is it that he
understands him self to be forgiven by them, to whom Christ has said: Mat.
xviij xix. Ioh. xx.xxiij.
To whom so ever ye forgive sins in earth, they shall be forgeuen in heauem.
And of no less effectualnesse and profit is private absolution, when it is
asked by them that have need of special remedy to releue their weakness. For
it happens oftentimes, that he which hears the general promises that are
directed to the whole congregation of the faithful, remains nevertheless in
some doubt, and has still an unquiet mind, as though he had not yet obtained
pardon: and the same man, if he have disclosed to his parsone the secret sore
of his mind, and hears peculiarly directed to him self that saying of the
Gospel, Mat. ix.ij.
Thy sins are forgeuen thee, be of good hope, stablisheth his mind unto
assuredness and is delivered from that trembling, wherewith he was before
tormented. But when we speak of the keys, we must take heed that we dream
not of a certain power severed from the preaching of the Gospel. In an other
place we shall have occasion more fully to declare this matter again, where we
shall entreat of the government of the church: and there shall we see that
all the power to bind and to lose, which Christ has given to his church, is
bound to the word. But this is most true in the ministry of the keys, the
whole force whereof stands in this, that the grace of the Gospel be publicly
and privately sealed up in the hearts of the faithful, by them whom the Lord
has ordained: which can not be done but by only preaching.

But what say the Romish divines? They decree that every one of C. Omnis
utriusque sexus. De su^ma trinitate and fide catho. It is ^ ^ecre of Pope
Innocentius, in the counsel of Laterane. and is recited, Lib. 4. Senten. 14.
c. ^. lib. 4. Senten. did. 19. cap. 2. Mat. xviii xix.
so son^e as they come to the years of discretion, must yearly ones at the
least confess all their sins to their own pressed: and that their sin is
not forgeuen, unless they have firmly conceived an intent to confess it:
which intent if they perform not when occasion is offered that they may do it,
there is now no more entry open for the^ into Paradise. And that the priest
has the power of the keys, where with he may lose and bind a sinner: because
the word of Christ is not in vain, What so ever ye bind. etc. About this
power they stoutely fight among them selves. Some say that there is but one
keye in substance, that is the power to bind and loose, and as for knowledge,
that it is in deed requisite for a good use, but that it is only as an
accessory and is not essentially joined with the other. Some other, because
they saw this to be to much an unbridled license, have reckened up two keys,
discretion, and power. Other again, when they saw ye lewd boldness of
prestes to be restrained by this moderation, have forged other keys, that is
to say, authority of discerning which they should use in giving determinate
sentence: and power, which they should practice in executing of their sentence:
and that knowledge stands by as a cou^seller. But they date not simply
expound this binding and loosing to be to forgive and put away sins, because
they hear the Lord criyng out in the Prophet: It is I, Esa. xliij.^i. and.xxv.
and none other but I: it is I, it is I that put away thy sins* O Israel,
But they say it is the prestes office to pronounce who be bound or loosed,
and to declare whose sins are forgeuen or retained: and that he does declare
it, either by confession when he absolueth and retained sins, or by sentence
when he excommunicated and receives again to partakyng of the Sacraments.
Finally, when they understand that they be not yet out of this doubt, but that
it still may be objected against them, that oftentimes their priests do bind
and loose men unworthy, which are not therefore bound or loosed in heaven:
then (which is their last refuge) they answer that the giving of the keys,
must be construed with a limitation, that is to say, that Christ has
promised, that before his judgment seat such sentence of the Priest shall be
allowed as has been justly pronounced, according as the deseruinges of him
that is bound or loosed, did require. Moreover they say, that these keys are
given by Christ to all Priests, and are delivered to them by their Bishops,
at the time of their promotinge to presthode: but the free use of them,
remains only with such as do exercise Ecclesiastical offices: and that the
excommunicate and suspended Prestes have in deed the keys, but rusty and
bound up. And they that say these things may well seem modest and sober in
comparison of the rest, which upon an new an uield have forged new keys, with
which they say the treasure of ye church is locked up. These keys we shall
hereafter try in place fit for it.

Psa. xix.xiii.
Must all sins be reckened up? But David, (Who as I think) had well studied
upon the confession of his sins, yet cried out: who shall understand his
errors? Lord cleanse me from my secret sins. Ps. xxxviii ^^.
And in an other place. My iniquities have passed above my head, and like a
weightye burden have wared heavy above my strength. Truly, he understood how
great was the bottomless depthe of our sins: how many were the sorts of
our misch^euous doings, how many heads this monster Hydra did bear, and how
long a tail she drew after her. Therefore he went not about to recke^ up a
register of the^, but out of y^ depth of euels, he cried unto ye Lord: I am
overwhelmed, I am v^ried and choked, the gates of helles have compassed me, let
thy hand draw me out, which am drowned in the great pit, and am fai^ting and
ready to die. Who now may think upon the nombryng of his sins, when he
sees that David can make no nombre of his?

mountains, and there appeared no hope, not so much as after long co^passinges,
any way to escape. And so they did stick fast between the sacrifice and the
stone, and at last was found no other issue but desperation. Then these cruel
butchers, to ease the wounds that themselves had made, lated certain gentle
plasters, that every man should do as much as he could. But new cares again
rose up, Yea new torments did slay y^ sylly souls, as to think: I have not
employed time enough, I have not endeavored my self with such diligence as I
ought, I have passed over many things by negligence and the forgetfulness
that comes by negligence is not excusable. Then were there ministered other
plasters to assuage such peines, as Repent thee of thy negligence: if it be
not altogether careless, it shall be pardoned. But al these things can not
close up the wound, and are not so much easmente of the evil, as poisons
covered with honey, that they should not with their bitterness offend the
first taste, but enter into the bowels before that they be perceived. Therefore
this terrible saying always calls upon them and sounds in their cares:
Confess al thy sins. And this horroure can not be appeased buy by assured
comfort. Here let the readers consider, how possible it is to bring into
account all the doings of a whole year, and to gather together what sins
they have done every day: for as much as experience proves to every man, that
when at evening he shall reckon up the faults but of one day, his memory is
confounded therewith, so great a multitude and diversity presents it self.
For I speak now of gross and blockish hypocrites that think they have done
sufficiently, if they have noted three or sower of the greatest sins: but I
speak of the true worshippers of God, which when they see themselves
oppressed with the examination that they have made, do add also this saying of
Ihon: i. Ioh. iii xx.
If our own heart do accuse us, God is greater than our heart: and so they
quake for fear at the sight of that judge, whose knowledge far sourmounteth
our understanding.

But whereas a great part of the world rested them upon such Luc.
xviii.xiii.
After this rule we see that the Publicanes confession was made. Lord be
merciful to me a sinner: as if he should say: All that ever I am, I am
altogether a sinner, and I can not atteine with wit or express with tongue
the greatness of my sins: let the bottomless depthe of thy mercy swallow
up the bottomless depth of my sin. But then thou will say, what? are not all
our sins to be confessed? is no confession acceptable to God, but that
which is knitte up in these two words, I am a sinner? No, but rather we
must endeavor our selves as much as in us lies, to pour out our heart
before the Lord, and not only in one word confess our selves sinners, but
also truly and heartyly acknowledge our selves to be such: and with all our
thought record, how great and diverse is our filth of sins, not only that
we be unclean, but what, how great, and in how many parts is our
uncleanness: not only that we be detters, but with how great dettes we be
laden, and how many ways charged: not only that we be wounded, but also
with how many and deadly strokes we be wounded. With this reknowleging when
the sinner has wholly poured out himself before God, Psalm. xix.xxxi
let him earnestly and syncerely think, that yet there remain more sins,
and that the secret corners of their euels are so deep, that they can not be
thoroughly disclosed. And he cries out with David: Who understands his
errors? Lord cleanse me from my hidden sins. Now where they affirm, that
sins are not forgeuen but with an intent of confessing firmly conceived, and
that the gate of paradise is shut against him that neglects occasion
offered when he may be confessed, God forbid that we should grant them
that. For there is no other forgiveness of sins, than alwaie has been. It is
not read that all they have confessed their sins in the ear of some priest,
that we read to have obtained forgiveness of sins at Christ's hand. And
truly, they could not confess, where there were neither any prestes
confessors, nor any confessing at all. And in many ages after, this confession
was unheard of, at which time sins wear forgeuen with out this condition.
But that we may not need to dispute longer about this, as about a doubtful
matter, the word of God is plain, which abides for ever: Whenever the
sinner repents, I will no more remember all his iniquities. He that dare add
any thing to this word, byndeth not sins, Eze* xviii.xxi.
but the mercy of God. For whereas they say, that Judgment can not be
given but when the cause is heard, we have a solution in readiness, that they
do presumptuously take that upon them selves, which have made themselves
judges. And it is a marvel, that they do so boldly frame to themselves such
principles, as no man in his right wit will grant. They boaste that the office
of Binding and Loosing is committed to them, as though it wear a certain
jurisdiction joined with Inquisition. Moreover their whole doctrine cries
out, yt this authority was unknown to ye Apostles. Neither does it belong to
the preeste, but to him which desires absolution, to know certainly whether
the sinner be loosed or no: forasmuch as he that hears can never know
whether ye reckning be just and perfect. So should there be no absolution but
such as is restrained to his words yt is to be judged. Moreover ye whole order
of loosing stands of faith and repentance, which two things are hidden from
ye knowledge of man, when sentence must be given upon an other man. It follows
therefore* yt the assurance of binding and loosing is not subject to the
judgment of an earthly judge: because the minister of the word, when he does
his office, can not give absolution but conditionally: but that this is spoken
for the sins sake, Whose sins ye forgive* etc. that they should not doubt
that the pardon which is promised by the commandment and word of God, shall
be ratified in heaven.

Therefore it is no marvel, if we condemn and desire to have utterly

Where the Consessionars allege for this purpose the power of the Mat.
xviii.xviii.
Whatsoever you loose upon earth, shall be also loosed in heaven? Do we then
make the word of Christ void? I answer there was a weighty cause why the
keys should be given, as both I have even now already declared, and shall more
plainly show again when I come to entreat of Excommunication. But what if I do
with one sword cut of the hold of all that they require, that is with saying,
that sacryficeng priests are not the vicars nor successors of the Apostles?
But this shall also be to be entreated of in an other place: but now they
raise up an engine whereby they would most of all defend themselves, and
thereby may all their buildinges be overthrown. For Christ did not give his
Apostles the power to bind and loose, before that he gave them the holy
ghost. Therefore I say, that none have the power of the keys that have not
first received the holy ghost. I deny that any man can use the keys, but
having the holy ghost going before and teaching him and informing him what is
to be done. They triflinge say, that they have the holy ghost: but in deed
they deny it, unless paraduenture they feign (as they do feign in deed) ye
holy ghost to be a vain thing and a thing of nothing, but therein they shall
not be believed. And by this engine they are utterly overthrown, that of what
soever door they boast yt they have the keie, a man may always ask the^ whether
they have the holy ghost which is the judge and gouerner of the keys. If
they answer that they have, then they may be asked again, whether the holy
ghost may err. This they will not be glade to speak expressly, although they
crokedly utter the same by their doctrine. It is therefore to be gathered, that
no priests have power of ye keys which do commonly without consideration
loose those things that the Lord would have to be bound, and bind those
things that the Lord commanded to be loosed.

i. Cor. vi.ix.
they may proclaim damnation into all and upon all that embrace not Christ.
In this word the Church pronounces that fornicatours, adulterers, thieves,
mansleiers, covetous men, unjust men, have no part in the kingdom of God, and
binds such with most sure bonds. With the same word the Church loses
them whom yt comfort being repentant. But what power shall this be, not to
know what is to be bound or loosed, and not to be able to bind or loose
without knowledge? Why then do they say that they loose by authority given
unto them, when ye loosing is uncertain? What have we to do with this
imaginatiue power, if there be no use of it? But I have it already prouch that
either there is no use of it, or so uncertain an use as may be accounted for
none at all. For whereas they confess that there is a great part of prestes
that do not rightly use the keys, and that the power without lawefull use is
of no effect. Who shall assure me that he of whom I am loosed is a good vser
of the keys? if he be an evil vser of it, what has he else but such a void
disposyng of them, as to say, what is to be found or loosed in thee I know not,
for as much as I lack the right use of ye keys, but if thou deserve I loose
thee. But so much might do, I will not say a lay man (for they could not bear
that with patient ears) but a Turk, or a Deuell. For it is as much as to
say, I have not the word of God the sure rule of loosyng, but there is power
given me to loose thee, if thy deservings be so. We see therefore what they
meant, when they defined the keys to be the authority of discernyng, and
power of executyng: and that knowledge is adjoined for a counselor, and like a
counselor serves for a good use: undoubtedly even they desired to reygne at
their own will, licentiously, without God and his word.

If any man take exception and say, that the lawful ministers of of God. The
doctrine that we teach is free and clear from al these absurdities. For the
absolution is conditional, that the sinner should trust yt God is merciful
unto him, so that he sincerely seek the cleansing of his sins in ye
sacrifice of Christ, and obey the grace offered him. So he ca^ not err, which
according to the office of a preacher, proclaims yt which is given him in
instructions by the word of God. And the sinner may embrace a sure and clear
absolution, when that simple co^ditio^ is annexed of the embracing the grace of
Christ, according to that general doctrine of the master himself, Matt.
ix.xxix.
Be it done to thee according to thy faith. Which has been wickedly despised in
the Paparie.

suffer God of his mere liberality to receive him into favor, that has lain
prostrate before the Tribunes seats, and there has been punished.

The whole sum comes to this point, that if they will make God

The third place in Repentance they assign to satisfaction, whereof Lib. 4.
Ser* Did. 10. c. 4. c. Non sufficit. de pont. cap. med. ^ade^^ did. c.
nullus. ^ade^. did.
They say that it is not enough for him that repents, to absteyne from his
former euels, and change his behauior into better, unless he make
satisfaction to God for those things that he has done: And that there be many
helps by which we may redeem sins, as wepinges, fastinges, oblatio^s and
the works of charity. With these we must win the Lord to be favorable, with
these we must pay our dettes to the righteousness of God, with these we must
make amends for our defaultes, with these we must deserve pardon. For although
by the largess of his mercy he has forgeuen our fault, yet by the
discipline of his justice he reteineth the peine, and that this is the pain
that must be redeemed with satisfactions. But in effect all that they say comes
to this point, that we do in deed obtain pardon of our sins at the
mercifulness of God, but by means of ye deserving of our works, by which
the offense of our sins may be reco^pensed, that due satisfaction may be
fully made to Gods righteousness. Against such lies, I set the free
forgiveness of sins, than which there is nothing more evidently spoken of
in ye Scripture. Esa. lij.iij To. v.v^i, Coloss. ii.xiiii. T^t. iij.v.
First, what is forgiveness, but a gift of mere liberality? For the creditour
is not said to forgive, yt acknowlegeth by acquitance yt the monye is paid,
but he that without any payment willingly of his own liberality cancelleth
the detters bond. Secondly, why is this word, Freely, added, but to take away
al opinion of satisfaction? With what confidence therefore do they yet set up
their satisfactio^s, yt are stricke^ down with so mighty a thu^derbolt? But
what? when ye lord cries out by Esaie, Esa. xliij, xv.
It is I, it is I, that do put away iniquities for mine own sake, and will not
be mindful of thy sins: does he not openly declare, that he fetches the
cause and fundation of forgiveness only from his own goodness? Moreover
whereas the whole Scripture bears this witness of Christ, ^
that forgiveness of sins is to be received by his name, does it not thereby
exclude all other names? Now then do they teach that it is received by the
name of satisfactions? Neither can they deny that they give this to
satisfactions, although they say that the same be used as helps by way of
means. For whereas the Scripture says By the name of Christ, it means that
we bring nothing, we allege nothing of our own, but rest upon the only
commendation of Christ. As Paul, ii. Cor. v.xix.
where he affirms that God is reconcilyng the world to him self in Christ,
for his sake not imputyng to men their sins, he immediately shows the mean
and manner how: because he that was without sin, was made sin for us.

^
when we are in Baptism received into the favor of God by Christ: that after
baptism we must rise again by satisfactions: and that the blood of Christ
profits nothing, but so far as it is distributed by the keys of the Church.
Neither do I speak of a doubtefull matter, for as much as they have in most
evident writings bewrayed their own filthynesse, and not one or two of them,
but all the Scholemen universally. For their Master, after that he had
confessed that Christ had paid the penalty of sins upon the tree, according
to the doctrine of Peter, i. Pet. ij.xxiiij. ii. Tim. i.ix. ^. Ih. ij. v. and
xii.
immediately corrects his saying with adding this exception, that in baptism
all temporal penalties of sins are released, but after baptism they are
minished by the help of penance, that so the cross of Christ and our penance
may work together. But John says far otherwise, if any sin, we have an
advocate with the Father, even Jesus Christ which is the propitiation for our
sins. I write unto you children, because your sins are forgeuen you for his
names sake. Truly he speaks to the faithful, to whom when he sets
forth Christ to be the propitiation of sins, he shows that there is no
other satisfaction by which God, being displeased, may be made favorable and
appeased. He does not say: God was ones reconciled unto you by Christ, now
se^ke you other means: but he makes him a perpetual advocate, always to
restore us by his intercession into the favor of his father: a perpetual
propitiation, by which our sins may be cleansed away. For this is ever
true that the other John said: I^ ^^xxvi
Behold, the Lamb of God, behold him that takes away the sins of the
world. He takes them away (says he himself and none other, that is to say:
for as much as he alone is the Lamb of God, he alone also is the oblation for
sins, he alone the propitiation sacrifice, he alone the satisfaction. For
whereas the right and power to forgive belongs proprely to the father, in the
respect that he is distinguished from the son, as we have already seen: Christ
is here set in an other degree, that taking upon himself the peine due unto us,
he has taken away our giltinesse before ye judgment of God. Whereupon follows,
yt we shall no otherwise be partakers of the satisfaction made by Christ,
unless ye same honor remain whole with him, which they do wrongfully take
to themselves that go about to appease God with their own recompensinges.

And here it is good to consider two things: that Christ may have Esa.
liii.iiii. i. Pet. ii.xxiiii. To. viii.iii. Gala. iii.xiii.
that the father has laid the iniquities of us all upon his son, that we
should be healed by his stripes. Which thing Peter rehearsyng in other words
says: that Christ did in his body bear our sins upon the tree. Paul
writes that sin was condemned in his flesh, when he was made sin for us.
That is to say, that the force and curse of sin was slain in his flesh,
when he was given to be a sacrifice, upon which the whole heap of our
sins, with all their malediction and curse, with the dreadful judgment of
God, and condemnation of death should be cast. Here those trislynges are in no
case to be heard, that after the first purging, every one of us does none
otherwise feel the effectualnesse of the passion of Christ, than after the
measure of satisfactorie repentance: but so often as we fall, we be called back
to the only satisfaction of Christ. Now set before thee their pestilent
follies, as for example: That the grace of God works alone in the first
forgiveness of sins: that if we afterward fall, to the obteynyng of a
second forgiveness our works do work with it. If these things may have
place, do these things that are here before assigned to Christ remain safe
unto him? It is a marvelous great difference, between this that our
iniquities are laid upon Christ, that they should be cleansed in him, and
this that they are cleansed by our own works: between this that Christ is the
procuryng of mercy, and this that God must be made merciful by works. But
if we speak of pacifieng the conscience: what pacification shall this be for a
man's conscience, to hear that his sins are redeemed by satisfactions? When
shall he certainly know the measure of his satisfaction? Therefore he shall
always doubt whether he have God merciefull or no, he shall always be ^exed,
and always quake for fear. For they that rest upon light pe^ satisfactions,
do to contemptuously esteem the judgment of God, ^^d do little consider how
great is the greuousnesse of sin, as we ^all declare in an other place. But
although we grant them to redeem some sins with just satisfaction: yet what
will they do when they are oppressed with so many sins, for satisfaction
whereof a hu^red lives although they were wholly applied thereunto ca^ not
suffice? Biside yt, all the places wherein the forgiveness of sins is
affirmed, do not belong to yonglinges, but to the already regenerate children
of God, and them that have been long nourished in the bosom of the church. That
embassage which Paul so honorably extolleth, ii. Cor. v.xx.
I beseech you in the name of God, be ye reconciled unto God. is not directed
to strangers, but to them that had been already regenerate. But he, biddynge
satisfactions farewell, sends them to the cross of Christ. So when he
writes to the Colossians, Col. i.xx.
that Christ by the blood of the cross has pacified all things in heaven or
in earth, he restrayneth not this to the only moment wherein we are received
into the church, but extends it to our whole course. Which easily appears
by the process of the text, where he says, that the faithful have a
redemption by the blood of Christ, that is forgiveness of sins. Albeit it is
super^luous to heap together more places, that redily offer themselves to be
found.

Romans vi.xxiv. Eze. xviii.xx. To. viij.i.
that the reward of sin is death, and that the soul that sins is worthy
of death. But that the sins of the faithful ar venial, not for that they
do not deserve death, but because by the mercy of God there is no
condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus, because they are not imputed,
because they are taken away by pardon. I know how unjustly they sclaunder
this our doctrine. For they say, that it is the Stoikes strange conclusion,
concerning the equality of sins. But they shall easily be convinced by their
own mouth. For I demand of them, whither among the very same sins that
they confess to be deadly, they do not acknowledge one to be greater than an
other. It does not therefore immediately follow, that sins are egall, because
they are al together deadly. When the Scripture definitiuely says, yt the
reward of sin is death, that the obedience of the law is the way of life, and
that the tra^sgre^^^h of the law is death, they can not escape this sentence.
What end o^ satisfieng then will they find in so great a heap of sins? If
the satisfaction of one day be the satisfaction of one sin, Pro. xxii^.xvi.
while they are about that one satisfaction, they wrappe themselves in many
sins, siche the iustest man passes no one day wherein he falls not many
times. Now when they shall prepare themselves to make satisfaction for these
sins, they shall heap up great numbers, yea rather innumerable. Then the
hope of satisfieng being cut of, what do they stay upon? how dare they still
think of satisfieng?

may be holden so fast, that they shall not be able ones to fold in the top
of their tail. Iere. xxxi, xxxi.
This is the new Testament which the lord has couenanted with us in his
Christ, that he will not remember our iniquities. What he meant by these
words, we learn by an other Prophet where ye lord says: Eze. xviij.xxiiij.
Es. xxxviij xvij.
If the righteous turn away from his righteousness, I will not remember al his
righteousnesses. If the wicked depart from his wickedness, I will not remember
al his iniquities. Whereas he says that he will not remember their
righteousness, this is as much to say, that he will have no regard of them in
respect to reward them. Therefore not to remember sins, is as much as not to
call them to punishment. The same thing is called in an other place, Esa.
xliiii.xxij. Mich. vij.xix.
to cast it behind his back, to wype it away like a cloud, to drown it in
the bottom of the sea, not to impute it and to hide it. By such manners of
speech the holy ghost does plainly express his meaning unto us, if we would
apply unto him willinge ears to learn. Psa. xxxij.xij.
Truly if God do punysh sins, he imputes the^: if he takes vengeance, he
reme^breth the^: if he call them to judgment, he does not hide them: if he
examine the^, he does not cast them behind his back: if he look upon them, he
has not wiped them away like a cloud: if he sift them, he has not cast them
into the bottom of the sea. Ps. lii.^j.
And in this manner does Augustine expound it in plain words. If God have
covered sins, then he would not look upon them: if he would not look upon them,
then he would not mark them: if he would not mark the^, then he would not punish
them: he would not know them, he had rather pardon them. Why therefore did he
say that sins were covered, that they should not be seen: What was meant by
this that God did see sins, but that he did punish them? But let us hear
also out of an other place of the Prophet, upon what conditions the lord
forgeueth sins. Esa. i.xviij
If (says he) your sins be as scarlet, they shall be made white as snow: if
they be red like crimosin, they shall be as woll. And in Jeremy Ier. l.xx.
we read thus: In that day the iniquity of Jacob shall be sought for, and shall
not be found: the sin of Judah, and it shall not be. Because I will be
favorable to the remnantes that I shall preserve. Will thou briefly understand
what is the meaning of those words? Job. xiiij.xvii. Osee.xiii.xii. Ier. xvij.i.
Weye on ye other side what is meant by these speches: that the Lord does
bind up iniquities in a sack, does gather them into a bundell and lay them
up, and does grave them with an iron pointell in an Adamant stone. If they
signify (as it is out of doubt) that vengeance shall be given for recompense,
then is it also not to be doubted, but that by contrary sentences the Lord
affirms, that he remitteth all recompensyng of vengeance. Here I must
beseech the readers not to harken to my gloses, but only that they will suffer
the word of God to take some place.

What, I pray you, had Christ done for us, if we would still be compelled i.
Pet. ij.xxiii^.
we mean nothing else there by but that he suffered all the pain and punishment
that was due to our sins. Esa. liij.v.
And the same has Esaye more lively declared where he says: y^ chastiseme^t
(or correction) of our peace, was upon him. What is the correction of our peace
but ye peine due to sin? and which we should have suffered before that we could
be reconciled to God, unless yt he had entered into our stead? Lo, thou see
plainly, that Christ suffered the peynes of sins, Romans iii.xxiiij. i. Cor
i.xxx. Ephesians. i.vij Col. i.xiiij i. Tim. ij.vi.
to deliver them that be his from them. And so often as Paul makes mention of
the redemption performed by Christ, he uses to call it in Greek Apolutrosin,
whereby he means not only redemption, as it is commonly taken, but the very
price and satisfaction of redemption. After which manner he writes, that
Christ gave him self An^ilutron, a price of ransom for us. What propitiatio^
is there with the Lord (says Augustine) but sacrifice? And what sacrifice is
there, but that which is offered for us in the death of Christ? But that which
is appointed in the law of Moses for cleansing the offenses of sins,
ministers us a strong battle ra^me. For the lord does not there apoint this or
that manner of satisfieng, but requires the whole recompense in sacrifices.
Whereas yet in other things, he does most diligently and in most exact order
set out all the ceremonies of expiation. Now comes it to pass, that he
commands to recompense faults committed, with not works at all, but
requires only sacrifices for satisfaction: but because his will is so to
declare, that there is only one kind of satisfaction, whereby his judgment is
appeased? For the sacrifices that the Israelites did then offer, were not weyed
by the work of men, but were esteemed by their truth, that is to say, by the
only sacrifice of Christ. But what manner of recompense the Lord receives of
us, Os^e, xii^.iij.
O see has very well expressed in few words. Thou shall (says he) take away
iniquity, O God. Lo, here is forgiveness of sins. And we shall pay thee
calves of our lips: Lo, here is satisfaction. I know that they yet do
suttelly slip away, when they make distinction between everlasting pain,
and temporal peines. But when they teach that temporal pain is any kind of
punishment that God takes as well of the body as of the soul, except only
everlasting death, this restraynyng of it does little help them. For the places
that we have above recited, do expressly mean this, that God receives us into
favor with this condition, that in pardonyng the fault, he pardons all the
pain what so ever we had thereby deserved. And so often as David or the other
Prophets do crave pardon of sins, they do also there withal pray to be
released of the pain. Yea, the very felyng of Gods judgment does drive the^m
thereunto. Again, when they promise mercy at the Lords hand, they do in
manner always of purpose preach of the peynes and the forgiveness thereof.
Truly when the lord in Ezechiell pronounces that he will make an end of the
exile in Babylon, Eze. xxxvj xxij. and xxxij
and that for his own sake, not for the Jews sake, he does sufficiently show
that both are of free gift. Finally, if we be delivered by Christ from
giltinesse of fault, the peines that come thereof, must needs cesse.

^ Sa. xij.xiii.
David (say they) being rebuked by Nathan the Prophet of adultery and
manslaughter, received pardon of his sin, and yet he was afterward punished
by the death of his son that he had gotten by that adultery. We are taught
to redeem with satisfactions such peynes as were to be extended after
forgiveness of the fault. for Daniel advised Nebuchadnezer to redeem his
sins with alms. Dan. iiii.^iiii.
And Solomon writes that for equity and godliness, Pro. xvi.vi. and x.xii.
i. Pet. iiii.viii. Luc. vii, xlvii.
iniquities are forgeuen. And in an other place, that with charity the
multitude of sins is covered. Which sentence Peter also confirms. Again,
in Luke the Lord says of the woman that was a sinner, that many sins are
forgeuen her, because she has loved much. Now peruersly and wrongfully they
ever weye the doings of God. But if they had marked (as they should not have
ouerpassed it) that there are two kinds of Gods judgment, they would have
seen in this rebukyng of David, a far other manner of punishment, than such as
might be though to tend to reuengement. But because it not a little behooves
vsal to understand whereunto the chastisementes have respect, wherewith God
corrects us for our sins, and how much they differ from those examples
wherewith he pursues the wicked and reprobate with indignation: therefore I
think it shall be not byside the purpose to comprehend it shortly in a sum.
For the order of plain teaching, let us call the one kind of judgment, the
judgment of Revenge, the other of Chastiseme^t. It is to be understood, that
God so punishes his enemies with the judgment of revenge, that he uses his
wrath against them, confounds them, destroys them, and brings them to
naught. Therefore let us take that to be properly the vengeance of God, when his
punishyng is joined with his indignation: with the judgment of Chastisement he
deals not so cruelly: as to be angry* nor punishes to destroy, nor sends
down his lightenyng to kill. Therefore it is not properly punishment or
vengeance, but correction and admonishment. The one is the doing of a judge,
the other of a father. For the judge when he punishes an evil doer, he has
regard to the offense, and punishes the very fault: when the father somewhat
rigorously corrects his child, he does it not to be reue^ged on him, or to
punish him, but rather to teach him and make him water in time to come.
Chrysostom in a certain place uses a similitude somewhat differyng from this,
but yet it comes to the same point. The son (says he) is beaten, and the
servant also is beaten: but the one is punished as a bondseruant, because he
has offended, and the other is chastised as a freeman and as a son, nedyng
correction. To the one his correction serves for proof and amendment, to the
other for and scourge and punishment.

But that we may have the whole matter shortly and in a ready sum, let this
be the first of two distinctions. Wheresoever punishment is to revenge, there
shows it self the curse and wrath of God, which he always withholdeth from
the faithful. Job. iii.xvii. Pro. vi.xi. ^eb. xii.i^
Contrariwise Chastisement both is a blessyng of God, and bears a testimony
of his love, as the Scripture teaches. This difference is commonly every where
sufficiently expressed in the word of God. For what so ever afflictions the
wicked ^uffer in this present life, therein is painted out unto us as it were a
certain entry of hell, from whense they do already see a far of their
eternal damnation: and they are so far from being amended or taking any profit
thereby, that rather by such beginnings they are prepared to the most cruel
hell that at length abides for them. Ps c.xvii^ xviij. Psa. cxix.xvii.
But the lord chastisyng chastises his servants, but he does not put them to
death. Therefore they confess that to be beaten with his rod, was good for
them into true instruction. But as we read every where that the holy ones
suffer such punishments with quiet mind, so they have always prayed to
escape the first kind of scourges. Chastise me Lord (says Jeremy) but in thy
judgment, Ier. x.xiiij
not in thy wrath, least thou destroy me. Pour out thy wrath upon the nations
yt have not known thee, and upon the kingdoms that have not called upon thy
name. Ps. vi.ij. and xxx^iij.ij.
And David says: Lord rebuke me not in thy wrath, nor correct me in thine
anger. And it makes nothing to the contrary, that oftentimes it is said, that
the Lord is angry with them that be his, when he punishes their sins. As in
Esaie: Esa. xij.i.
I will confess to thee O lord, because thou have be angry with me: thy wrath is
turned, and thou have comforted me. Again Abacuc. Hab.iii.ii.
Thou that have ben angry shall remember mercy. And Michee: Mich. vij.ix.
I will bear the wrath of the lord, because I have sinned against him. Where he
puts us in mind that not only they that are justly punished, nothing
prevail with murmuryng against him, but also yt the faithful have aswageme^t
of their sorto^, in considering the purpose of God. For after the same manner
it is said that he does defile his own inheritance, which yet (as we know) he
will never defile. But that is spoken not in respect of the purpose or meaning
of God that punishes, but of the vehement feling of sorrow, which they feel
that suffer any of his severity what so ever it be. But he not only pricketh
his faithful with no small rigor, but sometimes so wounds them, that they
think themselves not far from the damnation of hell. So he testifies that
they have deserved his wrath, and so it behooves that they should loathe
themselves in their euels, and be touched with the greater care to appease God,
and carefully make haste to crave pardon. But even in the very same doing he
shows a more evident testimony of his favorable kindness than of his
wrath. For the covenant continues that was made with us in our true Solomon:
the truth whereof he, that can not deceive, has affirmed, Ps. lxxxix.xxxi.
that it shall never be made void. If (says he) his children forsake my
law, and walk not in my judgments: if they defile my statutes, and keep not
my commandments, I will visit their sins with a rod and with stripes:
but I will not take away my mercy from him. Of which mercy to make us
assured, he says, that the rod wherewith he will correct the posterity of
Solomon, ij. Sa. vij.xiiij.
shall be of men, and stripes of the children of men: by which clauses when
he means moderation and lenity; he there withal secretlye declares, that
they can not but be confounded with extreme and deadly horror, that feel the
hand of God to be against the^. Now great regard he has of this lenity in
chastising his Israel, he shows in the Prophet: Esa. xlv^ij x.
I have purged thee (says he) in fire: But not as Silver, for then thou
should have been all consumed. Albeit he teaches that chastisementes serve
him for to cleanse him, but he further says that he uses the same so
temperately, that he be not to much consumed by them. And that is needful.
For the more that every man reuere^tly fears God, and gives himself to
follow godliness, so much the tendrer he is to bear his wrath. For the
reprobate, although they groan under his scourges, yet for that they weye not
the cause, but rather turn their back both to their own sins and to the
judgment of God, by that slothfulness they gather a hardness: or because
they murmr and kick against him, and do make an uproar against their judge,
that furious soden rage astoni^eth them with madness and furor. But the
faithful being admonished by his correction, by and by descend to consider
their sins, and being stricken with dread and horror, they flee in humble
wise to pray to him for pardon, unless the Lord did aswage these sorrows
wherewith the poor souls torment themselves, they would ^ainte a hundred times
even in small tokens of his wrath.

Then let this be the second distinction, that when the reprobate are In sermon.
de poenite. and co^^ess.
This I had rather express in Chrysostomes words than mine own. For this
(says he) God does lay peine upon us, not punishyng our sins past, but
correctyng us against time to come. And so says Augustine: That which thou
suffrest, yt for which thou lamentest, is a medicine to thee and no peine, a
chastisement and no damnation. Put not away the scourge, if thou will not be
put away from the inheritance, etc. Know ye brethren that all this misery of
mankind when the world groneth is a medicinal sorrow, and not a penal
sentence. etc. These sentences I have therefore thought good to allege, that
the manner of speech that I have above written, should not seem to any man new
and unused. And hereunto serve all the co^plaintes full of indignation wherein
the Lord oftentimes does expostulate of the unkindness of the people, for
that they stiffly despised al punishments. In Esaye he says: Esa. i.v,
To what purpose should I strike you any more: from the sole of the foot to
the crown of the head, there is no whole place. But because ye Prophets are
full of such sayenges, it shall be sufficient to have briefly showed that God do
the punish his church for none other intent, but that it should be tamed and
amend. Therefore when he did cast Saul out of the kingdom, i. Sam. iv x^iii.
i^ Sa. xij.xviii. 1. Cor. xi.xxxii.
he punished him to reuengement: When he took from David his young son, he
corrected him to amendment. According to this meaning is that to be taken
which Paul says, when we are judged of the Lord, we are corrected, that we
should not be damned with this world. That is, when we that be the children of
God are afflicted with the hand of our heavenly father, this is no pain
wherewith we should be confounded, but only a chastisement wherewith we should
be instructed. In which point Augustine is plainly on our side. Lib. de
Peccato, merito, ac remiss. 2. ca. 33. and 34.
For he teaches that the peynes wherewith me^ are a like chastised by God, ar
diversely to be considered: because to the holy ones they are battles and
exercises after the forgiveness of their sins, to the reprobate they are
without forgiveness peynes of wickedness. In which place he rehearses how
peynes were laid upon David and other godly men, and says that the same
tended to this end, that their godliness should by such humbling of them, Esa.
xl.ij.
be exercised and proved. And where Esaie says, that the Iewishe people had
their iniquity forgeuen them, because they had received full chastisement at
the Lords hand: this proves not that the pardon of sins hangs upon the
full payment of ye pain: but it is in effect as much as if he had said: Because
ye have already suffered peynes enough, and by the greuousnesse and multitude
thereof have been now pyned away with long mournyng and sorrow, therefore it
is now time that receiving the tidings of full mercy, your hearts should
rejoice and feel me to be your father. For there God did take upon him the
person of a father, which repents him even of his just severity, when he
was compelled sharply to correct his son.

i. Pet. iiij.xvij. Ier. xxv.^^ix.
It is time that the judgment began at the house of the Lord, in which his
name is called upon. What should the children of God do, if they did believe the
severity of God that they feel to be his vengeance? For he that being stryken
with the hand of God, imagines God a punishyng judge, can not co^ceyue him but
angry and enemy unto him, and detest the very scourge of God as a curse and
damnation. Finally he can never be persuaded that God loves him. yt shall
think him so minded toward him, that he is still minded to punish him. But he
only profits under the rod of God, that thinks him to be angry with his
sins, but merciefull and loving to himself. For otherwise that must needs
happen, which the Prophet complayneth that he felt, Ps. lxxxviij xiiij. Ps.
xx.vii.
where he says. Thy wrathes, O God have passed over me: thy terrors have
oppressed me. Also that which Moses writes, because we have faynted in thy
wrath: and we have been troubled in thy indignation, thou have set our
iniquities in thy sight, and our secrets in the light of thy countenance:
because all our days are gone away in thy wrath: our years are consumed as
the word that is passed out of a mouth. On the other side David says thus of
his fatherly chastisementes, to teach that the faithful are rather helped
than oppressed thereby: Ps. ^^iiii.^^. Ps. lxx^viii xvii.
Blessed is the man whom thou haste corrected O Lord, and have instructed in
thy law, to give him quiet from evil days, while a pit is dug for the
sinner. Truly it is a hard tentation, when God sparyng the unbelievers and
winkyng at their faults, seems more rigorous against them that be his.
Therefore he gave them a cause of comfort, the admonishment of the law, whereby
they should learn, that it is done to provide for their salvation when they
are called again into the way, and the wicked are carried hedlong into their
errors, whose end is the pit. And it is no difference whether the pain be
everlasting or during for a time. For as well war, famine, pestilence, and
sickness as the judgment of eternal death are the curses of God, when they
are laid upon men to this end, to be instruments of the Lords wrath and
vengeance against the reprobate.

God is grievously displeased with manslaughter and adultery, against which he
had showed so great an indignation in his beloved and ^aithful servant: that
David should be taught to be no more so bold to do the like deed: and not to
be a pain whereby he should make a certain recompense to God. And so is to be
judged of the other kind of correction, whereby the Lord punished his people
with a sore pestilence, ii. Sam. x.iiii.i^.
for David's disobedience whereinto he was fallen in numbryng the people. For he
did in deed freely forgive to David the giltinesse of his sin: but because
it perteined both to the public example of all ages, and also to the humbling
of David, that such a heinous offense should not remain unpunished: therefore
he most sharply chastised him with his rod. Which mark also we ought to
have before our eyes in the universal curse of mankind. For whereas after
pardon obtained, we do all yet suffer the miseries that wear laid upon our
first parent for pain of sin: we perceive our selves by such exercises to
be admonished, how grievously God is displeased with the transgression of his law:
that being thrown down and humbled with knowledge in conscience of our own
miserable estate, we may the more ^erue^tly aspire to true blessedness. But he
shall be most foolish that shall think, that the calamities of this present life
are laid upon us for the giltinesse of sin. Homil. ^^ de pr^^^^ ad
S^argi^rium.
And that I think was the meaning of Chrysostom when he wrote thus. If God do
therefore lay peines upon us, that he should call us, perseuering in euels to
repentance, then when repentance is ones showed, the peine shall be superfl^ous.
Therefore, as he knows it to be expedient for every man's nature, so he
handles one man more roughly, and an other with more loving tenderness.
Therefore where he minds to teach that he is not inmeasurable in taking
punishments, he reprocheth to the hard hearted and obstinate people that being
stricken yet they make not an end of sinning In this meaning he complains,
Ier. v.iii. Os^e. vii.vi^i.
that Ephraim was as a ^ake scorched on the one side, and raw on the other,
because the corrections did not pearce into their minds, that the people
having their vices boiled out, might be made mete to receive pardon. Truly he
that so speaks, shows, that so sone as a man has repented, he will by and
by become appeasable: and that by our stiffness he is enforced to that rigor
in chastisyng of faults, which should have been prevented with willing
amendment. Yet forasmuch as we all are of such hardness and rudeness as
universally needs chastiseme^t: it seemed good to him being a most wise
father, to exercise al without exception with a common scourge al their life
long. But it is marvelous why they so cast their eyes upon the only example of
David, and are no^ moved with so many examples, in which they might have
beholden free forgiveness of sins. Lu. xviii*^^ii. Luc. xxii.^^i. Mat. ix.ij
It is read that the Publicane went out of the temple justified. Their followed
no pain. Peter obtained pardon of his offense, his tears we read (says
Ambrose) his satis^actio^ we read not. And the man sick of the Palsy heard
it spoken to him: Rise, thy sins are forgeuen thee. There was no pain laid
upon him. All the absolutions that are rehearsed in the Scripture, are set out
as given freely. Out of this great number o^ examples, a rule should rather
have been gathered than of that only example that conteyneth in it a certain
special matter.

Dan. iiij.xxiiij.
and his iniquities with pitieng of the poor: his meaning was not to say,
that righteousness and mercy are satisfactorie appeasementes of God, and
redemption of peines (for God forbid that there were ever any redemption
sauinge only the blood of Christ) but to refer this word Redeming rather to
men than to God as if he had said: O king, thou have used an unrighteous and
violent government, thou have oppressed the humble, thou haste spoiled the
poor, thou haste hardly and unjustly handled thy people: for thy unjust
exactions, for thy violence and oppression, now render to them mercy and
righteousness. Pro. x.xij.
Likewise Solomon says, that with charity the multitude of sins is covered:
not before God, but among men themselves. For thus is the whole verse: Hatred
raises up contentions: but charity covers all iniquities. In which verse,
as his manner is, he does by way of comparison of contraries, compare the
euels that grow of hatreds, with the fruits of charity: in this meaning, they
that have together do one byte, bark at, reproach and rail at an other, and
turn all things to the worst: but they that love together, do dissemble many
things among themselves, do wynke at many things, and pardon many things
one to the other: not that the one allows the others faults, but bears
with them, and helps them with admonishyng, rather than galleth them with
reprochyng them. i. Pet. iiij.viij. Pro. xvi.vi.
And it is not to be doubted that Peter allegeth this place in the same sense,
unless we will accuse him of deprauyng and wrongfully wrestynge the Scripture.
But whereas he teaches that sin is purged with mercifulness and
liberality, he does not mean that recompense is therewith made for sin
before the face of the Lord, so that God being appeased by such satisfaction
does release the pain that otherwise he would have laid upon them, but after
the accustomed manner of the Scripture he declares that they shall find him
merciefull unto them that leauyng their former vices and iniquities, do turn
to him by godliness and truth: as if he should say, that the wrath of God
does cesse and his judgment rest, when we cesse from our evil doings.
Neither does he there describe the cause of pardon, but rather the manner of
true conversion. As many times the Prophets do declare that Hypocrites do in
vain pester God with forged ceremonious vsages instead of repentance, whereas
it is uprightness of life with the duties of charity yt deliteth him. Hebr.
xiij.xvi.
As also the author of the epistle to the Hebrews commending liberality and
gentleness, teaches yt such sacrifices please God. And when Christ, tau^ting
the Pharisees that giving head only to cleansyng of dishes, Mat. xxiij xxv.
Luc. xi.xxxix.
they neglected the cleanness of the heart, commanded them to give alms that
all might be clean: he did not thereby exhort them to make satisfaction: but
only teaches what manner of cleanness pleases God. Of which kind of speech
we have entreated in an other place.

Luc. vij.xxxvi.
will make us any controversy thereupon. The Pharisee thought with himself,
that the lord did not know the woman, which he had so easily received into his
presence. For he thought that Christ would not have received her, if he had
known her such a sinner as she was. And thereby he gathered, that Christ was
not a Prophet that might in such sort be deceived. The lord, to show that
she was no sinner to whom her sins were already forgeuen, did put out this
parable. There were two dettours to one creditour upon usury: the one ought
fifty, the other ought five hundred, both had their dettes forgeuen them.
Whether owes more thank? the Pharisee answered: he to whom most is
forgeuen. The Lord replied: learn hereby that this womans sins are forgeuen
her, because she has loved much. In which words (as you see) he makes not
her love the cause, but the proof of the forgiveness of her sins. For they
are derived upon a similitude of that ^ettour, to whom five hundred was
forgeuen, to whom he did not say that therefore it was forgeuen, because he
had loved much: but therefore loved much, because it was forgeuen. And
hereunto must that similitude be applied in this sort. Thou thynkest this
woman to be a sinner: but thou ought to know that she is none such, for
as much as her sins be forgeuen her. And that her sins be forgeuen her, her
love ought to prove unto thee, whereby she renders thank for his benefit. It
is an argument gathered of the following effect, whereby any thing is proved by
signs ensuyng. By what mean she obtained forgiveness of sins, the Lord
openly restifieth: Thy faith, says he, has saved thee. Therefore we obtain
forgiveness by faith: By charity we give thanks, and testify the
bountiefulnesse of the Lord.

As for those things that are commonly found in the books of Hom. 2. in
Psalm. 50.
Chrysostom in one place writes thus: where mercy is required, examination
cesseth: where mercy is asked, judgment is not rigorous: where mercy is
craved, there is no place for peine: where is mercy, there is no inquisition.
Where is mercy, the answer is pardoned. Which words howsoever they be
wrested, yet they ca^ never be made to agree with the Scholemens doctrines. In
ye book of Ecclesiastical doctrines, which is fathered upon Augustine is red
thus: Satisfaction of repentance is, to cut of the causes of sins, and not to
grant an entry to their suggestions. Whereby appears that the doctrine of
satisfaction that was said to be given in recompense for sins committed, was
even in those times laughed to scorn: for as much as they refer all
satisfaction to a heedefulnesse in absteining from sins in time to come. I
will not allege that which the same Chrysostom says, Hom. (...) Genesis
Enchi^il. (...).
that he requires of us no more, but that we should confess our sins unto
him with tears: sith such sentences are many times found in his wrytinges
and others. Augustine in deed in some places calls ye works of mercy,
remedies to obtain forgiveness of sins: but because no man should stu^ble at
that little word, he himself preuenteth it in an other place. The flesh of
Christ (says he) the true and only sacrifice for sins, not only these sins
y^ are wholly put away in baptism, but also these that afterward crepe in by
weakness: for which the whole church cries out at this day, Forgive us our
trespasses. And they are forgeuen by that singular sacrifice.

Cap. 65. and is rehearsed in ye Decretes cap. in acti^^^bus. de p^rit. dist^^.
1.
Which is also expressed of Augustine in these words in his Enchirrdion to
Laure^ce: Out of that ancient custom the co^fessions and satisfactions that
are at this day used, took their beginning. Truly very viperous birthes, by
which is brought to palle, yt there remains not so much as a shadow of ye
better form. I know that the old writers do sometime speak somewhat hardly,
and as I said even now, I do not deny that paraduenture they erred herein. But
those things that wear besprinkled with a few spots, when they are ones
handled with these men's unwashed hands, are altogether defiled. And if we must
contend with authority of old writers: good God, what old writers do they
thrust unto us? A good part of those wherewith Peter Lombard their cha^pion has
botched up his patched Sentences, is gathered out of ye unsavory dotages of
certain monks that are carried about under ye name of Ambrose, Hierome,
Augustine, and Chrysostom. As about this present question he takes in a
manner all out of Augustines book of Repentance, which is foolishly botched of
good and bad by some scraper together. It bears in deed the name of
Augustine, but such a book as no man being but meanly learned, would
vouchesaue to acknowledge for his. But whereas I do not so narrowly examine their
follies, let the readers pardon me whom I would ease of that tediousness. For
to me it should not be very laboursome, and yet very plausible to bewray to
their great shame those things that they have heretofore bosted upon as
mysteries, but because my purpose is to teach frutefully, therefore I pass
them over.

The fifte Chapter. Of the suppliynges which they add to satisfactions, as
pardons and purgatory.
battelrammes, and of them selves grow into decayed age, and bend toward
falling: yet because a short confutation of them shall be profitable for some
that be ignorant, I will not altogether omit it. As for this that pardons
have so long stand safe, and have so long ben unpunished, having ben used with
so outrageous and furious lice^tiousnesse: this may serve to teach us in how
dark a night of errors, men in certain ages past have been drowned. They saw
them selves to be openly and vncoloredly scorned of the Pope and his
Bulbearers, gainful markettes to be made of the salvation of their souls, the
price of salvation to be valued at a few pence, and nothing set out to be freely
given: that by this color they be wyped of offringes to be filthely spent upon
brothels, bawdes and bankettinges: that the greatest blowers abroad of pardons
are the greatest despisers of them: that this mo^stre does daily more and more
with greater licentiousness ouerrunne the world, and grow into outrage, and
yt there is no end, new lead dailye brought, and new money gotten. Yet with
hye reverence they received, they worshipped and bought pardons, and such as
among the rest saw somewhat farther, yet though the^ to be godly deceiptes,
whereby me^ might be beguiled with some profit. At ye length, sins the world
suffered it self to be somewhat wiser, pardons wax cold, and by little and
little become frosen, till they utterly vanishe away.

But for as much as many that se the filthy gamings, ye deceiptes, Act. x.xliij
should be otherwise supplied and profited? The law and all the Prophets
(says Peter) bear witness of Christ, that by him forgiveness of sin is to
be received: Pardons give remission of sins by Peter, Paul, and the Martyrs.
The blood of Christ (says John) cleanses us from sin: i. John. i.vij. ij.
Cor. v.xxi.
Pardons do make the blood of Martyrs the washyng away of sins. Christ
(says Paul) which knew not sin, was made sin for us, that is, the
satisfaction of sin, that we might be made the righteousness of God in him:
Pardons do set the satisfaction of sins in the blood of Martyrs. Paul cried
out and testified to the Corinthians, i. cor. i.xiij
that only Christ was crucified and died for the^: the pardons pronounce that
Paul and other died for us. Actu. xx.xxviij.
In an other place he says that Christ purchaced ye church with his blood:
the pardons appointe an other price of purchase in the blood of Martyrs. The
Apostle says, Heb. x.xiiij.
that Christ with one oblation made perfect for ever them that wear
sanctisfied: the pardons cry out to the contrary and say, that sanctification
is made perfect by the Martyrs, which otherwise were not sufficient. Reave.
vij.xiiij.
John says yt al ye saints washed their gowns in the blood of ye lamb: the
pardons teach me^ to wash their gowns in the blood of saints.

Epist. 81. Psalm. ^.xvi xv.
Although (says he) the death of many saints has been precious in the sight
of the Lord, yet the killing of no innocent has been the perpetuation for the
world. The righteous received, but gave not crowns: and out of the
valiantness of the faithful are graven examples of patience, nor gifts of
righteousness. For their deaths wear every one singular to them selves, and
none of them did by his end pay the det of an other, for as much there is one
Lord Christ, in whom all are crucified, all are dead, buried, and raised up
again. Which sentence (as it was worthy to remembered) he repeted in an other
place: There can nothing be required more plain to destroy this wicked
doctrine. Yet Augustine speaks no less fitly to the same effect. Epist. 95.
Tract. in John. 84.
Though (says he) we die brethren for brethren, yet the blood of no Martyrs
is shed for the forgiveness of sins. Which thing Christ has done for us,
neither has he therein done that for us, that we should follow him, but has
given us a thing to rejoice upon. Again in an other place, As only the son of
God was made ye son of man, Lib. 4. ad Bonifac. cap. 4.
to make us with him the sons of God: so he alone for us has taken upon him
punishment without evil deseruinges, that we by him might without good
deseruinges obtain grace not due unto us. Truly where as all their doctrine
is patched together of horrible sacrileges and blasphemies, yet this is a more
monstrous blasphemy than all the other. Let the^ remember them selves,
whether these be not their decrees: that ye Martyrs have by their death done
more to God, and deserved more, than was needful for themselves: and that they
had remaining so great a plenty of deseruinges, as did also ouerflowe unto
other: and that therefore, least so great goodness should be superfluous, their
blood is mingled with the blood of Christ, and of both these bloudes is made
the treasure of the church, for the remission and satisfaction of sins. And
y^ so is the saying of Paul to be taken: Colo. ^.xxiiii.
I supply in my body those things that want of the suffringes of Christ for his
body, which is ye church. What is this else but to leave Christ only his name,
otherwise to make him but a common pety saint, that may scarcely among the
multitude be known from the rest? He only, only should have been preached, he
only set fourth, he only named, he only ben looked unto, when the obteining of
forgiveness of sins, satisfaction, and sanctification are entreated of. But
let us hear their curtalled arguments. Least the blood of the Martyrs should
be shed in vain, therefore let it be employed to the common benefit of the
Church. Is it so? was it no profit to glorify God by their death? to
subscribe to his truth with their blood? by despisyng this present life, to
testify that they sought for a better life? by their steadfastness to
strengthen the faith of the church, and overcome the stubbornes of the
enemies? But this is the matter in deed: they acknowledge no profit of the
Martyrs death, if Christ only be the proportiator, if he only died for our
sins, if he only was offered up for our redemption. So (say they) Peter and
Paul might nevertheless have obtained the crown of victory, if they had died
in their beds. And where as they have fought even to the sheding of their
blood, it would not agree with the justice of God to leave the same barren and
frutelesse. As though God could not tell how to increase in his servants their
glory, according to the measure of his gifts. But the church receives in
commune together profit enough, when it is by their triu^phes encouraged to a
zealous desire to fight.

But how maliciously do they wrest that place of Paul where he Coloss.
i.xxiiij.
that he supplieth in his body those things that wanted of ye suffringes of
Christ? For he refers not yt default or supplying, to ye work of redemption,
satisfaction, and expiation: but to those afflictions wherwt all the members of
Christ, that is to say, all the faithful must be exercised, so long as they
shall be in this flesh. He says therefore, that this remains of the
sufferinges of Christ, that he daily suffers in his members the same that he
ones suffered in him self. Christ vouchesaueth to do us so great honor, to
reckon and account our afflictions his own. Where as Paul added these words,
For the church. he means not for the redemption, for the reconciliatio^, for
the satisfaction of ye church, but for the edifying and profit of the church.
As in an other place he says,. ij. Tim. ii.x.
that he suffers all things for the electes sakes, that they may obtain the
salvation which is in Christ Jesus. And he wrote to the Corinthians, i. Cor. i.vi
that he suffered all the troubles that he suffered, for their comfort and
salvation. And immediately in the same place he expounds him self, when he
says further, that he was made a minister of the church, not for redemption,
but according to the dispensatio^ that was committed unto him, to preach the
Gospel of Christ. If they yet require an other expositour, In Psalm. 16.
let the^ hear Augustine. The suffringes of Christ (says he) are in Christ
only as in the head: and both in Christ and the church, as in the whole body.
Whereby Paul being one member says, I supply in my body that which wants in
the suffringes of Christ. Therefore if thou, whatsoever thou be that hear
this, art one of the members of Christ, what so ever thou suffrest of them that
are not the members of Christ, that same wanted in the suffringes of Christ.
But whereunto the sufferings of the Apostles taken for ye church of Christ do
tend, he expounds in an other place where he says: Christ is to me the gate
unto you: Tract. in John. 47*
because ye are the sheep of Christ bought with his blood: acknowledging your
price, which is not given of me, but preached by me. Then he adds. As he
has given his soul, so ought we to give our souls for our brethren, to
edify peace, and to confirm faith. These are Augustines words. But God
forbid, that Paul should have thought that any thing wanted in the suffringes
of Christ as concerning all fullness of righteousness, salvation and life: or
that he meant to add any thing thereunto, Romans v.xv.
which so plainly and honorably preaches, that the abundance of grace was so
largely poured out by Christ, that it far surmounted all the force of sin. By
it only all the saints have been saved, and not by the merit of their own
life or death, Act. xv.xi.
as Peter expressly testified: so that he should be sclaunderous against God and
Christ, that should repose the worthiness of any saint any where else than in
the only mercy of God. But why do I tarrye hereupon any longer, as upon a
matter yet doubtful, sith the very bewraying of such monstrous errors is a
sufficient confutation of the^? ii. Cor. i.
without any acception, Paul witnesses where he says, that the word of
reconciliation was delivered to the ministers, whereby they might use this
form of message, as it were Christ giving exhortation by them: we beseech you,
be ye so reconciled to God? He has made him that knew no sin, to be made
sin for us, that we might be made the righteousness of God in him. And the
faithful know of what value is that common partaking of Christ, ^. Cor.
i.xvii.
which (as the same Apostle witnesses, is offered us to be enjoyed in the
Gospel. Contrariwyse the pardons do bring out of the storehouse of the Pope, a
certain pitance of grace, and fasten it to lead, parchement, yea and to a
certain place, and sever it from the word of God. If a man should ask whence
this abuse took beginning: it seems to have proceeded hereof, that when in time
past penitentes were charged with more rigorous satisfactions than all could
bear, they which felt them selves above measure oppressed with penance
enjoined them, required of the church a release. The mitigatio^ that was
granted to such, was called an Indulgence or pardon. But when they turned
Satisfactions from the Church to God, and said that they were recompenses
whereby men may redeem them selves from the judgment of God, then they
therewithal did also draw these indulgences or pardons to be propitiatory
remedies, to deliver us from deserved punyshementes. As for these blasphemers
that we have recited, they have forged them so shamelessely, that they can have
no color at all.

not leave to man's presumptuousnesse so to break into the secret places of
his judgments, and has severely forbidden men to inquire for truth at dead
men, Deuteronomy. xviij xxi.
neglecting his word, and permits not his word to be so irreverently
defiled. But let us grant, that all those things might for a while have been
borne with, as things of no great importance. But when the cleansyng of
sins is sought else where then in the blood of Christ, when satisfaction is
given away to any other thing, then it is most perilous not to speak of
it. Therefore we must cry out not only with vehement stretchynge of our voice,
but also of our throat and sides: that Purgatory is the dampnable deuyse of
Satan, that it makes void the Cross of Christ, that it lays an
intolerable sclaunder upon the mercy of God, that it febleth and overthrows
our faith. For what else is Purgatory among them, but the satisfaction that
the souls of men departed do pay after their death? So that ouerthrowyng the
opinion of satisfaction, Purgatory is immediatlye overthrown by the very
roots. But if in our former discourse it is more than evident that the blood
of Christ is the only satisfaction, propitiatory sacrifice and cleansing for
the sins of the faithful: what remains but that Purgatory is a mere and
horrible blasphemy against Christ? I pass over the robberies of God
wherewith it is daily defended, the offenses that it bredeth in religion, and
other things innumerable, which we se to have come out of the same spryng of
ungodliness.

But it is good to wring out of their hands such places as they Mat. xii.lij.
nor in the world to come, thereby he shows that there is a forgiveness of
some sins in the world to come. Mar. i^^.xxvi^.
But who sees not that the Lord there speaks of the fault of sin? Luke
xij.x.
Now if it be so, what is that to their Purgatory, for as much as by their
opinion the peine is there suffered of those sins, whereof they deny not the
fault to be forgeuen in this present life? But that they may no more carpe
against us, they shall have yet a plainer solution. When the Lord meant to cut
of all hope of Pardon from so heinous wickedness, he thought it not enough to
say that it should never be forgeuen: but the more to amplify it, he used a
division, wherein he comprehended both the judgment that every man's
conscience feleth in this life, and the last judgment that shall be openly
pronounced at the resurrection: as though he should have said: Beware ye of
malicious rebellion, as of most present dampnation. For he that of set purpose
shall endeavor to quench the light of the holy Ghost, shall not obtain
pardon, neither in this life, which is given to sinners for their conversion,
nor in the last day when the lambs shall be severed by the angels of God from
the goats, and the kingdom of heaven shall be cleansed from all offenses. Then
they bring fourth that parable out of Mathewe: Mat. v.xv.
Agree with thine adversary, least he deliver thee to ye Judge, and the judge
to the Sargeant, and the Sargeant to the prison, from whence thou shall not get
out, until thou have paid the uttermoste farthing. If in this place the Judge
do signify God, and the adversary plentife the Devil, the Sargeant the
Angel, and the prison Purgatory, I will gladlye yield unto them. But if it be
evident to all men, that Christ meant there to show into how many dangers
and mischeues they cast them selves, that had rather obstinatly pursue the
extremity of the law, than deal according to equity and good right, to the
end to exhort his disciples the more earnestly to agreement with equity:
where then I pray you shall Purgatory be found?

Phil. ii.x.
They fetch an argument out of the saying of Paul, where he affirms that the
knees of things in heaven, earth and helles, shall bow to Christ. For they
take it as confessed, that helles can not there be meant of those that are
adjudged to eternal damnation. Therefore it remains that it must be the souls
lying in peine in Purgatory. They did not reason very evil, if the Apostle
did by knelynge mean the true Godly worshippyng. But sith he teaches only,
that there is a dominion given to Christ, whereby all creatures are to be
subdued, what proof is there to the contrary, but that we may by helles
understand the Deuels, that shall be brought before the judgment of God, to
acknowledge him their judge with fear and tremblyng? Like as Paul him self
expounds the same prophecy in an other place. Romans xiij.x.
All (says he) shall be brought before the judgment seat of Christ. For it is
written: So truly as I live, every knee shall bow to me. etc. But we may not
so expound that which is in the Revelation: I have heard all creatures,
Revel. v.xv.
both these things that are in heaven, and those that are upon the earth, and
these that are under the earth, and those that are in the sea, and all those
that are in them, I have heard them all say to him that sytteth on the Throne
and to the Lamb, Blessinge and honor, and glory, and power, for ever and
ever. That I do in deed easily grant, but what creatures do they think to
be hear rehearsed? For it is most certain, that there are contained
creatures both without reason and without sense. Whereby is affirmed nothing
else, but that all the parts of the world, from ye highest top of the heavens.
to the very mydle point of the earth, do in their manner declare the glory of
their creator. ij. Match. xij.xliii.
As for that which they allege out of the history of the Machabees, I will
not vouchesaue to answer it, least I should seem to reckon that work in the
nombre of the holy books. But Augustine received it for Canonical. But
first, of what sure credit did he receive it? The Jews (says he) esteem not
the writing of the Machabees as they do the law, the Prophets and the
Psalms, of which the Lord him self has witnessed as of his witnesses,
saying: It was necessary, that all things should be fulfilled that are written
in the law, and the Psalms, and Prophets, concerning me. But it has been
received of the Church not unprofitably, if it be soberly red or heard. Co^tra
g^iu dent. epis^. 2. cap. 23. Luke xxiii.
And Hierome teaches without any doubtinge, that the authori^ie thereof is of
no force to proving of doctrines. And it evidently appears by that old
book, which is entitled under the name of Cypriane, concerning the
exposition of the Creed, that it had no place at all in the old Church. But
why do I here strive without cause? ii. Macha. xv.xxxvi.
As though the author him self does not sufficiently show, how much he is to
be credited, when in the end he craves pardon, (...) he have spoken any thing
not well. Truly he that confesses his writings to need pardon, says
plainly that they are not the oracles of the holy Ghost. Beside that, the
godliness of Judas is praised for none other cause, but for that he had an
assured hope of the last resurrection, when he sent an offrynge for the dead to
Jerusalem. Neither does the writer of that history refer that which Judas
did to be a price of redemption, but that they might be partakers of the
eternal life with the other faithful, that had died for their contrie and
relgio^. This doing was in deed not without superstition and preposterous zele,
but they are more than foles, that draw a sacrifice of the law so far as
unto us: for as much as we know that things do cesse by the coming of
Christ, that then were in use.

But they have an invincible bulwark in Paul, which can not so i. Cor. iii.
gold, silver, precious stones, tynber, heye, stubble, the Lord shall show
every man's work what it is: because it shall be reveled in fire, and the fire
shall try every man's work what it is. If any man's work do burn, it shall
suffer loss, but he shall be safe, but as through the fire. What fire (say
they) can that be, but the fire of Purgatory? by which the filthinesses of
sin are cleansed away, that we may enter pure in to the kingdom of God? But
the most part of the old writers thought it to be an other fire, Chryses^.
August. and other.
that is to say, Trouble or the cross, by which the Lord tries them that
be his, that they should not rest in the filthiness of the flesh: and that is
much more probable, than in fainyng Purgatory. All be it I do neither agree
with these men, because I think I have attained a certain and much plainer
understanding of yt place. But before that I utter it, I would have them
aunsweare me, whether the Apostles and all the saints must have gone through
this fire of Purgatory? I know they will say, nay. For it were to much
inconvenient that they must have neded to be purged, whose merits they dream
to ouerflowe above measure to all the me^bres of the church. But the Apostle
affirms it. For he does not say that the work of some shall be proved, but
the work of all. Neither is this my argument, Enchir. ad Laurent. 68.
but Augustines, which so confuteth that exposition. And (which is more
absurdity) he does not say, that they shall pass through the fire for all
works: but if they have faithfully builded the church, they shall receive
reward when their work is examined with fire. First we see that the Apostle
used a Metaphore, when he called the doctrines invented by man's brains, woed,
hey, and stubble. And the Metaphore has an apparent rescue: that as wood so
sone as it is put in the fire, consumes and wastes, so can not those
doctrines continue when they come to be examined. Now no man is ignorant that
such trial comes of the holy Ghost. Therefore to follow the true cause of his
metaphore, and match the parts together with just relation, he called the
trial of the holy Ghost, fire. For even as the nerer that gold and silver are
put to the fire, so much the surer proof they have of their goodness and
finenesse: so the Lords truth, the more exactlye it is weyed with spiritual
examination, so much the greater confirmation of credit it receives. As hey,
wood, and stubble put to the fire, are brought to sudein consuming, so the
inventions of men not stablyshed by the word of God, can not bear the trial
of the holy Ghost, but they by and by fall away and perish. Finally, if forged
doctrines be compared to wood, hey, and stubble, because like wood, hey, and
stubble, they are burned with fire and destroyed: but they are not destroyed or
driven away but by the spirit of the Lord: it follows that the holy Ghost
is the fire wherewith they shall be proved, whose proof Paul, according to the
common use of the Scripture, calls The day of ye Lord. For it is called the
day of ye Lord, whenever he does any way show his presence to men. But then
his face principally shines, when his truth shines upon us. Now have we
proved, that Paul means no other fire, but the trial of the holy Ghost. But
how are they saved by that fire, that suffer loss of their work? That shall
not be hard to understand, if we consider of what kind of men he speaks.
For he touches those buylders of the church, that keeping the true fundation,
do build disagreing matter upon it, that is to say, they that not swaruing
from ye che^e and necessary articles of faith, do err in points that be
smaler and less perilous, mingling their own devises with the word of God.
Such I say, must suffer loss of their work, having their devises destroyed.
But them selves are saved, but as by the fire: that is to say, not that their
ignorance and error is alowable before the Lord, but because they are
cleansed from it by the grace and power of the holy Ghost. Therefore whosoever
have defiled the golden finenesse of Gods word with this dong of purgatory,
they must needs suffer loss of their work.

other. And it is no dout, but yt even very superstition condemns ye Gentiles
before the judgment seat of God, for neglecting the care of the life to come,
which they professed them selves to believe. Now Christians, because they
would not be worse than Heathen men, were ashamed to do nothing for the dead,
as though they were utterly destroyed. Hereupon came that ill advised
diligence: because if they were slow in looking to the funeralles, in
bankettinges and offeringes, they thought that they had put them selves in
danger of a great reproach. And that which first proceeded from a wrongful
following of the Heathens example, was so multiplied by often new encreasces,
that now it is the principal holiness of Papistrie, Reu. xiiii, xij.
to help the dead in distress. But the Scriture ministers an other much
better and perfecter comfort, when it testifies, that the dead are blessed
that die in the Lord. And it adds a reason: because from thenceforth they
rest from their labors. And we ought not so much tenderly to follow our own
affection of love, to set up a wrongful manner of praying in the church.
Truly he that has but mean wisdom, does sone perceive that all that is
red hereof in the old writers, was done to bear with the common usage, and
the ignorance of the people. They them selves also, I grant, were carried away
into error: even as unadvised lightness of belefe is wont to rob men's wits
of judgment. But in the mean time the very redynge of them does show, how
doubtyngly they commend prayers for the dead. Augustine in his book of
co^fessions, reports that Monica his mother did earnestly desire, that she
might be remembered in celebrating the mysteries at the Altar. An old wives
request, which the son never examined by the rule of the Scripture, but
according to his affection of nature, would have it allowed of other. As for the
book that he made of care for the dead, contains so many doubtinges, that of
right it ought with the coldness thereof to quench the heat of a foolyshe
zele: if any man desire to be a proctor for dead men, truly with cold
lykelyhodes it will bring them out of care that were before careful. For this
is one pillar of it, that this doing is not to be despised, because it is a
custom grown in use, that the dead should be prayed for. But though I grant
to the old writers of the church, that it is a charitable use to help the
dead: yet we must still hold one rule which can not deceive: that it is not
lawefull for us in our prayers to use any thing of our own, but our requests
must be made subject to the word of God: because it is in his will to apoynte
what he will have to be asked. Now where as the whole law and the Gospel do
not so much as in one syllable give liberty to pray for the dead, it is a
profane abuse of the invocation of God to attempt more than he commands us.
But that our adversaries may not boaste that they have the ancient church
companion of their errrour: I say there is great difference between the^ and
it. They used a memorial of the dead, least they should seem to have cast away
all care of them: but they did therwithall confess that they doubted of their
state. As for purgatory, they so affirmed nothing, that they held it for a
thing uncertain. These men require to have yt which they have dreamed of
purgatory, to be holden without question for an article of faith. They
sclenderly and only to pass it lightly over, did in the communion of the holy
supper commend their dead to God: These do continually call upon the care of
the dead, and with importunate praising it, do make it to be preferred above
all dutiefull works of charity. Yea and it were not hard for us to bring
forth some testimonies of the old writers, that do manifestly overthrow all
those prayers for the dead, which then wear used. As this of Augustine, when
he teaches that all men look for the resurrection of the flesh and the
eternal glory and that every man then receives the rest yt follows after
death, Hom. in Joan. 456.
if he be worthy when he dies. And therefore he testifies, that all the Godly
do immediately after death enjoy the blessed rest as well as the Prophets,
Apostles and martyrs. If their estate be such, what I beseech you, shall our
prayers avail them? I pass over the grosser superstitions, wherewith they have
bewitched the minds of the simple: which yet are so innumerable and the most
part so monstrous, that they can have no honest color to excuse them. Also I
let pass those most filthy byings and sellinges that they have used, while ye
world was in such gro^^e senseless ignorance. For both I should never make an
end, and also the readers shall without any rehearsal of them, have here
sufficient, whereupon they may stablishe their consciences.

The sixth Chapter. Of the life of a Christian man: And first by what arguments
the Scripture exhorts us thereunto.
or I will leave that to other, which I my self am not mete to do. I do
naturally love shortness, and peradventure if I would speak more at large,
it would not frame well with me. And if a longer manner of teaching were never
so much pleasyng, yet I would scarce have mind to put it in proof. But the
course of this present work requires to knyt up a simple doctrine with as
great shortness as I may. As the Philosophers have their certain ends of
right and honesty, from which they derive particular duties and all the
company of virtues: so the Scripture is not without her order in this matter:
but holds a most goodly well ordered disposition, and much more certain
than all the Philosophers orders. This only is the difference, that they (as
they were vain glorious men) have diligently endeavored to atteine an
exquisite plainness of order, to show fourth the ready aptness of their
wit. But the Spirit of God, because he taught without curious affectation,
has not so exactely nor continuallye kept an orderly trade: which yet when
he sometime uses he does sufficiently declare, that it is not to be neglected
of us.

This instruction that the Scripture teaches, whereof we now Psa. xxxv.viii.
Psalm. iv.ii.xxiii.
Which as he has hallowed to him self, so is it unlawful that it be
vnholyly profaned by the uncleanness of the inhabitants. From hence came
these sayings, that they shall have a place in the tabernacle of God that
walk without spot, and study to follow righteousness. etc. Because it is
not meet that the Sanctuary whereon he dwells, should be like a stable full
of filthiness.

Mal. i.vi
we are worthy to be condemned of extreme unthankfulness, if we do not
likewise in our behalf show our selves children unto him. Ephe. v.i i.
Iho^. iii.i. Ephe. xv.
Sith Christ has cleansed us with the washing of his blood, and has made
us partakers of this cleansing by baptism, it is not semely that we should be
spotted with new filthiness. Sith he has graffed us into his body, we must
carefullye take heed that we sprincle not any spot or blott upon us that are
his members. Heb..x. i. Cor. vi.
Sith he him self that is our head, is ascended into heaven, it behooves us
that laying away earthly affection, we do with all our heart aspire to
heauenward: Sith the holy Ghost has dedicated us temples to God, we must
endeavor that Gods glory may be honorably set out by us, i. Cor. vi. i. Pet.
i.xv Iho^. xv.iij Ephe. v. Colos. iii. i. Cor. iii. ii. Cor. vi. i. These. v ^v.
and must not do any thing where by we may be profaned with filthynesse of
sin: Sith both our soul and our body are ordained to heavenly incorruption
and an vnperishing crown, we must diligently trauayll, that the same may be
kept pure and uncorrupted unto the day of the Lord. These (I say) be the best
laid foundations to bylde a man's life, and such as the like are not to be
found among the Philosophers, which in commendation of virtue do never climb
above the natural dignity of man.

Ephe. iiii.
But the Apostle says, that all they have not ryghtly learned Christ, that
are not taught that they must cast always the old man which is corrupted
according to the desire of error, and have not put on Christ. Therefore it is
proved that they falsely, yea and wrongfully pretend the knowledge of Christ,
although they can eloquently and roundely talk of the Gospel. For it is not a
doctrine of tongue, but of life: and is not conceived as other learnings be, with
only understanding and memory, but is then only received when it possesses
the whole soul, and finds a seat and place to hold it in the most inward
affection of the heart. Therefore either let the^ cesse, to the sclau^der of
God, to boste of yt which they are not, or let the^ show the^ selves not
unworthy scholars for Christ their master. We have given ye first place to the
doctrine wherein our religion is contained, because our salvation begins at
it: but the same must be poured into our heart, and pass into our ma^ners,
yea and transform us into it, that it be not unfruitful unto us* If ye
Philosophers do justly chafe against the^, and do with shameful reproach drive
the^ from their company, yt professing an art yt ought to be the
scholemaistres of life, do turn it into a Sophistical babbling: with how much
better reason shall we detest these trifling Sophisters, yt are contented to
role the Gospel upon ye top of their tongues, ye effectual working whereof ought
to pearce into the innermost affections of the heart, to rest in the soul, and
to alter the whole man a hundred times more, than the cold exhortations of
Philosophers?

Yet do I not require, that the manners of a Christian man savor of our
selves, till we atteine to goodness it self: which in deed we seek for and
follow all our life long: but we shall then only atteine it, when being
unclothed of the weakness of the flesh, we shall be received into the full
fellowship thereof.

The seventh Chapter. The sum of a Christian life: where is ^utreated of the
forsaking of our selves.
ALbeit that the law of the Lord have a most aptly well disposed order to
frame a man's life, yet it seemed good to the heavenly scholemaister to instruct
me^ yet with a more exact trade to the same rule that he had set fourth in his
law. And the beginning of that trade, is this: that it is the duty of the
faithful to yield their bodies to God a living, Romans xli.i.
holy and acceptable sacrifice unto him: and that therein stands the true
worshipping of him. Hereupon is gathered occasion to exhort men, that they do
not apply them selves to the fashion of this world, but be transformed in
renewinge of their mind, that they may prove what the will of God is. Now this
is a great thing, that we be consecrate and dedicate to God: that we should
from thencefourth think, speak, imagine, or do nothing but to his glory. For
the thing that is consecrate, can not be applied to unholy uses, without great
wrong done unto him. If we be not our own, but the Lords, it appears what
error is to be avoided, and whereunto all the doings of our life are to be
directed. We are not our own: therefore let neither our own reason nor our
own will bear rule in our counselles and doings. We are not our own:
therefore let us not make this the end for us to tend unto, to seek that which
may be expedient for us according to the flesh. We are not our own: thertore
so much as we may, let us forget our selves and all things that are our own.
On the other side, we are Gods: therefore let us live and dye to him. We are
Gods: therefore let his wisdom and will govern all our doings. We are Gods:
therefore let all the parts of our life tend toward him as their only
lawful end. Oh how much has he profited, that having learned that
himself is not his own, has taken from him self the rule and government of
him self to give it to God. To. xiiii.viii.
For as this is ye most strong working pestilence to destroy men, that they
obey themselves: so it is the only haven of safety, neither to know nor will
any thing by him self, but only to follow God going before him. Let this
therefore be the first step, that man depart from him self, that he may
apply all the force of his wit to ye obeying of the Lord. Obeying I call not
only that which stands in obedience of the word, but that whereby the mind
of man, Ephe. iiii.xxiii.
void from his own sensuality of flesh, bends it self wholly to the will
of Gods spirit. Of this trasformation (which Paul calls renewing of the
mind) where as it is the first entry into life, al ye Philosophers were
ignorant. For they make only Reason the gouernesse of man: they think she
only ought to be heard: finally to her only they give and assign the rule of
manners. But the Christian Phylosophie bids her to give place, Gal. i.xx.
and to yield and be subject to the holy ghost: so yt man now may not live
himself, but bear Christ living and reigni^g in him.

things that be our own, but those things that be according to the will of
the Lord, and that make to the advancement of his glory. This is also a proof
of great profiting, that in a manner forgetting our selves, and altogether
leaving ye regard of our selves, we trauail to employ our study to God and his
commandments. For when the Scripture bids us to leave private regard of
our selves, it does not only race out of our minds the covetousness of
having, the gredy seking for power and favor of men: but also roteth out
ambition and al desire of worldly glory, and other more secret pestilences.
Truly a Christian man must be so fashioned and disposed, to think throughout
al his life, that he has to do with God. In this sort, as he shall examine al
his doings by Gods will and judgment: so he shall reverently direct unto him
all the earnestly bent diligence of his mind. For he that has learned to look
upon God in all things that he has to do, is therewithal turned away from
all vain thoughts. This is that forsaking of our selves, which Christ even
from their first beginning of instruction so earnestly gave in charge to his
Disciples: which when it ones has gotten possession in ye heart leaves no
place at all, first neither for pride, nor disdainfulnesse, nor vain glorious
bosting, then neither for couetise, nor filthy lust, nor ryotousnesse, nor
deintinesse, nor for other evils that are engendered of the love of our selves.
Contrariwise whersoeuer it reigns not, there either most filthy vices do
range without shame, or if there be any spice of virtue, it is corrupted with
perverse desire of glory. For show me a man, if thou can, that unless he
have forsaken him self according to the commandment of the Lord, will of
his own free will use goodness among men. For all they that have not ben
possessed with this feling, if they have followed virtue, they have done it at
ye least for praises sake. And all the Philosophers that ever most of all
affirmed that virtue was to be desired for it selfs sake, were puffed up with
so great pride, that it appeared that they desired virtue for no other thing,
but that they might have matter to be proud upon. But God is so nothing at all
deli^ed, neither with those gapers for the peoples breath, nor with these
swelling beasts, that he pronou^ceth yt they have already received their
reward in the world, and makes harlottes and Publicanes nerer to the kingdom
of heaven, than them. And yet we have not thoroughly declared with how many and
how great stoppes man is hinders from that which is right, so long as he has
not forsaken him self. For it was truly said in time past, that there is a
world of vices hidden in the soul of man. And thou can find no other
remedies, but denying thy self, and leaving regard of thy self, to bend thy
mind to seek those things that the Lord requires of thee, and to seek them
therefore only because they please him.

In an other place the same Paul does more plainly, although shortly, Tit.
ii.xii.
saying: The grace of God that brings salvation unto all men, has appeared
and teaches us, that we should deny all ungodliness, and worldly lusts, and
that we should live sobre minded, ryghteously and Godly in this present world,
loking for the blessed hope and glorious appearing of ye mighty God, and of our
savior Jesus Christ, which gave him self for us to redeem us from all
unrighteousness, and to purge us a peculiar people unto him self fervently
given unto good works. For after that he has set forth the grace of God to
encourage them, to make ready the way for us to worship God, he takes away
two steps that do most hinder us, that is to say, Ungodliness, whereunto
we are naturally to much inclined, and Worldly desires, which extend
further. And under the name of ungodliness, he not only means superstitions,
but also comprehends all that disagreeth with the earnest fear of God. And
worldly lusts are in effect as much as the affections the flesh. Therefore he
commands us in respect of both the tables of ye law, to put of our own
wit, and to forsake all that our own reason and will informs us. And all the
doings of our life he brings into three parts, sobriety, righteousness,
and godliness: of the which sobriety without doubt signifies as well
chastity and temperaunce, as a pure and measurably sparing use of temporal
things, and a pacient sufferance of poverty. Righteousness contains all the
duties of equity, to give every man his own. The third is Godliness, that
seuereth us from the defilinges of the world, and with true holiness joins
us to God. These things, when they be knyt together with an inseperable knot,
make a full perfection. But for as much as nothing is more hard, than
forsaking the reason of the flesh, yea subduing and renouncing her desires, to
give our selves to God and our brethren, and to study for an angelike life in
the filthy state of this earth: therefore Paul, to loose our minds from all
snares, calls us back to the hope of blessed immortality, admonishing us not
to strive in vain: because as Christ has ones appeared the redemer, so at his
last coming, he shall show the fruit of the salvation that he has purchaced.
And thus he drives away the enticementes that blind us, and make us not to
aspire as we ought to the heavenly glory: yea and he teaches that we must
trauaill as men being from home in this world, that the heavenly inheritance
be not lost or fall away from us.

Romans xii.xx. Phi. ii.iii.
and partly, yea chiefly to God. For where as the scripture bids us so to
behave our selves with men, that we prefer them before us in honor, that we
faithfully employ our selves wholly to procure their commodities: therefore it
greueth such commandments as our mind is not able to receive, but first
being made void of natural sense. For (with such blyndnesse we run all
into love of our selves) every man thinks him self to have a just cause to
advance him self, and to despise all other in comparison of him self. If God
have given us any good gift, by and by bearing our selves bold thereof we lift
up our courage, and not only swell, but in a manner burste with pride. The vices
wherewith we abound, we do both diligently hyde from other, and to our selves we
flatteringly feign them light and scle^der, and sometime embrace them for
virtues. And if the same good gifts, which we praise in our selves, or better
do appear in other, least we should be compelled to give place to them, we do
with our enuiousnesse deface them and find fault with them. If there be any
faults in them, we are not contented severely and sharply to mark it, but we
also odiously amplify it. Hereupo^ grows that insolence, that every one of
us, as though he were priuileged from the common estate, would be hier than the
rest, and carelessly and proudely set light by every man, or despise the^ as
inferiors. The poor yield to ye rich, base people to gentlemen, servants to
their masters, unlearned to the learned: but there is no man that does not
nourish within himself some opinion of excellency. So every man in flatteryng
himself, bears a certain kingdom in his breast. For presumptuously taking
upon them somewhat whereby to please themselves, they judge upon the wits and
manners of other men. But if they come to contention, there bursteth out
their poison. For many do make a show of great meekness, so long as they
find all things gentle and lovely: but how many a one is there that keeps
that continual course of modesty, when he is pricked and stirred to anger?
And there is no remedy hereof* but that the most hurtful pestilence of love,
of sovereignty and self love be rooted out of the bottom of their hearts,
as it is rooted out by the doctrine of the Scripture. For there we are so
taught, that we must remember that the good gifts that God has given us, are
not our own good things, but the free gifts of God, whereof if any be proud,
they bewraye their own vntha^kefulnesse. Who makes thee to excel? i. Cor.
iiij.vij.
Paul says, if thou haste received al things, why do thou boste as if
they were not given thee? Then, that we must with continual reknowledgyng of
our faul^es, call our selves ^^ck to humility. So shall there remain in us
nothing to be proud (...), but there shall be much matter to abace our selves.
Again, we (...) commanded, whatsoever gifts of God we see in other men, so
to reverence and esteem those gifts, that we also honor those men in whom
they be. For it were a great lewdness for us, to take from the^ that honor, ye
God has vouchesaued to give the^. As for their faults, we are taught to wink
at them, not to cherish them with flattering, (...) that we should not by
reason of those faults triumph against (...), to whom we ought to bear good
will and honor. So shall it ^ome to pass, that with what man so ever we have
to do, we shall ^chaue our selves not only temperatly and modestly, but also
gently and friendly. As a man shall never come any other way to true meekness,
but if he have a heart endued with abacyng of himself, and reuerencyng of
other.

Now how hard is it, for thee to do thy duty in sekyng the profit of i. Cor
x^^.iiij.
Charity (says he) is patient and gentle, not proud, not disdaynefull,
enuieth not, swells not, seeks not her own, is not angry, etc. If this one
thing be required, that we seek not the things that are our own, we shall do
no small violence to nature, which so bends us to the only love of our
selves, that it does not easily suffer us negligently to pass over our selves
and our own things, to watch for other men's commodities, yea to depart with
our own right to re^igne it to an other. But the Scripture, to lead us
thither as it were by the hand, warns us that what so ever gracious gifts we
obtain of the Lord, they are committed unto us upon this condition, that they
should be bestowed to the common benefit of the church: and that therefore the
true use of al Gods graces is a liberal and bountiful communicating of them to
other. There can be no certain rule, nor more forceable exhortation could be
devised for the keeping of the same, tha^ when we be thaught that all the good
gifts that we have, are things of God delivered, committed to our trust upon
this condition, that they should be disposed to the benefit of our neighbors.
But ye Scripture goes yet further, when it co^pareth them to the powers
wherewith the members of man's body are endued. No member has his power for
himself, nor applies it to his private use: but pours it abroad into the
other members of the same body, and takes no profit thereof, but such as
proceeds from the common commodity of the whole body. So whatsoever a godly
man is able to do, he ought to be able to do it for his brethren, in providing
none otherwise privately for himself, but so that his mind be bent to the
common edificatio^ of the church. Let this therefore be our order for kindness
and doing good: that whatsoever God has bestowed upon us, whereby we may help
our neighbor, we are ye Baylies thereof, and bound to render account of the
disposyng of it. And that the only right disposing is that which is tried by ye
rule of love. So shall it come to pass, that we shall always not only join the
trauail for other men's commodity with the care of our own profit, but also
set it before the care of our own. And that we should not happen to be
ignorant that this is the true law of disposyng all the gifts that we receive
of God, he has in the old time set the same law even in the smalest gifts
of his liberality. Exo. xxij.xxix. and xxiij xix.
For he commanded the first fruits of corn to be offered unto him, by which
the people might testify that it was unlawful for them to take any fruit of
the goods that were not first consecrate to him. If the gifts of God be so
only then sanctified unto us, when we have with our own hand dedicate them
to the author thereof, it is evident that it is an untrue abuse thereof that
does not favor of such dedication. But it shall be vain for thee to go about
to enriche the Lord with communicatyng to him of thy things. Therefore sith
thy liberality can not extend unto him, Ps. xvi.iij. Heb. xiij.xvi.
as the Prophet says, thou must use it toward his saints that are in earth.
Therefore alms are compared to holy oblations, that they may now be
correspondent to these of the law.

i. Cor. xiij.iiij.
that charity is patie^t and not moved to anger. The Lord commands to do
good to al universally, of who^ a great part are most unworthy, if they be
considered by their own deserving. But here ye Scripture helps with a very
good mean, when it teaches that we must not have respect what me^ deserve of
themselves, but that the image of God is to be considered in all men, to which
we owe all honor and love. But the same is most diligently to be marked in
the^ of the householde of says, Gal. vi.x.
in so much as it is in them renewed and restored by the Spirit of Christ.
Therefore whatsoever man thou light upon, that needs thy help, thou have no
cause to withdraw they self from doing him good. If thou say that he is a
stranger: but ye lord has given him a mark, ye ought to be familiar unto
thee, by the reason that he forbids thee to despise thine own flesh. Esa.
iviij.vii.
If thou say yt he is base and naught worth: but the lord shows him to be
such a one, to whom he has vouchesaued to give the beauty of his image. If
thou say that thou owe him nothing for any thing that he has done for thee:
but God has set him as it were in his place, in respect of whom, thou know
so many and so great benefits wherewith he has bound thee unto him. If thou
say yt he is unworthy that thou should labor any thing at al for his sake:
but the image of God whereby he is commended to thee, is worthy that thou
should give thy self and all that thou have unto it. But if he have not
only deserved no good at thy hand, but also provoked thee with wrongs and
evil doings: Matt. vi.xxiiii. and xviij.xxxv.
even this is no just cause why thou should cesse both to love him and to do
for him the dutiful works of love. Thou will say, he has far otherwise
deserved of me. But what has ye Lord deserved? Which when he commands thee
to forgive all wherein he has offended thee, truly he wills the same to be
imputed to himself. Luc. xvij.iij.
Truly, this is ye only way to come to that which is utterly against the
nature of man, much more is it hard for man. I mean, to love them that hate
us, to recompense euel with doing good, Matthew. v.xliiij.
to render blessings for reporches: if we remember that we must not consider
the malice of men, but look upon the image of God in the^, which defacing and
blotting out their faults, does with the beauty and dignity of it self
allure us to embrace it.

Therefore this Mortification shall then only take place in us, when that it is a
payement of that which being due by the law of nature it were monstrous to
deny. And by this reason it shall follow, that he may not think himself
discharged that has performed one kind of duty, as it is commonly used, that
when a rich manne has given any thing of his own, he leaves other charges
to other men, as not belongyng to him. But rather every manne shall think thus
with himself, that he is altogether detter to his neighbors, and that he must
determine none other end of vsyng his liberality, but when ability fails,
which how large so ever it be, must be measured by the rule of charity.



leaving to the favor of men, nor trustyng upon a vain imagination of
fortune, but that we always look unto the Lord, to be led by his guidyng to
what so ever lot he has provided. So first it shall come to pass, that we
shall not violently rush to the catchyng of richesse and inuadynge of honors,
by wrong, by guile and evil crasty means, or extortion with doing injury to
our neighbors, but shall only follow those fortunes that may not lead us
from innocence. For who may hope for the help of Gods blessyng among
frauds, extortio^s, and other subtle means of wickedness? For as Gods
blessing follows no man but him that thinks purely, and does rightly, so
it calls back all them of whom it is desired, from crooked thoughts, and
corrupt doings. The^, we shall be bridled that we burn not with inmeasurable
desire of growyng rich, nor ambitiously gape for honors. For with what face
may a man trust to be helped of God, to obtain those things that he desires
against his word? For God forbid that God should give the help of his
blessyng to that which he curses with his own mouth. Last of all, if it
succeed not according to our wish and hope, yet we shall be restrained from
impatience, and from cursyng our estate what soever it be: because we know that
that is to murmr against God, at whose will richesse and poverty, baseness
and honors are disposed. Brefely, he that rests himself in such sort as is
aforesaid upon the blessyng of God, neither will by evil suttelties hunt for
those things that men are wont outragiously to covet, by which crafty
means he thinks that he shall nothing prevail: nor if any thing happen
prosperously will impute if to himself, and to his own diligence endeavor or
to fortune, but will assign it to God the author. But if while other men's
estates do flourish, he go but sclenderly forward, yea or slide backward, yet
he will bear his ill fortune with greater quietness and moderation of mind,
than a profane manne will bear a meanly good success, which is not
altogether so good as he desired: because he has a comfort wherein he may
more quietly rest, than upon the hiest top of wealth and authority: because
he accompteth that his things are ordered by God as is auailable for his
salvation. So we see that David was minded, Ps. c.xxxi.
and yeldeth himself to be ruled by God, he declares himself to be like to a
weyned child, and that he walks not in hye things or marvelous above
himself.

And the godly minds ought to have that quietness and suffera^ce children or
kinsfolks are taken away by death, our house is consumed with fire: these be
the things at chauncyng whereof men curse their life, derest the day of their
birth, have heaven and light in execration, murmr against God, and (as they
be eloquent in blasphemies) accuse him of injustice and cruelty. But a
faithful manne must even in these chances behold the merciful kindness
and fatherly tenderness of God. Therefore whether he see his house destroyed,
his kinsefolke slain, yet he will not therefore cesse to praise God, but rather
will turn himself to this thought: yet the Grace of the Lord that dwells in
my house, will not leave it desolate. Or if when his corn is blasted or
bitten, or consumed with frostes, or beaten down with hayle, he see famine at
hand, yet he will not despeyr, nor speak hatefully of God, Ps. ixxix.x^ij.
but will remain in this confidence, We are yet in the Lords protection, and
sheep brought up in his pastures: he therefore will find us food even in
extremest barrenness. Or if he be troubled with sickness, eue^ then he will
not be discouraged with bitterness of sorrow, to burst out into impatience and
quarrel thus with God: but considering the righteousness and lenity in gods
correction, he will call himself back to patience. Finally, what so ever shall
happen, because he knows it ordained by the hand of God, he will take it with
a well pleased and thankful mind, least he should stubbornly resist his
authority, into whose power he has yielded himself and all his. Therefore let
that foolish and most miserable comfort of the Heathen be far from a Christian
man's heart, which to stre^gthen their minds against adversities, did impute
the same to fortune, with whom they co^pted it ^oolish to be angry, because
she was blind and unadvised, that blindely wounded both the deserving and
vndeseruyng. For contrariwise this is the rule of godliness, that the only
hand of God is the judge and gouernesse of both fortunes, and that it runs
not forward with unadvised sodeyne rage, but with most orderly justice deals
among us both good things and evil.

The eight Chapter. Of the bearyng of the cross, which is a part of the
forsakyng of our selves.
Mat. xvi.^^^^^.
For all whom the Lord has chosen and vouchesaued to receive into his
company, must prepare themselves to a hard, trauailsome and unquiet life, and
full of many and diverse kinds of inco^modities. So it is the will of the
heavenly father, to exercise the^ in such sort, that he may have a true proof
of them that be his. Beginning at Christ, his first begotten son, he
proceeds with this order toward al his children. Matt. iii.xvii. ^ xvii.v.
For whereas Christ was the best beloved son above the rest, and in whom the
fathers mind was fully pleased, yet we see how he was not te^derly and
deintily handeled: so that it may be truly said, yt he was not only exercised
with a perpetual cross so long as he dwelled in earth, but that at his life
was nothing else but a kind of continual cross. The Apostle shows the
cause thereof to be, that it behooved that he should learn obedience by those
things that he suffered. Why then should we privilege our selves from that
estate, whereunto it behooved Christ our head to be subject, specially sith he
became subject thereunto for our cause, to show us an example of patience in
himself? Therefore the Apostle says that this is the appointed end for all the
children of God, To. viij.i^.
to be fashioned like unto him. Whereupon also in hard and sharp chances,
which are reckened adversities and euels, arises a great comfort unto us, that
we communicate with the suffringes of Christ: that as he entered out of a maze
of all troubles into the heavenly glory, so we may by diverse tribulations be
brought into the same glory. For so says Paul himself, Act. xiiij.xxii.
Phil. iij.x
that when we learn the communicating of his afflictions, we do also conceive
the power of his resurrection: and when we are fashioned like unto his death,
we are so prepared to the fellowship of his glorious risyng again. How much
may this avail to aswage all the painfulness of the cross, that the more
we are afflicted with adversities, so much the more surely is our fellowship
with Christ confirmed? by communicating whereof, our suffringes are not only
made blessed unto us, but also do much help us to the furtherance of our
salvation.

Byside that, our Lord had no need to take upon him to bear the Ps. xxx.vi^
I said in my rest, I shall never be moved. Lord, thou had stablished in thy
good pleasure a strength to my hill, thou hiddest away thy face, I was
stricken. For he confesses that with sluggishnesse in prosperity his senses
were dulled, that not regardyng the grace of God, upon which he should have
hanged, he leaned unto himself, to promise himself perpetual continuance. If
this chanced to so great a Prophet: which of us ought not to be fearful, that
we may be heedefull? Therefore whereas in prosperity they flatter themselves
with opinion of a greater constancy and patience, when they are ones humbled
with adversity, they learn that their former opinion was but hypocrisy. The
faithful (I say) being admonished by such examples of their diseases, do
thereby profit to humility, that being unclothed of the wrongful confidence
of the flesh, they may resort to the grace of God. And where they are ones
come to his grace, they feel the presence of Gods strength, wherein is
abundantly sufficent succor ^or them.

To. v.iij.
by patience proof. For whereas God has promised the faithful that he will be
present with them in troubles, they feel the same to be true, when they stand
patiently, being vpholden by his hand, which by their own strength they were
not able to do. Patience therefore brings a proof by experience to the holy
ones, that God when need requires, will in deed perform ye help that he
has promised. And thereby also their hope is confirmed: for as much as it were
to much unthankfulness not to look for in time to come, the same truth of God
that they had already by experience proved to be constant and sure. We see now
how many good things do come unto us in one knot by the cross. For,
ouerthrowyng the opinion that we falsely presume of our own strength, and
disclosing our hypocrisy that deliteth us, it shakes away the hurtful
confidence of the flesh, and teaches us being so humbled, to rest upon God
only, by which it comes to pass, that we neither be oppressed nor fall
down. And after victory follows hope, in so much as the Lord in performing
that which he has promised, stablisheth the credit of his truth for time to
come. Truly, although there were no more reasons but these, it appears how
much the exercise of the cross is necessary for us. For it is a matter of no
small importance, to have the blind love of thy self wiped away, that thou
may well know thine own weakness. To feel thine own weakness, that thou
may learn to distrust thy self: to distrust thy self, that thou may
remove thy confidence from thy self unto God: to rest with confidence of heart
upon God, that being vpholden by his help, thou may continue vnouercomme to
the last end: to stand fast by his grace, that thou may understand that he
is true in his promises: to know by proof the truth of his promises, that thy
hope may be strengthened thereby.

Genesis xij.j.
by this that he refused not to offer up in sacrifice his own and only son.
Therefore Peter teaches, that our faith is so proved in troubles, (...). vij
as gold is tried in a furnace: And who can say that it is not expedient,
that the most noble gift of patience, which a faithful man has received of
his God, should be brought forth into use, that it may be made certainly known
and manifest? For otherwise men will not esteem it as it is worthy. Now if God
himself does rightfully when he ministers matter to stir up the virtues that
he has given to his faithful, that they should not lie hidden, yea lie
unprofitable and perish: then is there good reason of the afflictions of the
holy ones, without which there patience should be nothing. I say also that by
the cross they are instructed to obedience, because they are so taught to live
not after their own wish, but after the will of God. Truly if all things
should flow unto them after their own mind, they would not know what it were
to follow God. De uit^ bed a^a cap. 15.
And Seneca reherseth that this was an old Proverb, when they exhorted any
man to suffer adversities, Follow God. By which they declared, that then only
me^ truly entered under the yoke of God, when he yielded his hand and back to
Gods correction. Now if it be most righteous, that we should show our selves
in all things obedient to the heavenly father, then we ought not to refuse,
that he should by all means accustom us to yield obedience unto him.

But yet we perceive not how necessary this obedience is for us, Deu. xxxii^
xv.
And this is continual in us that God co^playneth to have been in the people of
Israel, that being well fed and covered with fatness, we kick against him that
fed and nourished us. The liberality of God should in deed have allured us to
consider and love his goodness, but for as much as our evil nature is such,
that we are always corrupted with his tender usage, it is more than necessary
for us, to be restrained by some discipline, that we run not outragiously
into such a stubborn wantonnese. So, that we should not grow fierce with
unmeasurable abundance of richesse, that we should not wax proud being lifted
up with honors, that we should not become insolent, being puffed up with other
good gifts, either of the soul, body or fortune, the lord himself, as he
foreseeth it to be expedient, preuenteth it, and with the remedy of the cross
subdueth and bridleth the fearcenesse of our flesh, and that diverse ways, so
much as is healthful for every man. For all are not a like sick of all one
diseases, or do a like need of hard healyng. And thereupon is to be seen how
some are exercised with one kind of cross, and some with an other. But
whereas the heavenly Physician handles some more ge^tly, and purges some with
sharper remedies, when he means to provide for the health of all: yet he
leaves none free or untouched, because he knows all without exception to be
diseased.

Moreover* the most merciful father needs not only to prevent ought not
chefely to ground our exhortation to patience upon the acknowlegyng of sin.
For the Scripture ministers us a far better consideration, i. Cor. xi.viij.
when it says, that the Lord corrects us with adversities, that we should
not be damned with this world. Therefore we ought even in the very sharpness
of tribulations to acknowledge the kindness and goodness of our father toward
us, for as much as eue^ then he cesseth not to further our salvation. For he
does afflict, not to destroy or kill us, but rather to deliver us from the
damnation of the world. That thought shall lead us to that, which the
Scripture teaches in an other place: Pro. iij.xi.
My son, refuse not the Lords correction, nor be weary when thou shall be
rebuked of him. For whom the Lord loves, he corrects, and embraces him as
a father does his child. When we know his rod to be y^ rod of a father, is it
not our duty rather to show our selves obedient children and willing to
learn, than with obstinatie to do like desperate men, that are hardened with
evil doings? The Lord leseth us, unless he call us back by correction when
we are fallen away from him: so that the author of the Epistle to the
Hebrews rightly says that we are bastardes, Hebr. xij.viij.
and not children if we be out of correction. Therefore we are most froward, if
we can not suffer him when he declares his good will and the care that he has
for our salvation. This y^ Scripture teaches to be the difference between the
unbelievers and the faithful, that the unbelievers as the bond slaves of a rooted
and hardened wickedness, are made the worse and more obstinate with whippyng:
the faithful, like children having an honest freedom of nature, do thereby
profit to repe^ta^ce. Now must thou choose of whether number thou will be. But
because I have spoken of this matter in an other place, I am content to touch
it briefly, and so will make an end.

Mat. v.x.
Poverty in deed, if it be considered in it self, is miserable: likewise
banishment, conte^ptious estate, prisonment, shame: Finally, death is the
uttermost of all calamities. But when the favor of our God breaths upon us,
there is none of al these things, but it turns to our felicity. Therefore let
us rather be content with the testimony of Christ, than with the false estimation
of ye flesh. So shall it come to pass, that we shall rejoice as the Apostles
did, when God shall account us worthy to suffer reproach for his name. For why?
If we being innocent, and knowing our selves clear in our conscience, are by
the nougthy dealyng of wicked men spoiled of our goods: we are in deed brought
to poverty thereby among men, but so richesse do truly grow unto us in
heaven before God. If we be thrust out of our houses, we are the more inwardly
received into the household of God. If we be vexed and despised, we take so
much the deper roots in Christ. If we be noted with reproaches and shame, we
are in so much the more honorable place in the kingdom of God. If we be
slain, so is the entry made open for us unto blessed life. Let us be ashamed
to esteem less these things, upon which the Lord has set so great a price,
than shadowysh and fickle enticyng pleasures of present life.

Sith therefore the Scripture does with these and like admonitions i. Pet.
iiii.xii.
whereby Christ will be glorified in us. As also Peter teaches. But it is more
grievous to gentle natures to suffer shame than a hundred deaths: i. Tim. iiii
x.
therefore Paul expressly admonishes that we shall not only suffer
persecutions, but also reproaches, because we trust in the living God. As in an
other place he teaches us after his example to walk through sclaunder and
good report. ii. Cor. vi.viii.
Yet there is not required of us such a cherefulnesse as may take away all
felyng of bitterness and sorrow, or else the patience of the holy ones in the
cross were no patience, unless they should be both tormented with sorrow and
vexed with grefe. If there were no hardiness in poverty, no pain in
sickness, no grefe in shame, no horror in death, what valia^tnesse or
temperance were it to bear them indifferently? But when every one of these
does with the natural bitterness thereof bitte the hearts of us all, herein
does the valiantness of a faithful man show it self, if being assayed with
the felyng of such bitterness, how grievously so ever he be troubled with it,
yet with valiantly resistyng he overcomes it, his patience utters it self
herein, if being sharply provoked, he is yet so bridled with the fear of God,
that he bursteth not out into any diste^per. His cherefulnesse appears herein,
if being wounded with sadness and sorrow, he rests upon the spiritual
comfort of God.

This conflict, which the faithful do sustain against the natural ii. Cor.
iiii, viii.
We are put to distress in all things, but we are not made sorrowful: we
labor, but we are not left destitute: we suffer persecution, but we are not
forsaken in it: we are throwe^ down, but we perish not. You see how to bear
the cross patiently, is not to be altogether astonished and without al felyng
of sorrow. As the Stoikes in old time did foolishly describe a valiant hearted
man, to be such a one as puttyng of all nature of man, was a like moved in
prosperity and in adversity, in sorrowful and ioyefull state, yea such a
one as like a stone was mo^ed with nothing. And what have they profited with
this hye wisdom? Forsothe they have painted out such an image of wisdom as
never was found, and never can herafter be among me^: But rather while they
coueted to have to exact and precise a patience, they have taken away all the
use of patience out of man's life. And at this day also among Christians there
are new Stoikes, that reckon it a fault not only to groan and w^pe, but also
to be sad and careful. But these strange conclusions do commonly proceed from
idle men, which busieng themselves rather in speculation than doing, can do
nothing but bread us such new found doctrines. But we have nothing to do with
that stony Philosophy, which our master and Lord has condemned not only by
his word but also by his example. For he mourned and wept both at his own and
other men's adversities. Ioh. xvii.xx.
The world (says he) shall rejoice, but you shall mourn and weep. And
because no man should find fault therewith, by his open proclamation, he has
pronounced them blessed that mourn. Matthew. v.iiij. Luc. xxii.xliiij.
And no marvel. For if all weeping be blamed, what shall we judge of the Lord
himself, out of whose body dropped blouddy tears? If every fear be noted of
infidelity, what shall we judge of that quakyng fear, wherewith we read that
he was not sclenderly stricken. If all sadness be mislyked, how shall we like
this, that he confesses his soul to be sad even to the death?

Ih. xxi.x.
When thou waste young thou did gird thy self, and did walk whether thou
would: But when thou art old, an other shall gyrde thee and lead thee
whither thou shall not be willing. Neither is it likely that Peter, when the
time came that he must glorify God by his death, was drawn unwillingly and
resistyng unto it. Else his martyrdom should have but small praise. But how so
ever he did with great cherefulnesse of heart obey the ordinance of God, yet
because he had not put of the nature of man, he was doubly strayned with two
sorts of wills. For when he did by himself consider the bloudly death that
he should suffer, being stryken with horror thereof, he would gladly have
escaped it. On the other side, when it came in his mind, that he was called
unto it by the commandment of God, then conqueryng and treadyng down fear,
he gladly, yea and cherefully took it upon him. This therefore we must endeavor
if we will be the Disciples of Christ, that our minds be inwardly filled with
so great a reverence and obedience to God, as may tame and subdue to his
ordinance all contrary affections. So shall it come to pass, that with
whatsoever kind of cross we be vexed, eue^ in the greatest anguishes of
mind, we shall constantly keep patience. For adversities shall have their
sharpness, wherewith we shall be bitten: so when we are afflicted with sickness,
we shall both groan and be disquieted and desire health: so being pressed with
poverty, we shall be pricked with the s^inges of carfulness and sorrow: so
shall we be stricken with grefe of shame, contempt and injury: so shall we
yield due tears to nature at the burial of our friends: but this always shall be
the conclusion, But the lord willed so. therefore let us follow his will. Yea
even in the midst of the prickynges of sorrow, in the midst of mourning and
tears, this thought must needs come between, to incline our heart to take
cherefully the very same things, by reason whereof it is so moved.

But for as much as we have taken the chief cause of bearyng the thanks
geuyng, which can not be without joy. But if the praise of the Lord and
thanks geuyng proceeds of nothing but of a chereful and joyful heart, and
there is nothing yt ought to interrupt the same praising of God and
thankesgeuyng in us: hereby appears how necessary it is that the bitterness
of the cross be tempered with spiritual joy.

The.ix. Chapter. Of the meditation of the life to come.
BUt with what so ever kind of trouble we be distressed, a contempt of this
present life.

For between these two there is no mean, the earth must either become

But let the faithful accustom themselves to such a despisyng of examples:
and these be the benefits that are daily bestowed upon us. Sith therefore
this life serves us to understand the goodness of God, shall we disdain it as
though it had not a cru^me of goodness in it? We must therefore put on this
felyng and affection, to reckon it among the gifts of goodness that are not
to be refused. For though there wanted testimonies of Scripture, of which there
are both many and most evident, very nature it self does exhort us to give
thanks to the Lord, for that he has brought us into the light of it, that he
grants us the use of it, that he gives us all necessary succors for the
preservation of it. And this is a much greater reason, if we consider that we
are in it after a certain manner prepared to the glory of the heavenly
kingdom. For so the Lord has ordained that they which in time to come
shall be crowned in heaven, must fight certain battles in earth, that they
should not triumph, till they had overcome the hard adventures of the battle,
and obtained the victory. Then an other reason is, yt we do by diverse
benefits begin therein to taste the sweetness of Gods liberality, that our
hope and desire should be whetted to long for the reuelyng thereof. When this
is determined, that it is a gift of Gods clemency that we live this earthly
life, for which as we be bound unto him, so we ought to be mindful and
thankful: the^ we shall in fit order come to consider the most miserable estate
thereof, to this end yt we may be delivered from to much gredinesse of it,
whereunto as I have before said, we are of our selves naturally inclined.

ii. Cor. v.vi.
we wander abroad from the Lord. Therefore if the earthly life be compared with
the heavenly life, doutlesse it ought to be despised and trodden under foot.
But it is never to be hated, but in respect that it holds us in subjection to
sin, and yet that hatred is not properly to be laid upon our life. But how
so ever it be, yet we must be so moved either with werinesse or hatred of it,
that desiring the end of it, we may be also ready at the will of the Lord to
abide in it: so yt our werinesse may be far from all grudging and impatience.
For it is like a place in battle array, wherein the Lord has placed us, which
we ought to keep till he call us away. Romans vii.xxiiii.
Paul in deed lame^teth his state that he is holden bond in the bonds of the
body longer than he wyshed, and sigheth with fervent desire of his redemption:
nevertheless to obey the commandment of the Lord, he professed him self
ready to both, Philip. i.xxiii.
because he acknowledges himself to owe this unto God, to glorify his name,
either by death or life: and that it is in God to determine what is most
expedient for his glory. Therefore if we must live and die to the Lord, let us
leave to his will the time of our life and death: but so that we be still
fervent in desire of death, and be continually occupied in meditation thereof,
and despise this life in comparison of the immortality to come, and wyshe to
forsake it when it shall please the Lord, because of the bondage of sin.

But this is monstrous, that instead of that desire of death, many ii. Cor.
v.i
For Paul does very well teach, that the faithful ought to go cherefully to
death: not because they would be unclothed, but because they desire to be newly
clothed. Shall brute beasts, yea and lifeles creatures, even stocks and
stones, Romans viii.xix.
knowing their present vanity, be earnestly bent to loking for the last day of
the resurrection, that they may with the children of God be delivered from
vanity, and shall we that are endued with the light of wit, and above wit
enlightened with the spirit of God, when it stands upon our being, not lift
up our minds beyond this rottenness of earth? But it pertains not to my
present purpose, nor to this place, to speak against this perverseness. And in
the beginning I have alredie professed, that I would not here take upon me the
large handlinge of common places. I would counsel such fearful minds, to
read Cyprians book of Mortality, unless they were mete to be sent to the
Philosophers, that they may begin to be ashamed when they se the contempt of
death that those do show. But this let us hold for certainly determined, that
no man has well profited in Christ's schole, but he that does joyfully look
for the day both of death and of the last resurrection. For both Paul
describes all the faithful by this mark, ^.
and also it is common in the Scripture, to call us thither as often as it will
set forth a ground of perfect gladness. ^.
Rejoice (says the Lord) and lift up ^our heads, for your redemption comes
nere at hand. Is it reasonable, I pray you, yt the thing which he willed to
be of so great force to raise up joy and cherefulnesse in us, should bread
nothing but sorrow and discouragement? If it be so, why do we still boast of
him as our Scholemaster? Let us therefore get a sounder mind, and howsoever
the blind and senseless desire of the flesh do strive against it, let us not
doubt to wish for the coming of the Lord, not only with wishinge, but also
with groaning and sighing, as a thing most happy of all other. For he shall come
a redemer to us, to draw us out of this infinite gulf of euels and miseries,
and to lead us into that blessed inheritance of his life and glory.

To. viii.xx^vi. i. Cor. xv.xix.
must be as sheep appointed to slaughter, that they mate be fashioned like
Christ their head. Therefore they were in most lamentable case, unless they
had their mind raised up into heaven, and surmounted all that is in the
world, and passed over the present face of things. Contrariwise, when they
have ones lif^ed their heads above all earthly things, although they see the
wealth and honors of the wicked storyshing, if they see them enjoying quiet
peace if they see them proud in gorgiousnesse and sumptuousness of all
things, if they see them to stowe in plentiful store of al delites, by side
that if they be spoiled by their wickedness, if they sustain reproachful
dealinges at their pride, if they be robbed by their covetousness, if they be
vexed by any other outrage of theirs: they will easily uphold themselves in
such aduersyties. For that day shall be before their eyes, Esa. xxv.xvii. Revel.
vii.xvii.
when the Lord shall receive his faithful into the quiet of his kingdom,
when he shall wipe all tears from their eyes, when he shall clothe them with
the robe of glory and gladness, when he shall feed them with the vnspeable
swetnesse of his deinties, when he shall advance them to the fellowship of
his hie estate: ynally when he shall vouchesaue to enterparten his felicity
with them. But these wicked ones that have floryshed in the ear^he, he shall
throw into extreme shame, he shall change their delites into torments, their
laughing and mirth into weping and gnasshing of tethe, he shall disquiet their
peace with terrible torment of conscience, he shall punish their deintinesse
with unquenchable fire, and shall put their heads in subjection to those godly
men, whose patience they have abused. i. These. i.vi.
For this is righteousness (as Paul testifies) to give release to the
miserable and to them that are unjustly afflicted, and to render affliction to
the wicked that do afflict the godly, when the Lord Jesus shall be reveled
from heaven. This truly is our only comfort, which if it be taken away, we
must of necessity either despeir, or flatteringly delight our selves with the
vain comfortes of the world to our own destruction. Ps. lxxiii.
For even the Prophet confesses that his fete stagged, when he tarried to
long upon considering the present prosperity of the wicked: and that he
could not otherwise stand steadfast, but when he entered into the sanctuary
of God, and bended his eyes to the last end of the godly and the wicked. To
conclude in one word, then only the cross of Christ triumphs in the hearts
of the faithful upon the Devil, flesh, sin and the wicked, when our eyes
are turned to the power of the resurrection.

The tenth Chapter. How we ought to use this present life, and the helps
thereof.
BY such introductions the Scripture does also well inform

Let this be a principle: that ye use of Gods gifts swarueth not out self
has created and appointed them for us, for as much as he has created them
for our good and not for our hurt. Therefore no man can keep a righter way, than
he that shall diligently look unto this end. Now if we consider to what end he
has created meats, we shall find that he meant to make provision not only
for necessity but also for delight and pleasure. So in apparel, beside
necessity he appointed an other end, which is comeliness and honesty. In
herbs, trees, and fruits, beside diverse profitable uses, there is also a
pleasantness of sight, and sweetness of smell. For if this were not true, the
Prophet would not reckon among the benefits of God that wine makes glad the
heart of man, Psa. c.iiii.xv.
and that oil makes his face to shine: the Scripture would not echewhere, to
set fourth his liberality, rehearse that he has given all such things to
men. And the very natural qualities of things do sufficiently show, to what
end and how far we may use them. Shall the Lord have set in flowers so great
a beutie, as presents it self to our eyes: shall he have given so great a
sweetness of savor as naturally flows into our smelling: and shall it be
unlawful either for our eyes to take the use of that beauty, or for our
smelling to feel that sweetness of savor? what? Has he not so made
difference of colors, that he has made some more acceptable than other?
what? Has he not given to gold and silver, to iuorie and marble, a special
grace whereby they might be made more precious than other metalles or stones?
Finally has he not made many things commendable unto us without necessary use?

And the same is also to be seen in the rest. Therefore it is certain that
hereby the licenciousnesse of abusing is somewhat restrained, and that rule of
Paul confirmed, Romans xiii.x^iii.
that we be not to careful of the flesh, for the lusts thereof, to which if
we grant to much, they boil out above measure and temper.

But there is no surer nor redier way than that which is made us i. Cor.
vi^*iii.
should be so minded as though they used it not, they yt mary wives as though
they did not mary: they yt bye as though they did not bye, as Paul teaches.
The other, yt they should learn as well to bear poverty, quietly and
patie^tly, as abundance moderatly. He yt bidde^h thee to use this world as
though thou did not use it, does cut away not only ye intemperance of
gluttony in meat and drink, and to much deintinesse, sumptuousness, pride,
hautinesse, and niceness, in fare, bylding^ and apparel, but also all care
and affection yt may either withdraw thee or hinder thee from thinking of the
heavenly life, or from study to garnish thy soul. But this was long ago truly
said of Cato: that there is great carfulness of trimming our body, and great
carelessness of virtue. And it is an old proverb yt they which are much
busied in care of their body ar commonly careless of their soul. Therefore,
although the liberty of the faithful in outward things is not to be
restrained to a certain form, yet truly it must be subject to this law, to
bear very little with their own affections, but contrariwise still call upon
them selves with continually bent mind, to cut of all show of superfluous
plenty, much more to restrain ryotous excess, and to take diligent head,
that they do not of helps make to them selves hinderaunces.

The other rule shall be, that they that have but small and sclender Phil.
iiii.xij.
Therefore let all them that have an unfeigned zele of Godliness, endeavor to
learn by the Apostles example, to be full and hu^gry, to have store and suffer
want. The Scripture has also a third rule, whereby it tempereth the use of
earthly things, of which we have spoken sumwhat when we entreated of the
precepts of charity. For the Scripture decrees that al earthly things are
so given us by the bountifulness of God, and appointed for our commodity,
that they may be as things delivered us to keep, whereof we must one day yield
an account. We must therefore so dispose them, that this saying may continually
sound in our ears, yield an account of thy ^aylywike. Therwithall let this also
come in our mind Who it is that asks such an account, even he that has so
much commended abstinence, sobriety, honest sparing, and modesty, and
abhors riotous sumptuousness, pride, ostentation and vanity, which
allows no other disposing of goods, but such as is joined with charity:
which has already with his own mouth condemned all those deliteful things that
do withdraw a man's mind from chastity and cleanness, or do dull his wit
with darkness.



The aleuenth Chapter. Of the justification of Faith, and first of the
definition of the name and of the thing.
I Think I have already sufficiently declared before, how

But that we stumble not at the first entry, (which we should do if
forgiveness of sins, and imputation of the righteousness of Christ.

Luc. vii.xxi.
First where Luke says that the people when they had heard Christ did
justify God. And where Christ pronounces that wisdom is justified by her
children: he does not mean there, Luc. vii.xxxvii.
yt they do give righteousness, which always remains perfect with God, although
all the world go about to take it away from him: nor in this place also to
make the doctrine of salvation righteous, which has ever that of it self. But
both these speches are as much in effect, as to give to God and his doctrine
the praise that they deserve. Again when Christ reprocheth the Pharisees, Luc.
xvi.xv.
that they justify them selves, he does not mean that they obtain
righteousness by well doing, but do vainegloriously seek for the same of
righteousness, whereof in deed they be void. They that are skillful of the
Hebrew tongue do better understand the sense of this phrase: in which tongue
they are not only called wicked doers, that are gylty in their conscience of
any wicked doing, but also they that come in danger of judgment of
condemnation. For when Bersabe says that she and Solomon shall be wicked doers,
i. Reg. i.xxi.
she does not therein acknowledge any offense, but complayneth that she and her
son shall be put to shame, to be numbered among the reprobate and condemned. But
by the process of the text it easelye appears, that the same word in Latin
also, can not otherwise be taken but by way of relation, and not to signify
any quality. But as concerning the matter that we are now in hand with:
where Paul says that the Scriptur did forsee, Gal. iii.viii. Romans iii.xxvi.
that God justifies the Gentiles by faith, what may a man understand thereby,
but that God does impute righteousness by faith? Again, when he says that
God justifies ye wicked man that is of the faith of Christ, what meaning can
be thereof, but by the benefit of faith to deliver them from the damnation
which their wickedness deserved? And yet he speaks more plainly in the
conclusion, when he cried out thus, Romans viii.xxxiii.
Who shall accuse Gods elect? It is God yt justifies, who shall condemn? It is
Christ that died, yea that rose again, and now makes intercession for us.
It is as much in effect as if he should say, Who shall accuse them whom God
acquiteth? who shall condemn them whose patron Christ is and defends them?
To justify therefore is nothing else, than to acquit him that was accused, from
gilthynesse as allowyng his innocence. Sith therefore God does justify us by
ye intercession of Christ, he does acquit us, not by allowa^ce of our own
innocence, but by imputatio^ of righteousness, that we may be co^pted for
righteous in Christ which are not righteous in our selves. So in the.xiii.
Chapter of the Acts, Act. xiii.xxxviii.
in Paul's sermon: by him is forgeuenes of sins preached unto you, and every
one that believes in him is justified from al those things, from which you
could not be justified in the law of Moses. You see that after forgiveness of
sins, justification is added in place of an exposition. You see plainly that
it is taken for absolution. you se that it is taken away from the works of
the law. you see that it is the mere beneficial gift of Christ. you see that
it is received by faith. Finally you see that there is a satisfaction spoken of
where he says that we are justified from sins by Christ. So when it is
said that the Publicane came justified out of the Temple, Luc. xviii, xiiii.
we can not say that he obtained righteousness by any deserving of works.
This therefore is said that after pardon of his sins obtained, he was
coumpted for ryghteous before God. He was therefore ryghteous, In Psalm. ^8 Hom,
10.
not by approuinge of works, but by Gods free absolutio^. Wherefore Ambrose
says very well, that calls the confession of sins a lawefull
justification.

But to leave striving about the word: If we look upon the thing Romans
ii^.xxiiii.
that God does freely justify. In the.iiii. Chapter to the Romans, he first
calls it an imputation of righteousness, and sticks not to say that it
consists in forgiveness of sins. Romans iiii, vi.
That man (said he) is called of David a blessed man, to whom God accompteth
or imputes righteousness without works, as it is written: Blessed are they
whose iniquities ar forgiven. etc. Truly he there does entreat not of one
part of justification, but of all justification wholly. And he testifies that
David in that place makes a definition of justification, when he pronounces
that they are blessed to whom is given free forgiveness of sins. Whereby
appears that this righteousness whereof he speaks, is in comparison simply
set as contrary to giltinesse. But for this purpose, yt is the best place where
he teaches, that this is the sum of the message of the Gospel, yt we should
be reconciled to God: ii. Cor. v.xviii.
because it is his will to receive us into favor through Christ, in not
imputing sins unto us. Let the reders diligently wey all the whole process
of the text. For by and by after, where he adds by way of exposition, that
Christ which was without sin was made sin for us, to express the manner
of reco^ciliation, doubtless he means nothing else by the word reco^ciling
but iustifiyng. Romans v^ xix.
And that which he says in an other place, that we are made righteous by the
obedience of Christ, could not stand together, unless we be accounted
righteous before God, in him, and without our selves.

But where as Osiander has brought in, I wot not what monster may easily
undo all his knottes. He had conceived a certain thing very near to the
opinion of Manichees, to desire to convey the substance of God into men.
Herupon rises an other invention of his that Adam was fashioned after the
Image of God, because even before the fall Christ was ordained the pattern of
the nature of man. But because I would be short, I will tarry upon the
matter that I have presently in hand. He says that we are one with Christ. We
grant. But we deny yt the substance of Christ is mingled with ours. Moreover
we say that this principle that Christ is righteousness to us, because he is
an eternal God, the fountain of righteousness and the very self
righteousness of God, is wrongfully drawn to defend his deceites. The
readers shall pardon me, if I do now but touch these things that the order
of teaching requires to be dyfferred into an other place. But although he
excuse himself from meaning nothing else by the name of essential
righteousness, but to resist this opinion yt we are accounted righteous for
Christ's sake: yet he plainly expresses yt he is not contented with ye
righteousness yt is purchased for us by ye obedience and sacrifice of Christ,
but faineth that we are substantially righteous in God, as well by substance as
by quality poured into us. For this is the reason why he so earnestly
affirms, that not only Christ, but also the father and the holy ghost do
dwell in us. Which although I grant to be true, yet I say that he wrongfully
wresteth it. For he should have considered the manner of dwelling, that is,
that the father and the holy ghost are in Christ, and as the fullness of the
Godhead dwells in him, so do we possess whole God in him. Therefore all that
he says severally of the father and the holy ghost, tends to no other end
but to draw the simple from Christ. And then he thrusts in a mixture of
substances, whereby God pouring himself into us, does make us as it were a
part of himself. For he reckeneth it almost a matter of nothing, yt it is
wrought by the power of ye holy ghost, yt we grow into one with Christ, and
that he is our head and we his members, unless his very substance be mingled
with us. But in the father and ye holy ghost (as I have said) he does more
openli bewraie what he thinks, even this, that we be justified not by the
only grace of the Mediator, and that righteousness is not simply or perfectli
offered us in his person, but that we are made partakers of the
righteousness of God, when God is essentially made one with us.

is not a free imputation but a holiness and uprightness, which the
substance of God remaining in us does breath into us. Then he stoutly denies,
yt Christ is our righteousness in respect yt being a pressed he did with
satisfactorily purging sins appease his father toward us, but in respect
that he is eternal God and life. To prove that first point, that God does
justify not only by forgeuinge but also by regenarating, he asks whether
God does leave them whom he does justify such as they were by nature,
changing nothing of their vices. The answer hereof is very easy: that as
Christ can not be torn in parts so these two things which we together and
jointly receive in him, that is to say righteousness and sanctification, are
inseparable. Therefore, whomesoeuer God receives into favor, he does also
therewith all give them the spirit of adoption, by the power whereof he newly
fashioneth them after his image. But if ye brightness of ye sun can not be
severed from the heat thereof, shall we therefore say that ye earth is warmed
with the and light, enlightened with the heat? There is nothing more fit for
this purpose, than this similitude. The sun with his heat gives life and
frutefulnesse to the earth, with his beams he gives light and brightness.
Here is a mutual and inseperable co^ioyning: yet reason forbids to convey
to the one that which is peculiar to the other. Like absurdity is in this
confusion of two sorts of graces, that Osiander thrusts in. For because God
does in deed renew them to the observing of righteousness whom he freely
acco^pteth for righteous, therefore Osiander confounds that gift of
regeneration with this fre acceptance, and affirms that they be al one and
the selfsame thing. But the Scripture joining the^ both together, yet does
distinctly recke^ them, yt the manifold grace of God may ye better appear unto
us. For yt saying of Paul is not superfluous, i. Corin. ^.xxx.
yt Christ was given us unto righteousness and sanctification. And whenever
he resoneth to prove by the salvation purchaced for us by the fatherly love of
God, and by the grace of Christ, that we are called to holiness and
cleanness, he plainly declares yt it is one thing to be justified and an
other be made new creatures. But when Osia^der comes to ye Scripture, he
corrupts as many places as he allegeth. Where Paul says that faith is
accounted for righteousness to him yt works not, but believes in him that
justifies the wicked man, he expounds it to make righteous. With like
rashness, he depraueth all the fourth Chapter to ye Romans, To. iiii.v.
and sticks not with like falls color to corrupt yt place which I even now
alleged, Who shall accuse the electes of God? it is God yt justifies: where it
is plain yt he speaks simply of gilthinesse and acquiting, and the meaning
of the Apostle hangs upon a comparing of contraries. Therefore Osiander is
found to fond a babbler, as well in yt reason as in alleging the testimonies of
Scripture. And no more rightly does he speak of the name of righteousness, in
saying that faith was accounted to Abraham for righteousness, after that
embracing Christ (which is the righteousness of God and God him self) he
excelled in singular virtues, whereby appears that of two whole places he has
wrongfully made one corrupt place. For the righteousness that is there
mentioned, pertains not to the whole course of his calling: but rather the
holy Ghost testifies, yt although ye virtues of Abraham were singularly
excellent, and that with long continuance he at length had encreasced them: yet
he did no other way please God, but by this, that he received by faith the
grace offered in the promise. Whereupon follows, that in justification there
is no place for works, as Paull very well affirms.



Iere. xv.
where he promises that the Lord Iehoua shall be our righteousness, but out of
that he shall gather nothing, but that Christ which is righteousness, is God
openly showed in the flesh. In an other place we have rehearsed out of Paul's
sermon, Act. xx.xxviij.
that God purchased to himself the church with his blood, if any man gather
thereupon, that the blood wherewith sins were purged was divine, and of the
nature of Godhed, who can abide so foul an error? But Osiander thinks that
with this so childishe a cauillation he has gotten all things, he swells,
he leapeth for joy, and stuffeth many leaves full with his big words: when
yet there is a plain and ready solutio^ for it in saying that the word Iehoua
in deed when he is made the issue of David shall be the righteousness of ye
godly: Esaias. liij.xi.
But Esaie teaches in what sense, saying: My just servant shall with knowledge
of him self justify many. Let us note that the father speaks: that he
gives to ye son the office of iustifiyng: he adds a cause, for that he is
just, and sets the manner or mean as they call it in the doctrine whereby
Christ is known. For it is a more commodious exposition to take this word
Daah knowledge passiuely. Hereupon I gather first that Christ was made
righteousness when he did put on the form of a servant: secondely that
he did justify us in respect that he showed him self obedient to his
father: and that therefore he does not this for us according to his nature of
Godhed, but according to the office of dispensation committed unto him. For
although God alone is ye fountain of righteousness, and we be made righteous
by no other mean but by the partaking of him: yet because we are by unhappy
disagreme^t estranged from his righteousness, we must needs come down to this
lower remedy, that Christ may justify us with ye force of his death and
resurrection. If he object yt this is a work of such excellency, yt it is
above ye nature Romans v.xix.
whereupon we gather that righteousness was given us in his flesh. Likewise in
the other words (which I marvel that Osiander is not ashamed to allege so
often) he apoynteth the fountain of righteousness no where else but in the
flesh of Christ. Him that knew no sin he made sin for us, that we might
be the righteousness of God in him. Osiander with full mouth aduaunceth the
righteousness of God, and triumphs as though he had proved that it is his
imaginatiue ghost of essential righteousness: when ye words sound far
otherwise, yt we by righteous by ye cleansing made by Christ. Uery young
beginners should not have been ignorant that the righteousness of God is taken
for the righteousness that God allows, as in John, John. x.
where the glory of God is compared with the glory of men, I know that
sometime it is called the righteousness of God, whereof God is the author and
which God gives us: but though I say nothing, the reders yt have their sound
wit do perceive yt nothing else is meant in this place but that we stand
upright before the judgment seat of God, being vpholden by the cleansing
sacrifice of Christ's death. And there is not so great importance in the word,
so that Osiander do agree with us in this point that we are justified in
Christ, in this respect yt he was made a propiciatorie sacrifice for us, which
can not agree with his nature of Godhed. After which sort, when Christ
means to seal the righteousness and salvation that he has brought us, he
sets before us an assured pledge thereof in his flesh. He does in deed call
him self the lively bred, but expressing the manner here, he adds that his
flesh is verily meat, and his blood is verily drink. Which manner of
teaching is seen in the Sacraments, which although they direct our faith to
whole Christ, and not to half Christ, yet they do there withal teach that
the matter of righteousness and salvation remains in his flesh: Not that in
that that he is only man, he either justifies or quickens of him self, but
because it pleased God to show openly in the mediator that which was hidden
and incomprehensible in him self, whereupon I am wont to say, that Christ is
as it were a fountain set open for us, out of which we may draw that which
otherwise should without fruit lie hidden in that close and deep spring that
rises up unto us in the person of the Mediator. In this manner and meaning,
I do not deny that Christ as he is God and man does justify us, and that
this is also the work of the father and the holy Ghost as well as his.
Finally, that the righteousness whereof Christ makes us partakers, is the
eternal righteousness of the eternal God, so that he yield to the sure and
plain reasons that I have alleged.

end: First that God should with a gross mixture pour him self into us, as
he fayneth a fleshely eating of Christ in the supper: secondlye that God
should breathe his righteousness into us, whereby we may be really righteous
with him: for by his opinion, this righteousness is as well God him self, as
the goodness or holiness, or pureness of God. I will not spend much labor
in wyping away the testimonies that he brings, which he wrongfully wresteth
from the heavenly life to this present state. i. Pet. i.iiii.
Through Christ (says Peter) are given us the precious and most great
promyses, that we should be made partakers of the nature of God: As though we
wear now such as the Gospel promised that we shall be at the last coming of
Christ: yea John tells us, i. Iho^. iii.i.
that we shall then see God as he is, because we shall be like unto him. Only I
thought good to give a small taste to the readers, that I do of purpose pass
over these trifles: not for that it is hard to confute them, but because I
will not be tedious in a superfluous work.

But in the second point lurketh more poison, where he teaches i. Cor. v.xii.
what means that saying of Paul, God was in Christ reconciling the world to
him self, not impu^ynge to men their sins. For, him that had done no sin,
he made sin for us, that we might be the righteousness of God in him. First
I win thus much, that they be judged righteous that be reconciled to God.
The manner how is declared, for that God justifies by forgeuyng: as in an
other place justification is set as contrary to accusation, which comparing of
them as contraries, does clearly show that it is a phrase borrowed from the
use of the law. And there is no man being but meanly practiced in the Hebrewe
tongue, if he have a sober brain, that is ignorant that this phrase came from
thence, and whereunto it tends, and what it means. Romans iiii.vii.
Now where Paul says that David described the righteousness without works,
in these words, Blessed are they whose sins are forgeuen: Ps. xxxii.^
Let Osiander answer me whether this be a full definition or but half a one.
Truly Paul brings not in the Prophet for a witness, as though he taught yt
forgiveness of sins is but a part of righteousness, or a thing yt joins
with other to the iustifiyng of man: But he includes whole ryghtuousnesse in
free forgiveness, pronou^cing ye man blessed, whose sins are covered, to
whom God has forgeuen iniquities, and to whom he imputeteh no tra^sgressions:
He does measure and judge such a man's felicity thereby, because he is not
this way righteous in deed, but by imputatio^. Osiander takes exception and
says, that this should be sclaunderous to God, and contrary to his nature, if
he should justify them that in deed remain still wicked. But we must
remember, as I have already said, that the grace of justifying is not severed
from regeneration, although they be several things. But because it is more
than sufficiently known by experience, that there abide always in the
righteous some re^nantes of sin, it must needs be that they be far
otherwise justified than they be reformed into newness of life. For this later
point of reformation, God so begins in his elect, and throughout the whole
course of their life, by little and little, and sometime slowly proceeds in it,
that they be always before his seat in danger of the judgment of death. But he
justifies them, not by partmeale, but so that they may freely, as clothed with
the pureness of Christ, appear in heaven. For no portion of righteousness
could appease our consciences, till they be satisfied ye God is fully pleased
with us, because we be righteous in his sight with out exception. Whereupon
follows, that the Doctrine of justification is misturned, yea ouerturned from
the very foundation, when doubtinge is cast into men's minds, when the affiance
of salvation is shaken, when thee free and dredlesse invocation is hindered, yea
when quiet and tranquillity with spiritual joy is not sta^lyshed. Gala.
iii.xviii.
Whereupon Paul gathers an argument by contraries, to prove, that the
inheritance is not by the law. For by this mean faith should be made void,
which if it have respect to works, is overthrown, because none of the most
holy shall therein find whereupon to trust. This difference of iustifiyng and
regeneratyng (which two things Osyander confoundinge together, calls two
sorts of righteousness) is very well expressed by Paul: For speaking of his
real righteousness in deed, or of the uprightness where with he was endued
(which Osiander names essential righteousness) he lamentably cries out: Romans
vii.^xiiii.
Wretch that I am: who shall deliver me from the body of this death? But fleing
to the righteousness which is grounded upon the only mercy of God, he
gloriously triumphs over both life, death, reproaches, hunger, sword, and all
adversities. Who shall accuse the electes of God whom he justifies? Romans
viii.xxxiii.
For I am surely persuaded, that nothing shall sever us from his love in
Christ. He plainly publishes, that he has the righteousness which alone
fully suffices to salvation before God, so that the wretched bondage which he
knowing to be in him self, did a little before beuayle his estate, may not
mouish nor any way hinder his boldness to glory. This diversity is
sufficiently known, and so familiar to all the holy ones, that groan under the
burden of iniquities, and yet with victorious confidence, do mount up above all
fears. As for this that Osiander obiecteth, that it disagreeth with the nature
of God, it falls upon him self. For although he clotheth the holy ones with
a double righteousness as it were with a furred garment, yet he is compelled
to confess that without forgiveness of sins they never pleased God. If that
be true, then at least let him grant, yt they which are not righteous in deed,
are accounted righteous according to the appointed proportion of imputation, as
they call it. But how far shall a sinner extend this free acceptance that is
put in place of righteousness? shall he measure it by the pound or by the
ounce? Truly he shall hang doubtefull and waueryng to this side and that side,
because he may not take unto him so much righteousness as shall be necessary to
stablish confidence. It is happy that he that would bind God to a law, is not
judge of this cause. But this shall stand steadfast, that thou may be
justified in thy sayenges and ouerco^me when thou art judged. Psa. ii.vi.
But how great presumption is it to condemn the chief judge when he freely
acquiteth, that this answer may not be in force, I will have mercy upon whom
I will have mercy. And yet the intercession of Moses which God did put to
silence with this saying, Exodus xxi.xix.
tended not to this end that he should spare none, but that he should acquit
altogether, taking away their condemnation although they were gilty of offense.
And we do say that they which were lost have their sins buried and so are
justified before God: because, as God hates sin, so he can love none but
them whom he justifies. But this is a marvelous manner of justifying, that
they being covered with the righteousness of Christ stand not in fear of the
judgment which they have deserved, and when they worthily condemn themselves
are accounted righteous without themselves.

But the readers are to be warned, that they take good heed to the Col. ii.iij.
but in Paul's writings that name is given him in diverse wise, because all the
treasures of wisdom and knowledge are laid up in him. That therefore which he
had with his father, he disclosed unto us: and so that which Paul says is not
referred unto the essence of the son of God, but to our use, and is rightly
applied to Christ's nature of manhood: because although he shined a light in
darkness, before that he did put on flesh, yet it was a hidden light till
the same Christ came forth in the nature of man, Ioh. viii.xii.
the shinyng sun of righteousness, which therefore calls himself the light
of the world. Also it is folishly objected of him, yt the power of justifying
is far above both Angeles and men: for as much as this hangs not upon the
worthiness of any creature, but upon the ordinance of God. If Angels will take
upon the^ to satisfy God, they can nothing prevail, because they are not
appointed thereunto. Gala. iii.xiii.
But this singularly belonged to Christ being man, which was made subject to
the law, to redeem us from the curse of the law. Also he does sclaunderously
cauil, yt they which deny that Christ is our righteousness according to his
nature of Godhed, do leave but one part of Christ, and (which is worse) do
make two gods, because although they confess, yt God dwells in us, yet they
say again that we are not righteous by the righteousness of God. For
although we call Christ the author of life, in respect that he suffered death to
destroy him that had the power of death, we do not by and by take away that
honor from whole Christ as he was openly showed God in the flesh, Hebr.
ij.xiiij.
but we only make a distintio^ how the righteousness of God is conveyed unto
us, that we may enjoy it. In which point Osiander has to fowly erred. Neither
do we deny that that which is openly given us in Christ, proceeds from the
secret grace and power of God: and we strive not against this, that ye
righteousness which Christ gives us is the righteousness of God that
proceeds from God: but we hold this steadfastly, that we have righteousness
and life in the death and resurrection of Christ. I ouerpasse that heapyng
together of places whereof he may well be ashamed, wherewith he has tediously
co^bred ye readers, without choice and without common reason, to prove that
whersoeuer is made mention of righteousness, there ought to be understood
this essential righteousness. As where David calls upon the righteousness
of God to help him: whereas he does the same above a hundred times, Osiander
sticks not to corrupt so many sentences. And nothing stronger is the other
objection, that that is properly and rightly called righteousness, whereby we
be moved to do rightly, but that God only works in us both to will and to
perform. For we do also not deny, but that God reformeth us with his Spirit
unto holiness of life and righteousness: Philip. ij.xiii.
but we must first see whether he do this by himself and immediately, or by the
hand of his Son, with whom he has left all the fullness of his holy Spirit,
that with his abunda^t store he should supply ye need of his me^bres.
Moreover although righteousness come unto us out of the secret fountain of
the godhed, yet it follows not that Christ which sanctified himself in y^
flesh for our sakes, Iho. xvii.xix.
was righteousness unto us according to his nature of godhed. No less fond is
that which he says, yt Christ himself was righteous by ye righteousness of
God. Because unless ye will of his father had moved him, he could not himself
have satisfied ye office committed unto him. For though we have in an other
place said, yt all the deseruings of Christ himself do proceed from the mere
good will of God, yet that makes nothing to that fantastical thing, wherewith
Osiander bewitcheth both his own and simple men's eyes. For who would suffer a
man to gather this conclusion, that because God is the fountain and beginning
of our righteousness, therefore we be essentially righteous, and the essence of
Gods righteousness dwells in us? Esa. lix.xvij.
In redeminge the church (says Esaye) God did put on his righteousness as a
harness: but did he so to spoil Christ of his armure which he had given him,
to make him to be no perfect redemer? But the Prophet meante nothing else but
that God borrowed nothing out of himself, nor was helped by any aid to red^me
us. Which thing Paul brefly expressed in other words, To. iij.xxv
saying that he gave us salvation to the showing of his righteousness. But
this does not overthrow that which he teaches in an other place, that we are
righteous by the obedience of one man. To. v.xix.
Finally whosoever wrappeth up a double righteousness, that poor souls may
not rest in the mere only mercy of God, he does in a mockery crown Christ
with thorns.

But for as much as a great part of me^, imagines righteousness to Philip.
^iv*viii.
The Apostle faith that he esteemed al things as dong that he might win
Christ and find in him the righteousness that is of God by faith, co^pting
not his righteousness that which is by the law, but y^ which is by the faith
of Jesus Christ. You see that here is also a comparison of co^traries and that
here is declared ye he which will obtain the righteousness of Christ, must for
sake his own righteousness. To. ^.iii
Therefore in an other place he says, yt this was the cause of fall to the
Jews y^ going about to stablish their own righteousness, they were not
subject to y^ righteousness of God. If in stablishyng our own righteousness
we shake away the righteousness of God, therefore to obtain Gods
righteousness our own must be utterly abolished. Romans iii.xx^ii.
And he shows the same thing, when he faith, that our glorieng is not
excluded by the law, but by faith. Whereupon follows that so long as there
remains any righteousness of works, how little soever it be, there still
remains to us some (...) to glory upon. Now if faith exclude al glorieng,
then the righteousness of works can no wise be coupled with the
righteousness of faith. To this effect he speaks so plainly in the.iiij.
chapter to the Romans, To. iiii.ij.
that he leaves no room for cauillations or shifts: If (says he) Abraham
was justified by works, he has glory. And immediately he adds; but he has
no glory in the sight of God. It follows therefore that he was not justified
by works. Then he vryngeth an other argument by contraries, when reward is
rendered to works, that is done of det and not of grace. But righteousness is
given to faith according to grace: Therefore it is not of the deseruinges of
works. Wherefore farewell their dream, that imagine a righteousness made of
faith and works mingled together.

The Sophisters think that they have a subtle shifte, that make to (...)
For he teaches that this is the righteousness of the law, yt he should
obte^^e salvation that has performed that which the law commands: and that
this is the righteousness of faith, if we believe that Christ died and is risen
again. Moreover we shall her after show in place fitio^ it, that
sauctification and righteousness are several benefits of Christ, Whereupon
follows that the very spiritual works come not into the account, when the
power of justifying is ascribed to faith. And where Paul denies (as I eue^
now alleged) that Abraham had any thing whereupon to glory before God, because
he was not made righteous by works: this ought not to be restrained to the
literal and outward kind of virtues, or to the endeavor of free will. But
although the life of the Patriarch Abraham were spiritual and in manner
Angelike, yet he had not sufficient deservings of works to purchase him
righteousness before God.

Heb. xi.vj.
They read in ye Apostle that he which comes to God, must first believe that
there is a God and then that he is a rendrer of reward to them that seek him.
But they mark not, what is the manner of seking. And that they are deceived in
the name of grace, is plamely proved by their own writings. For Lombarde
expounds, (...) lib. 3. (...) 16. ca. ^.
that justification by Christ is given us two ways. First (says he) the death
of Christ does justify us, when by it charity is stirred up in our hearts,
by which we are made righteous. Secondly that by the same death sin is
destroyed, whereby Satan held us captive, so that now he has not whereby to
condemn us. You see how he considers the grace of God principally in
justification, to be so far as we are directed to good works by ye grace of
the holy ghost. He would forsooth have followed the opinion of Augustine: but he
follows him a far of, and goth far out of the way from rightly following him:
because if Augustine have spoken any thing plainly he darkeneth it, if there be
any thing in Augustine not very vnpure, he corrupts it. The Scholemen have
still strayed from worse to worse, till with hedlong fall at length they be
rolled down into a Pelagian error. And the very sentence of Augustine, or at
least his manner of speaking is not altogether to be received. For though he
singularly w^ll takes from man all praise of righteousness, and assigns it
wholly to ye grace of God, yet he refers grace to sanctification, whereby we
are renewed into newness of life by the holy ghost.

and free goodness, considering nothing in him but misery whereby he may be
mo^ed to mercy, for as much as he sees him altogether naked and void of good
works, fetchyng from himself the cause to do him good: then, that he moves
the sinner himself with feling of his goodness, which desperyng upon his own
works casts all the sum of his salvation upon Gods mercy. This is the
felyng of faith, by which felyng the sinner comes into possession of his
salvation, when he acknowlegeth by the doctrine of the Gospel that he is
reconciled to God: that obteyning forgiveness of sins by means of the
righteousness of Christ, ^e is justified: and although he be regenerate by the
Spirit of God, he thinks upon continual righteousness laid up for him not
in the good works to which he applies himself, but in y^ only righteousness
of Christ. When these things shall be every one particularly weyed, they shall
give a perfect declaration of our sentence. Albeit they might be better
disposed in an other order than they are set forth. But it makes little matter,
so that they hang together in such sort that we may have the whole matter truly
declared and surely proved.

Here it is good to remember the relation that we have before said To. x.v.
comparing the law and the gospel together he says: the righteousness that
is by the law is thus, the man yt does these things shall live in them. But the
righteousness that is of faith offreth salvation, if thou believe in thy heart
and confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus, and that the father has raised him
up from the dead. See you not how he makes this the difference of the law and
the Gospel, that the law gives righteousness to works, and the Gospel
gives tree righteousness without help of works? It is a notable place, and
that may deliver us out of many hard doubts, if we understand that the same
righteousness that is given us by the Gospel is free from all conditions of
the law. This is the reason, why he does more than ones with great seming of
contrariety set the promise by way of opposition against the law, Gala.
iij.xviij.
as it ye inheritance be of the law, then is it not of the promise: and all the
rest in the same chapter to the same effect. Truly the law it self has also
her promises. Therefore there must needs be in the promises of ye gospel,
something different and diverse from the promises of the law, unless we will
confess that the comparison is very sond. But what diversity shall this be,
unless it be that they are freely given, and vpholden by the only mercy of
God, whereas the promises of the law hang upon the condition of works.
Neither let any manne here carp against me, and say, that in this place the
righteousness is rejected which men of their own force and freewill would
compel God to receive: To. vi^.ij.
for as much as Paul without exception teaches that the law in commanding
profits nothing: because there is none not only of the common multitude, but
also of the perfectest, that fulfilleth it. Love undoubtedly is the chief point
of the law: when the Spirit of God frames us unto it, why is it not to us a
cause of righteousness, but for that even in the holy ones it is imperfect,
and therefore of it self deserves no reward.

Gal. iij.xij
but the man that does these things shall live in them. How could this
argument otherwise stand together, unless we agree upon this point, that
works come not into the account of faith, but are utterly to be severed from
it: The law (says he) differs from faith. Why so? because works are
required to the righteousness thereof. Therefore it follows that works are
not required to the righteousness of faith. By this relation it appears, that
they which are justified by faith are justified byside the deserving of works,
yea without the deseruyng of works, because faith receives that
righteousness which the Gospel gives. And the gospel differs from the law
in this point, that it binds not righteousness to works, but sets it in
the only mercy of God. Like herunto is that which he affirms to the Romans,
To. iiii.ii.
that Abraham had nothing to glory upon, because faith was imputed to him unto
righteousness, and he adds a confirmation, because then there is place for
the righteousness of faith, when there are no works to which a reward is
due. Where be works (says he) due reward is rendered unto them: that which
is given to faith is freely given. For the very meaning of ye words that he
uses in that place serve to prove the same. Whereas he adioyneth within a little
after, that therefore we obtain ye inheritance by faith as according to
grace, hereupon he gathers that the inheritance is of free gift, because it
is received by faith: and how comes that, but because faith without any help
of works leans wholly upon the mercy of God? And in the same meaning,
without dout he teaches in an other place, To. iii.xxi.
that the righteousness of God was openly showed without the law, although it
have witness borne of it by the law and the Prophets: because excludyng the
law, he says that it is not helped by works, and that we obtain it not by
workyng, but come empty that we may receive it.

To. iiii.ii.
How can free gift agree with works? And with what cauillations will they
mock out, that which he says in an other place, that the righteousness of
God is manifestly showed in the Gospel? To. 1.x^ii
If righteousness be manifestly showed in the Gospel, surely therein is
contained not a torn or half righteousness but full and perfect. Therefore
the law has no place therein. And they stand upon not only a false but also
a foolish shifte about this exclusine word, Only. Does not he perfectly enough
give al things to only faith, that takes al things from works? To. iii.xxi,
^xxiiii.
What, I pray you, mean these sayenges: that righteousness was manifestly
showed without the law: that man is justified freely and without the works of
the law? Here they have a witty shifte to escape withal, which although they
devised it not themselves but borrowed it of Origene and certain of the old
writers, yet is very foolish. They prate that the ceremonial works of the
law, not the moral, are excluded. They profit so with continual brawling, that
they know not the very first rules of Logike. Do they think that the Apostle
doted when he alleged these places to prove his saying? The man that shall do
these things shall live in them: Gal. iij.x.
and, Cursed is every one that fulfilleth not all things that are written in
the volume of the law. Unless they be mad, they will not say that life was
promised to the kepers of Ceremonies, or curse thretened only to the breakers
of them. If these places be to be understood of the moral law, it is no
doubt that the moral works also are excluded from the power of justifying.
To the same purpose serve these arguments that he uses: To. iii.xx. and
iii.xv.
because the knowledge of sin was by the law, therefore righteousness is
not by the law. Because the law works wrath, therefore it works not
righteousness. Because the law can not make conscience assured, therefore
also it can not give righteousness. Because faith is imputed unto
righteousness, therefore righteousness is not a reward of work, but is
given being not due. Because we are justified by faith, therefore gloryeng is
cut of. Gala. iii, xxi.
If there had been a law given that might give life, then righteousness were
truly by the law: but God has shut up all under sin that the promise might
be given to the beleuers. Let them now fondly say if they dare, that these
things are spoken of ceremonies and not of manners: but very children would
hiss out so great shamelessness. Therefore let us hold this for certain, that
the whole law is spoken of, when the power of justifying is taken away from
the law.

But if any manne marvel why the Apostle used such an addition, Gala.
iii^.xvii.
Wherefore the Apostle in an other place, to prove that Abraham could not be
justified by works, allegeth that the law was given, almost four hundred and
thirty years after the covenant made. Unlearned men would laugh at such an
argument, because there might be righteous works before the publishyng of the
law. But because he knew yt there was no such value in works but by ye
testimony and vouchsauing of God, therefore he takes it as a thing confessed
that before ye law they had no power to justify. We understand why he namely
expresses ye work of the law, when he means to take away justification
from any works: because controversy may be moved of those and none other.
Albeit sometime he excepteth all works without any addition, as when he says,
that by the testimony of David blessedness is assigned to that man, (...)
iiij.vi.
to whom the Lord imputes righteousness without works. Therefore they can
with no cauillatious bring to pass, but that we shall get this general
exclusive, only. And they do in vain seek that triflyng sutteltie, that we
are justified by that only faith which works by love, so that righteousness
must stand upon love. Gal. v.vi.
We grant in deed witn Paul, that no other faith justifies, but that which
is effectually workyng with chatitie: but that faith takes not her power of
iustifiyng from that effectualnesse of charity. Yea it does by no other mean
justify, but because it brings us into the communicatyng of the
righteousness of Christ. Or else all that which the Apostle so earnestly
presses, should fall to naught. Romans iiij.iiij.
To him that works (says he) the reward is not teckened according to grace,
but according to Det. But to him that works not, but believes in him that
iusti^ieth the unrighteous, his faith is imputed unto righteousness. Could he
speak more evidently than in so saying? that there is no righteousness of
faith but where there are no works to which any reward is due: and that only
then faith is imputed unto righteousness, when righteousness is given by
grace that is not due.

Esa. lix.vij.
The hand of the Lord is not shortened, that he is not able to save: nor his
ear dulled that he can not hear: but your iniquities have made disagreement
between you and your God, and your sins have hidden his face from you that he
hears you not. We hear that sin is the division between man and God, and
the turnyng away of Gods face from the sinner. Neither can it otherwise be.
For it is disagreyng from his righteousness to have any fellowship with sin.
Romans v.iii^.
Wherefore the Apostle teaches that manne is enemy to God till he be restored
into favor by Christ. Whom therefore the Lord receives into ioynyng with him,
him he is said to instifie: because he can neither receive him into favor nor
join him with himself, but he must of a sinner make him righteous. And we
further say, that this is done by the forgiveness of sins. For if they whom
the Lord has reconciled to himself be judged by their works, they shall be
found still sinners in deed, who yet must be free and clean from sin. It
is certain therefore that they whom God embraces, are no otherwise made
righteous, but because they are cleansed by having the spots of there sins
wiped away by forgiveness, tha^ such a righteousness may in one word be
called the forgiveness of sins.

ii. Cor. iij.xix.
God was in Christ reconcilyng the world to himself, not imputyng their sins
to man, and he has let with us the word of reconciliation. ii. Cor.iii.xxi.
And then he adds the sum of his message, that him which knew no sin he
made sin for us, that we might be made the righteousness of God in him. Here
he names righteousness and reconciliation without difference, that we may
perceive that the one is mutually contained under the other. And he teaches
the manner to atteyne this righteousness to be when our sins are not imputed
unto us. Wherefore doubt thou not hereafter how God does justify us, when
thou hear that he does reconcile us to himself by not imputyng sins. To.
iiij.vi.
So to the Romans he proves by the testimony of David, that righteousness
is imputed to man without works, because David pronounces the man blessed
whose iniquities are forgeuen, whose sins are covered, to whom the lord has
not imputed his offenses. Without doubt by blessedness he there means
righteousness. And sith he affirms the same to stand in the forgiveness
of sins, there is no cause why we should otherwise define it. Luc. i.lxxvii.
Therefore Zachary the father of John the Baptist sings that the knowledge of
salvation consists in the forgiveness of sins. Which rule Paul following
in his Sermon which he made to the Antiochians concerning the sum of
salvation, as Luke reports it, Act. xiii.xxxviii.
concluded in this manner: by him forgiveness of sins is preached unto you,
and every one that believes in him is justified from all these things, from
which ye could not be justified in the law of Moses. The Apostle so knitteth
ye forgiveness of sins with righteousness, that he shows that they be
both all one. Whereupon he rightfully reasons that the righteousness is
freely given unto us, which we obtain by the loving kindness of God.
Neither ought it to seem a strange unused speech, that the faithful are
righteous before God, not by works, but by free acceptance: sith both it is
so often found in the Scripture, and the old authors also do sometime so speak.
For Augustine says thus in one place: De ciuit. dei. ca. 27,
The righteousness of the saints in this world stands rather in
forgiveness of sins, than in perfection of virtues. Wherewith agree thte
notable sentences of Bernard: Not to sin is the righteousness of God: Sermon.
23. in cant. Sermon. 22,
but the righteousness of man, is the merciful kindness of God. He had
before affirmed that Christ is to us righteousness in absolution, and
therefore that they only are righteous that have obtained pardon by mercy.

Hereupon also follows this, that by the only mean of Christ's ii. Cor. v,
xxi.
This the Apostle affirms most plainly when he writes that he which knew
no sin was made for us a propitiatory sacrifice to cleanse away sin, that
we might be made the righteousness of God in him. You see that our
righteousness is not in us but in Christ, and that it belongs to us only by
this title, because we be partakers of Christ, because we possess all his
richesse with him. And it makes nothing to the contrary, that in an other
place he teaches, To. vi^^.iij
that sin was condemned of sin in the flesh of Christ, that the
righteousness of the law might be fulfilled in us: where he means no other
ful^illing, but that which we obtain by imputation. For the Lord Christ does
in such sort communicate his righteousness with us, that after a certain
marvelous manner, he pours the force thereof into us, so much as pertains to
the judgment of God. It appears that he did no otherwise mean, by the other
sentence which he had spoken a little before: To. v.xix.
As by the disobedience of one man we wear made sinners, so by the obedience
of one man we are justified. What is it else to set our righteousness in the
obedience of Christ, but to affirm that hereby only we are accounted
righteous, because the obedience of Christ is imputed unto us as if it were our
own? Therefore me thinks that Ambrose has excellently well showed how there
is an example of this righteousness in the blessing of Jacob. L^b. 2. de Iac.
and ui^^ beata.
For as Jacob having not of himself deserved the preeminencie of the first
begotten son, hid himself in the apparel of his brother, and being clothed
with his brothers cote that sauored of a most sweet smell, he crept into the
favor of his father, and received the blessing to his own commodity under
the person of an other: so we do lie hidden under the precious pureness of
Christ our elder brother, that we may get a testimony of righteousness in the
sight of God. The words of Ambrose are these: Whereas Isaac smelt the savor of
the garments, paradue^ture this is meant thereby, that we are not justified by
works but by faith: because fleshly weakness hinders works, but ye
brightness of faith which meriteth forgiveness of sins, ouershadoweth the
error of deeds. And truly so it is. For, that we may appear before the face
of God unto salvation, it is necessary for us, to smell swetely with his odor.
and to have our faults covered and barred with his perfection.

The.xii. Chapter. That, to the end we may be fully persuaded of the free
justification, we must lift up our minds to the judgment scare of God.
ALthough it appears by most evident testimonies, that all these things are
true, yet we shall not clearly perceive how necessary they be, until we have
set before our eyes those things that ought to be the grounds of all this
disputation. First therefore let us remember this, that we purpose not to speak
of the righteousness of a worldly judicial court, but of the heavenly
judgment seat: that we should not measure by our own small portion, by what
uprightness of works Gods judgment may be satisfied. But it is marvelous to
see with what rashness and boldness it is commonly debated. Yea and it is to
be seen how none do more boldly or with fuller mouths (as the saying is)
prate of the righteousness of works, than they that are either monstruously
sick of open outward diseases, or be ready to burste with inward vices. That
comes to pass because they think not upon the righteousness of God, whereof
if they had never so little felyng, they would never make so great a mockery of
it. And truly it is out of measure lightly regarded, when it is not
acknowleged to be such and so perfect that nothing be imputed unto it but every
way whole and absolute, and defiled with no uncleanness: such as never was
and never shall be able to be found in man. It is in deed easy and ready for
every man in Schools to talk vaynely upon the worthynesse of works to
justify men. But when they come into the sight of God, such dalliances must
avoid, because there is earnest doing used, and no triflyng strife about
words. To this, to this I say, we must apply our mind, if we will profitably
enquire of true righteousness, how we may answer the heavenly judge when he
calls us to account. Let us think him him a to be judge, not such a one as
our own understandings do of themselves imagine: but such a one as he is
painted out in the Scripture, with whose brightness the stars shall be
darkened, by whose strength the hills do melt away, by whose wrath the earth
is shaken, by whose wisdom the wise are taken in their sutteltie, by whose
pureness all things are proved vnpure, whose righteousness the Angels are
not able to bear, which makes the innocent not innocent, whole vengeance
when it is ones kindled pearceth to the bottom of hell. If he (I say) sit to
examine men's doings, who shall appear assured before his throne? Esa. xxxiij
xiiij.
who shall dwell with a deuouryng f^er? says the Prophet. Who shall abide
with continual burninges? he that walks in righteousnesses and speaks
truth, etc. But let such a one come forth, what so ever he be. But that answer
makes, that none comes forth. For this terrible saying sounds, to the
contrary: Lord if thou mark iniquities, Ps. ^xxx.ii^ Job. iiij.xvij.
Lord, who shall abide it? truly all must needs immediately perish, as it is
written in an other place: Shall man be justified if he be compared with God,
or shall he be purer than his maker? Behold they that serve him are not
faithful, and he has found perverseness in his Angels. How much more shall
they yt dwell in houses of ^^aye, and that have an earthly fundation, be
consumed with mothes? they shall be cut down from the morning to the euenyng.
Job. xv.xv.
Behold among his Saints there is none faithful, and the heavens are not
^^ane in his sight: how much more is man abominable and vnpro^^table, which
drinks iniquity as water? I grant in deed that in the book of Job, is
mention made of a righteousness that is hyer than the keeping of the law. And
it is good to understand this distinction: because although a man did
satisfy the law, yet he could not so stand to the trial of that
righteousness that passes all senses. Therefore although Job be clear in his
own conscience, yet he is amassed, and not able to speak, because he sees
that very angelike holiness can not appease God, if he exactly weye their
works. But I therefore will at this time ouerpasse that righteousness which I
have spoken of, because it is incomprehensible: but only this I say, that if
our life be examined by the rule of the written law, we are more than
senseless if so many curses wherewith the Lord has willed us to be awaked do
not torment us with horrible fear, and among other this general curse, (...)
xxvii.x^vii.
Cursed is every one that does not abide in all ye things that are written in
this book. Finally all this discourse shall be but unsavory and cold, unless
every man yield himself gilty before the heavenly judge, and willingly throw
down and abace himself, being careful how he may be acquitted.

Luc. xvi.xv.
but that which is hie to men is abominable to God. Now go thy way and
proudely boste of thy righteousness among men, while God from heaven abhors
it. But what say the servants of God that are truly instructed with his
Spirit? Ps. xliii.ii.
Enter not into judgment with thy servant, because every living man shall not
be justified in thy sight. An other says, although in somewhat diverse meaning.
Job. ix.viij.
Man can not be righteous with God: if he will comende with him, he shall not
be able to answer one for a thousand. Here we now plainly hear what is the
righteousness of God, even such as can be satisfied with no works of men, to
whom when it examineth us of a thousand offenses, we can not purge our selves
of one. Such a righteousness had that same chosen instrument of God Paul
conceived, i. Cor. iiii.iiij.
when he professed that he knew himself gilty in nothing, but that he was not
thereby justified.

Ad (...). lib. 3. ca. 5.
All the godly that groan under this burden of corruptible flesh, and in this
weakness of life, have this only hope that we have one mediator Jesus Christ
the righteous, and he is the appeasement for our sins. What says he? If this
be their only hope, where is the confidence of works? For when he calls it
only, he leaves none other. Super ca^t. sermon. 61.
And Bernard says. And in deed where is safe and steadfast rest and
assuredness for the weak, but in the wounds of the Savior? and so much the
surer I dwell therein as he is mightier to save. The world rages, the body
burdeneth, the deuel lies in wait I fall not, because I am bulded upon the
sure rock. I have sinned a grievous sin my conscience is troubled, but it
shall not be ouertrobled, because I shall remember the wounds of the Lord. And
hereupon afterward he concludes. Therefore my merit is the Lords taking of
mercy, ^^ psalm. qui. habitat sermo. 15.
I am not utterly without merit, so long as he is not without mercies. But if
the mercies of the Lord be many, then I also have as many merits. Shall I sing
mine own righteousnesses. Lord I will remember only thy righteousness. For
that is also my righteousness, for he is made unto me righteousness of God.
Again in an other place. I^ cant. sermo. 13.
This is the whole merit of man, if he put his whole hope in him that saves
whole man. Likewise where reteyning peace to him self he leaves ye glory to
God. To thee (says he) let glory remain vnminished: it shall be well with me,
if I have peace. I forswere glory altogether, least if I wrongfully take upon
me yt which is not mine own, I lose also that which is offered me. And more
plainly in an other place he says: Why should the church be careful of
merits, which has a surer and safer way to glory upon the purpose of God? So
there is no cause why thou should ask, by what merits we hope for good
things, Eze. xxxvi.xx^j. and xxx^^
specially when thou hear in the Prophet, I will do it, not for your sakes,
but for mine own sake, says the lord. It suffices for merit, to know that
merits suffice not. But as it suffices for merit not to presume of merits,
so to be without merits suffices to judgment. Whereas he freely uses this
word Merits for good works, we must therein bear with the custom. But in
the end his purpose was to make Hypocrites afraid, that wildly range with
licentiousness of sinnyng against the grace of God. As afterward he expounds
himself, saying: Happy is the Church that neither wants merits without
presumption, nor presumption without merits. It has whereupon to presume, but
not merits. It has merits, but to deserve not to presume. Is not the very
not presuming a deseruyng? Therefore it presumes so much the more boldly,
because it presumes not, having large matter to glory upon, even the many
mercies of the Lord.

This is the truth. The exercised consciences perceive this to be i. Cor.
iiij^ ii.
and (as Paul says) shall reuele the secrets of darknesses, and disclose the
hidden things of the heart, which shall compel the lurking and unwilling
conscience to utter al things that now are fallen out of remembrance. The
Deuell our accuser will press us, which is privy to all the wicked deeds
that he has moved us to do. There the outward pompous shows of good works
which now only are esteemed, shall nothing profit us. Only the pureness of will
shall be required. Wherefore the Hypocrisy, not only whereby every man knowing
himself gilty before God desires to boste himself before men, but also
wherewith every man deceives himself before God (as we be al inclined to
stroke and flatter our selves) shall fall down confounded, howsoever it now be
proud with more than dro^ken ^oldnesse. They yt bend not their wit to such a
sight, may in deed for a short time swetely and pleasantly frame a
righteousness to themselves, but it is such a righteousness as shall be by and
by shaken away from them at the judgment of God: like as great richesse
heaped up in a dream do vanish away from men when they awake. But they that
shall earnestly as it were in the sight of God, enquire of the true rule of
righteousness, shall certainly find that all the works of me^, if they be
judged by their own worthiness, are nothing but defilinges and filthiness:
that y^ which among the common people is accounted righteousness, is before
God mere wickedness: that that which is judged purity, is uncleanness: that
that which is reckened glory, is but shame.

P^o. ^xi.ij ^xvi.ij.
Again. All the ways of man seem clean in his own eyes. But what* Is he
acquitted by this blindness? No. But (as he further says in the same place)
the lord weyeth y^ hearts, that is to say, while man flattereth himself by
reason of the outward visore of righteousness that he bears in resemblance,
in ye mean time the lord with his bala^ce examineth y^ hidden uncleanness of
the heart. Therefore since we so nothing profit with such flatteries, let us not
wilfully mock our selves to our own destruction. But that we may try our
selves rightly, we must necessarily call back our conscience to the judgment
seat of God. For we do altogether need his light to disclose ye secret
foldinges of our perverseness, which otherwise lie to depely hidden. For then,
and never til then, we shall clearly perceive what is meant hereby: that man
being rottenness and a worm, Job. xv.x^^. Job. xiiij.iiij. Job. ix.xx
abominable and vain, which drinks wickedness as water is far from being
justified before God. For who should make yt clean that is conceived of
unclean seed? not one man. The^ shall we also find yt by experience, which
Job said of himself: If I will go about to show my self innocent, mine own
mouth shall condemn me: if I will show my self righteous, it will prove me
wicked. For that is not meant of one age only, Esa. iiii.vi
but of al ages, which the Prophet in old time complained of Israel, that all
went astraye like sheep, that every one turned aside to his own way. For he
there co^prehendeth all them, to whom the grace of redemption should come. And
the rigorousnesse of this examination ought to proceed so far, till it subdue
us, so that we be fully thrown down withal, and by that mean prepare us to
receive the grace of Christ. For he is deceived that thinks himself able to
receive the enioyeng of this grace, until he have first throwe^ down all
haughtiness of mind. i. Pet. v.^.
This is a known saying: that God confounds the proud, and gives grace to
the humble.

Ps. (...).
Therefore when thou hear in ye Prophet, that there is prepared salvation for
the humble people, and abaceme^t for the eyes of the wicked: First think, that
there is no entry open to salvation, until thou have laid away all pride and
taken to thee perfect humbleness: then, that the same hu^blenesse is not a
certain modesty whereby thou geuest over to the Lord a hear breadth of thine
own right, as they are called humble before men that do neither presumptuously
advance themselves, nor reprochefully triumph over other, although they stand
upon some estimation of their own excellence: but an unfeigned submission of a
mind thrown down with feling of his own misery and nedinesse. For it is so
each where described in ye word of God. When the lord says thus in Zephanias:
Zepha. l^^ xi.
I will take away out thee him that outragiously reioyseth, and I will leave in
the mids of thee ye afflicted man, and the poor man, and they shall trust in
the lord: does he not there plainly show who be humble? even they that lie
afflicted with knowledge of their own poverty. On the other side he calls
the proud, outrageous reioysers, because me^ ioyeng in prosperity ar wo^t to
rejoice without measure. But to the humble whom he purposes to save, he
leaves nothing but to trust in ye Lord. And likewise it is said in Esaye: Esa.
lxvi.ij. Esa. lvii.xv.
Whom shall I look unto, but to the poor and contrite in spirit, and him that
fears my words? Again: The hie and excellent, that inhabiteth eternity,
his name is holy, that dwells on hye, and in the holy place, and with the
contrite and humble spirit, to quicken the spirit of the humble and the heart
of contrite. When thou so often hear the name of contrition, understand
thereby the wound of the heart, that suffers not a man thrown down on the
ground to rise again. With such contrition ought thy heart to be wounded, if
thou will according to the saying of God be advanced with the humble. If that
be not done, thou shall be brought low with the mighty hand of God to thy
shame and disgracement.

And our best Schoolemaister thinking it not enough to show it Luc. xixij*
xiij.
For he brings forth a Publicane that standing a far of, not daryng to lift
up his eyes to heaven, with much knocking his breast prays in this wise: Lord
be merciful to me a sinner. Let us not think these to be tokens of feigned
modesty, that he dare not look up to heaven, nor to come nerer, that with
knocking his breast he confesses himself a sinner: but let us know that they
be testimonies of inward affection. On the other side he sets the Pharisee,
which thanketh God that he is not of the common sort of men, either an
oppresser, or an unrighteous man, or an adulterer, because he fasted twyse on
the Sabbat, and gave tithes of all that he possessed. He do the with open
confession acknoweledge that the righteousness which he has is the gift of
God: but because he stands in confidence that he is righteous, he departs
from God vnfauored and in hatred. The Publicane by acknowledgyng of his own
wickedness is justified. Hereby we may se, how great is ye estimation of our
hu^bling us before God: so that the heart can not be open to receive his
mercy, unless it be first void of al opinion of his own worthiness. When
this opinion has possessed the place, it shuts up the way for Gods mercy
to enter. And that no man should doubt hereof, Christ was sent of his father
into the earth with this co^missio^, to bring glad tidinges to the poor, Esa.
lxi.i.
to heal the contrite in heart, to preach liberty to the captive, and
deliverance to them that were shut up in prison, and to comfort them that
mourn: to give them glory for ashes, Matt. x^.xxviij. Matt. ix.xiij.
oil for mournyng, the robe of praise for the spirit of sorrow. According to
this commission, he calls none but them that labor and are lode^ to take
part of his liberality. And in an other place he says: I came not to call the
righteous, but sinners.

De uerbis apest. ca. 8.
we embrace the gifts of Christ. Because if he sought deseruinges in us, we
should not come to his gifts. Sermon. 15. in cant.
Wherewith Bernard very well accords, co^paryng proud men to unfaithful
servants, that arrogantly claim any thing be it never so little to their own
deseruinges: because they do wrongfully keep to themselves the praise of grace
passing by the^, as if a wall would say that it brings forth the sunbeame
which it receives through a window. But, not to tarry longer hereupon, let us
take a short but a general and sure rule, that he is prepared to take part of
the fruits of Gods mercy, that has utterly emptied himself, I will not say
of righteousness, which is none at all, but of the vain and windye image of
righteousness. Because every man so much hinders his receiving of the
liberality of God as he rests in himself.

The.xiii. Chapter. That there are two things to be marked in free
justification.
only to God a confession of praise, when we entreat of righteousness. And
the Apostle testifies, Romans iij.xv.
that this was the Lords principal purpose of giving us righteousness in
Christ, that he might show his own righteousness. And what a showing that
should be, he declares immediately after: that is, if he alone be known to be
righteous, and that justified him that is of the faith of Jesus Christ. Thou
see that the righteousness of God is not sufficiently set out, unless he
alone be accounted righteous, and do communicate the grace of righteousness to
them that deserve it not. By this mean he will have every mouth to be stopped,
and the whole World to be made subject to him. For while man has any thing to
speak in his own defense, so long there is somewhat taken away from the
glory of God. Ezec. xx.xl^i.
So in Ezechiel he teaches how much we glorify his name by reknowleging of
our own wickedness. You shall remember (says he) the ways and all the wicked
doings wherewith ye have been defiled. And ye shall be displeased with your
selves in your own sight, in all the euels that ye have committed. And ye
shall know that I am the Lord, when I shall do good to you for mine own
names sake, and not according to your most wicked offenses. If these things
be contained in the true knowledge of God, that we being broosed with knowledge
of our own iniquity, should consider that he does good to us where as we be
unworthy thereof: why then do we to our great hurt attempt to steal away from
the Lord any parcel be it never so small of the praise of his free goodness?
Like wise Jeremy when he cries out, Ier. ix.xiij
Let not ye wise man glory in his wisdom, or the rich man in his richesse,
or the strong man in his strength, but let him that glories, glory in the
Lord: does he not there declare that somewhat is diminished from Gods glory,
if man glory in him self? To this purpose truly does Paul apply those
words, i. Cor. i.xxx.
when he teaches that all the parts of our salvation are reposed in Christ,
that we should not glory but in the Lord. For his meaning is that he rises up
against God and darkeneth his glory, whosoever thinks that he has any
thing be it never so little of his own.

This is the truth, we never truly glory in him, unless we be utterly Romans
ii.xix.
For Paul judges that only by this mean the world is made subject to God,
when all matter to glory upon is utterly taken from men. Therefore Esaie, when
he declares that Israel shall have their justification in God, Esaie. xlv.xxv.
since also that they shall there also have their praise: as though he should
say, that the Lord to this end justifies the elect that they should glory in
him and in nothing else. But how we ought to be praised in the Lord, he had
taught in the verse next before: that is, yt we should swear that our
righteousnesses and strength are in the Lord. Note that there is not required a
bare confession, but confirmed with an oath, that a man should not think that
he shall be discharged with I wot not what fained humility. And let no man
here allege for excuse, that he does not glory when without arrogance he
reknowlegeth his own righteousness: for there can be no such estimation but it
engenders confidence, nor confidence but it bredeth glory. Therefore let us
remember that in all the disputation of righteousness we must have regard to
this end, that the praise thereof remain with the Lord whole and perfect. For
as much as for declaration of his righteousness (as the Apostle testifies)
he has poured out his grace upon us, Romans iii.xxvi.
that he might be just and iustifiyng him that is of the faith of Christ.
Ephe. i.ii. Ephesians. i.viii
Wherefore in an other place, when he had taught that the Lord gave us
salvation, to set out the glory of his name, afterward as it were repeting ye
same thing he adds: ye ar saved by grace and by the gift of God, not by
works, that none should glory. And when Peter tells that we are called unto
hope of salvation that we should declare the powers of him yt has called us out
of darkness into his marvelous light, without doubt his meaning is so to make
ye only praises of God to sound in the ears of the faithful, yt they should with
deep silence oppress al arrogancy of the flesh. In a sum, man can not
without robbery of God challenge to him self any one crum of righteousness:
because even so much is plucked and taken away from the glory of Gods
righteousness.

Pro. xx.^x.
I have cleansed my heart, I am made clean from my sin? Truly there is no
man that shall not be overwhelmed with infinite filthiness. Therefore let even
the perfectest man descend into his own conscience, and call his doings to
account: what end shall he have? Shall he swetely rest as though al things were
in good order between him and God? and shall he not rather be vexed with
terrible torments, when he shall feel matter of damnation abiding in him self
if he be judged according to his works? The conscience, if it look upon God,
must of necessity either have assured peace with his judgment, or be beseged
with the terrors of hell. Therefore we profit nothing in disputing of
righteousness unless we stablyshe such a righteousness, with the
steadfastness whereof our soul may be stayed in the judgment of God. When our
soul shall have whereby it may both without fear appear before the face of
God, and receive his judgment, unshaken, then and not till then let us know
yt we have found an unfeigned righteousness. Therefore not without cause the
Apostle stands so much upon this point, Romans iiii.xiiii.
with whose words I had rather express it than with mine own. If (says he)
the promise of inheritance be of the law, faith is made void, the promise is
made abolished. He first infers that faith is disanulled and made void if
the promise of righteousness have respect to the deseruinges of our works, or
do hang upon the keeping of the law. For so could never any man assuredlye rest
in it: because it could never come to pass that any man might assuredly
determine with him self that he had satisfied ye law, as in deed never any man
does by works fully satisfy it. Whereof, that we should not need to seek far
for testimonies to prove it, every man may be a witness to him self that will
with a right eye behold himself. And hereby appears, in how deep and dark
corners hypocrisy buried the minds of me^, while they so carelessly bear with
the^ selves, that they stick not to set their own flatteries against the
iudgegement of God, as though they would bind to a stay of his judicial
proceeding, but the faithful that do sincerely examine them selves, are grieved
and tormented with a far other manner of carfulness. Therefore there should so
enter into all minds a doubting, and at length a very despeire where each man
for him self should make account, with how great a burden of det he is still
ouerpressed, and how far he is from the condition wherwt he is charged. Lo,
how faith is by this mean already expressed and extinguished. For to waver, to
vary, to be carried up and down, to stick fast in doubting, to be holden in
suspense, to stagger, and at length to despeire, is not to trust: but to
strengthen thy mind with constant certainty and perfect assurednes, and to
have whereupon to rest and faste^ thy foo^e.

He adioyneth also an other thing, yt is, that ye promise shall thereby be Ps.
x.xix.lxxiii.
before yt he required salvation by the word of God, first determines ye cause
thereof to be in his mercy. Let thy mercies (says he) come unto me, thy
salvation according to thy word. And rightfully: because God is by no other
mean persuaded to make the promise, but of his own mere mercy. Therefore we
must herin stay, and deeply fasten all our hope and not to look to our own
works, to seek any help of the^. And that you should not think that I herin
speak any new thing: Augustine does also teach yt we ought so to do. In Psalm.
88. tract. priore.
Christ (says he) shall reign for ever in his servants, God has promised it,
God has said it, and if yt be not enough, God has sworn it. Therefore for
as much as ye promise is stablished, not according to our deseruinges, but
according to his mercy, no man ought to speak fearfully of yt of which he
can not doubt. Bernarde also says: In ded^ea^^ templi. ser. 5.
The disciples of Christ say, Who can be saved? Butte he answered: this
is impossible with men, butte yt is not impossible with God. This is all our
confidence, this is our only comfort, this is the whole ground of our hope,
but being assured of the possibility, what say we of his will? Who knows
whether he be worthy of love or hatred? Eccle. ix.i. i. Cor. ii.xvi
Who has known ye Lords meaning* Or who has been his counselor? Here now
faith must of necessity help us, here must his truth succoure us, yt that
which is hidden from us in y^ heart of ye father, may be reveled by ye Spirit,
and his Spirit testifieng it may persuade our hearts that we are ye sons of
God. And it may persuade us by calling and iustifyeng us freely by faith, in
which things there is as it were a certain mean passage from ye eternal
predestination to ye glory yt is to come. Brefely let us thus conclude. The
Scripture declares yt the promises of God are not stablished, unless they be
taken hold of with assured affiance of conscience: and whersoeuer there is any
doubting or uncertainty it pronounces yt they be void. Again yt pronounces
yt they do nothing but stagger and waver if they rest upon our own works.
Therefore we must needs either lose righteousness, or we must not consider our
own works, but only faith must take place, whose nature is this, to lift up
her ears and shut her eyes, yt is to say, to be hedefully bent to the promise
only, and to turn away her thought from all man's worthiness or deserving.
Zach. iii.ix.
So is y^ notable prophecy of Zachary fulfilled, that when the wickedness of
the land shall be done away, a man shall call his friend under his vine and under
his fig tree, where the Prophet declares yt the faithful do no otherwise
enjoy true peace but after obteining of the forgiveness of sins. For this
cauelatio^ is to be remembered in the Prophets, that when they speak of the
kingdom of Christ, they set out the outward blessings of God as figures of
the spiritual things. Esaie. ix.vi. Ephe. ii.xiiii.
Whereupon Christ is called both the king of peace and our peace, because he
appeaseth all the troublesome motions of conscience. If we seek by what mean he
does it, we must needs come to the sacrifice by which God is appeased. For he
shall never cesse to tremble for fear that shall not determine that God is
appeased by the only satisfactorie cleansing wherein Christ has sustained his
wrath. Finally peace is no where else to be sought for but in the terrors of
Christ our redemer.

Romans v.i.
unless it be determined that we be justified by faith. And he therwithall
declares whense that assurednes comes, namely when ye love of God is poured
into our hearts by the holy Ghost: as if he had said, yt our consciences can
not otherwise be quieted, unless we be certainly persuaded yt we please god.
Whereupon also in an other place he cries out in ye person of al ye godly,
Romans v.
Who shall sever us from the love of God, which is in Christ? because we shall
^re^ble even at every little breath, till we be arrived into yt haue^: but we
shall be without care even in the darkness of death, so long as ye lord shall show
him self a pastor to us. Psa. xxiii.xii.
Therefore whosoever prate yt we are justified by faith, because being
regenerate we are just by living spiritually: they never tasted the sweetness
of grace, to consider yt God will be merciful unto the^. Whereupon also
follows, that they do no more know the manner of praiyng rightly, than Turks
and whatsoever other profane Nations. For (as Paul witnesses) it is no true
faith unless it teach and put us in mind of ye most sweet name of Father,
yea unless it open our mouth freely to cry out Abba father. Gal. iiii.vi.
Which in an other place he more plainly expresses, where he says yt in
Christ we have boldness and entry in confidence by ye faith of him. Truly
this comes not to pass by the gift of regeneration: which as it is always
imperfect in this flesh, so it contains in it self manifold matter of douting.
Wherefore we must of necessity come to this remedy, yt the faithful should
determine that they may by no other right hope for ye inheritance of ye
heavenly kingdom, but because being graffed into ye body of Chist they are
freely accounted righteous. For as touching justification, faith is a thing
merely passive, bringing nothing of our own to the recovering of the favor of
God, but receiving of Christ that which we want.

The.xiiii. Chapter. What is the beginning of justification, and the continual
procedinges thereof.
God with uncleanness of life whom they confess with mouth, they are Christ's
no further the^ in name: or they be hypocrites, which cover ye wickedness of
their hearts, with vain deceitful colors: or being regenerate by ye Spirit of
God, they endeavor themselves to true holiness. Specially when they are to be
judged by their natural gifts, from ye croune of their head to ye soul of
their foot, there shall not be found one sparcle of goodness: unless
paraduenture we will accuse ye Scripture of falshed, when it sets out all ye
sons of Adam with these titles, yt they be of froward and stubborn heart yt
al ye imagination of their heart is euel from their infantie, Ier. xvii.ix.
Genesis viii.xxi. Psa.x^^ii^ xi. and xiiij.ii. Genesis vi.iii. Gal. v.xix
yt their thoughts be vain, yt they have not ye fear of God before their
eyes, yt none of them understands or seeks God: brefeli yt they be flesh, by
which word are understood al those works which Paul reherseth, fornication,
vncle^anes, unchastity, riotousnes, worshipping of ydoles, witchcraftes,
enmities, contentions, emulations, angers, dissensions, sects, enuies,
manslaughters, and whatsoever filthiness and abomination may be devised. This
forsothe is ye worthiness, with confidence whereof they must be proved. But if
any among the^ excel with such honestye of manners as may have some show of
holiness among men: yet because we know yt God regards not ye outward
glistering, we must search ye very fountain of works, if we will have them to
avail any thing to righteousness. We must (I say) thoroughly look into them,
from what affection of heart these works proceed. But although here lies open
a most large field to discourse in, yet because ye matter may be declared in
very few words, I will follow as much as I may a brefenesse in teaching.

First I deny not yt whatsoever excellent gifts appear in ye unbelievers,

But nevertheless it is true which Augustine writes, that all they Li. 4.
cotra ^ulianum.
are not only worthy of no reward, but rather are worthy of punishment,
because they do with defiling of heart, bespott the pure good things of God.
For though they be the instruments of God, to preserve the fellowship of me^
with justice, continence, te^perance of mind, valiantness, and wisdom: yet
they do very euelly execute these good works of God: because they are
restrained from evil doing, not by sincere love of goodness, but either by
only ambition, or by love of themselves, or by some other crooked affection.
Whereas therefore they are corrupt by ye very vnclenesse of heart as by their
beginning, they are no more to be reckened among virtues, than those vices,
which are wont to deceive by reason of nerenesse and likeness of virtue. Finally
when we remember, that thend of that which is right, ever is that God be
served: whatsoever tends to any other end, fourthwt worthily loses the name
of right. Because therefore they have not respect to the mark which ye wisdom
of God apointeth: although the thing that they do, seem good in doing, yet by a
wrongful end it is sin. He concludes therefore yt al ye Fabricii, Scipio^es,
and Catoes, in all these excellent acts of theirs: yet sinned in this behalf,
yt whereas they lacked ye light of faith, they did not apply them to that end to
which they ought to have applied them: and that for that cause, true
righteousness was not in them: for as much as duties are not weyed by the
doings, but by the ends.

i. John. v.xii.
who so have no part in Christ, what manner of men so ever they be, whatsouer
they do or go about, yet they run forward with their whole course into
destruction and the judgment of eternal death. After this reason, Li. ad
Bonisac. 3. ca. 5.
is that said of Augustine, Our religion disceneth ye righteous from ye
unrighteous, not by law of works, but by the very law of faith, without which,
those that seem good works are turned into sins. Wherefore the same Augustine
says very well in an other place, Pref. in Psalm.
when he co^pareth ye endeavor of such me^ to running out of ye way. For how
much faster a man runs out of ye way, so much further he is from ye mark,
and therefore is made so much more miserable. Wherefore he affirms that it is
better to halt in ye way, than to run out of ye way. Finally it is certain
that they are euel trees, forasmuch as without ye communicating of Christ there
is no sanctification. They may therefore bear fair fruits and beautiful to
the eye, yea and sweet in taste, but in no wise good fruits. Hereby we easily
perceive that whatsoever man thinks, purposes, or does, before yt he be
reconciled to god by faith, is accursed, and not only of no value to
righteousness, but of certain deserving to da^natio^. And why dispute we
hereof as of a doutful thing, since it is already proved by ye witness of
thapostle, Heb. xi.vi
that it is impossible yt any man may please God without faith.

John. v.xxv.
he is said to raise us from death, and to make us a new creature. For we se
that oftentimes, specially of the Apostle, the goodness of god is set forth
unto us by this title. God (says he) which is rich in mercy, Ephesians. ii.iiii.
for the great love wherwt he loved us, even when we were dead by sins, has
made us alive together in Christ. etc. In an other place, where under the figure
of Abraham he entreats of ye general calling of the faithful, he says: it is
God yt gives life to ye dead, and calls those things that are not, as
though they were. If we be nothing, what (I beseech you) can we do? Wherefore
the lord strongly beats down this arrogancy, in the history of Job, in
these words: who preuenteth me, Job. ^^^.ii Romans x.xixv.
and I shall render it him? for all things ar mine. Which sentence Paul
expou^ding applies it to this, that we should not think that we bring any thing
to the lord but mere shame of needines and emptines. Wherefore in the place
above cited, to prove yt we are come into the hope of salvation by his grace
alone, not by works, he allegeth yt we are his creatures because we are new
begotten in Christ Jesus, to the good works which he has prepared yt we should
walk in the^: Ephesians. ii.x.
As if he had said: which of us may boaste yt he has with his righteousness
provoked God, since our first power to do good proceeds out of regeneration?
For as we are made by nature, oil shall sooner be wrong out of a stone, tha^ a
good work out of us. Truly it is wonderful if man being condemned of so great a
shame, dare yet say that there remains any thing with him. Therefore let us
confess with this noble instrument of God, i. Ti^. ix.
yt we are called of God with a holy calli^g, no^ according to our works, but
according to his purpose and grace: and that ye kindness and love of God our
savior toward us has appeared, Tit. iii.iiii
because he has saved us, not by ye works of righteousness which we have don,
but according to his own mercy: yt being justified by his grace, we might be
made ye heirs of eternal life. By this confession we dispoil man of al
righteousness eue^ to ye least little piece thereof, til he be by only merci
regenerate into hope of eternal life: forasmuch as if ye righteousness of works
do bring any thing toward ye iustifyi^g of us, To. xi.vi. Matt. ix.xiii.
it is falsely said yt we are justified by grace. Truly thapostle had not
forgotten himself, when he affirmed justification to be of fre gift, which in
an other place resoneth yt grace is now not grace, if works do any thing auail.
And what other thing does ye lord mean, when he says that he came not to call
righteous me^ but sinners? If only sinners ar received, why seek we an entry
by fained righteousnesses?

Still this same thought has now and the^ recourse to my mind, that it is Esa.
lvi.x^i
The lord has seen, and it seemed (...) in his eyes. And he saw, that there is
no man: and he maruailed that there is none that offers himself: and he has
set salvation in his own arm, and has stre^gthned himself with his own
righteousness. Where are our righteousnesses if it be true which ye prophet
says: yt there is no man yt helps ye lord in recoueri^g his salvation? So an
other prophet, where he brings in ye lord, discoursi^g of ye reco^ciling of
si^ners to himself, Ose. ii.xii
says: I will espouse the to me for ever, in righteousness, judgment, grace and
mercy. I will sai to her yt has not obtained merci, you have obtained merci. If
such covenant, which it is certain to be ye first co^ioyning yt we have with God,
stands upon ye mercy of god there is left no fou^datio^ of our own
righteousness. And I would fain learn of those me^ which fame yt man meteth God
with so^ righteousness of works, whether they think yt there is any righteousness at
al, but that which is acceptable to God. If it be madness to think so, what
acceptable thing to god ca^ proceed from his enemies, who^ he wholli abhors
with al their doings? That al we, ^
I sai, ar ye dedli and professed enemies of our god, ye truth it self
testifies, til being justified, we are received into friendship. If justified
(...) the beginni^g of love, what righteousness of works shall go before (...)
Ihon, to turn away that pestilent arrogance, does diligently put us in mind
how we did not first love him. And ye self same thing ye lord had long before
taught by his prophet: ^se. x^iil.^v.
I will love the^, saih he, with a fre love, because mine anger is turned.
Certainly his love is not provoked by works if it has of his own accord
inclined it self unto us. But ye rude common sort of men think it to be
nothing else, but that no man has deserved yt Christ should perform our
redemption: yet that to the entering into ye possession of redemption, we be
helped by our own works. Yea but hosoeuer we be redeemed of Christ, yet till we
be by the calling of the Father graffed into the communion of him, we are both
heirs of darkness and death and the enemies of God. ^. Cor. vi.xi.
For Paul teaches that we are not cleansed and washed from our uncleannesses
by the blood of Christ, until the holy ghost works y^ cleansing in us.
Which same thing Peter minding to teach, declares that the sancrifinge of
the Spirit avails unto obedience and the sprinkling of the blood of Christ.
i. Pet. i.i^.
If we be by the Spirit sprinkled with the blood of Christ unto cleansing,
let us not think that before such watering we be any other than a sinner is
without Christ. Let this therefore remain certain, yt the beginning of our
salvation is as yt were a certain resurrection from death to life: because when
for Christ's sake it is given to us to believe in him, the^ we first begin to
pass from death into life.

Hag. ii.^^^
Ask (says he) ye prestes, saying: if a man carry sanctified flesh in ye
he^me of his garment, and puts to it bread or other meat, shall it be
sanctified? The prestes answered: No. And Haggee said. If a defiled man in
soul touch any of such these things, shall it be defiled? The prestes
answered: it shall be defiled. Haggee said. So is this people before my face,
says ye lord: and so al ye work of their hands, and al things yt they offer
to me shall be defiled. I would to god yt this saying might either get full credit
with us, or well be settled in our remembrance. For there is no man, though he be
otherwise in his whole life never so heinous a wicked doer, yt ca^e abide to be
persuaded, yt which ye Lord here plainly pronounces. The naughtiest man, so
sone as he has performed one or two doubtful deeds of ye law, doubts nor y^
it shall be accounted to him for righteousness. But ye Lord cries to ye
contrary, yt there is no sanctification gotten thereby, unless ye heart be
first well cleansed. And not contented therewt, he affirms yt al ye works
whatsoever they be yt proceed from sinners, are defiled with uncleanness of ye
heart. Therefore let ye name of righteousness depart from these works which are
by ye Lords own mouth condemned of filthiness. And with how fit a similitude does
he show ye same? For it might have been objected, yt whatsoever ye Lord had
commanded, was inuiolably holly. But he on the contrary side sets against
them, that it is no marvel, if those things that are hallowed by the law of
the Lord, are de^^ied with the filthiness of naughty men: whereas an unclean
hand prophaneth a holy thing with touching it.

The same matter he excelle^tly well handles in Esai. Offer not (says Esa.
i.xiii.
incense is abomination to me: my soul hates your Calendes and solemnities.
They are become tedious to me, and I have been werie with bearing them: when
you shall hold up your hands I will turn away mine eyes from you: when you
shall multiply prayer I will not hear: for your hands are full of blood. Be
washed, be clean, take away the evil of your thoughts. What means this that
the lord so lotheth the obeying of his own law? Yea but he here refuses
nothing that is of the natural observing of the law, the beginning whereof he
every where teaches to be the unfeigned fear of his name. Wh^ that is taken
away, what so ever things ar offered him are not only trifles, but stinking
and abominable filthiness. Now let the hypocrites go, and keeping perverseness
wrapped up in their heart, endeavor to deserved ye favor of God with works. But
by this mean, they shall more and more provoke him to wrath. Pro. xv, viij.
For to him the sacrifices of wicked are abominable, and the only prayer of
upright men pleases him. Therefore we hold that out of dout, which ought to be
most commonly known to him, that is eue^ but meanly excercised in the
Scriptures, that even those works that glister most gloriously in men not yet
truly sanctified, ar so far from righteousness in the sight of the lord, Aug.
lib. de poe^il. and Gregor.
yt they be judged sins. And therefore they have said most truly that have
taught that favor with God is not procured to any person by works: but
contrary wise that works do then please, and never til the^, when ye person
has first found grace in ye sight of God. And this order is religiously to be
kept, to which ye scripture leads us by ye hand. Moses writes yt the lord
had respect to Abell and to his works. Genesis iiii.iiii. Act. xv vi,
See you not how he declares that God is favorable to the men, before that
he has respect to their works? Wherefore the cle^sing of ye heart must go
before, yt the works which come from us, may be lovingly received of God:
bi^^^se this sayi^g of Jeremy is always in force, Iere v.iii
yt the works of God have respect unto truth. And that it is only faith by
which the hearts of men ar cleansed, the holy ghost has affirmed by the mouth
of Peter: whereby it is certain, that the first foundation is in true and truly
faith.

Now let us look what righteousness they have, whom we have set There is none
righteous, ^. ^ing. bui. v^.
(says ye scripture) yt does good and sins no^. What manner of righteousness
therefore will they yet get by their works? First I say, yt the best work yt
can be brought forth of the^, is yet always sprikled and corrupted with some
uncleanness of ye flesh, and has as it were some dregs mingled with it. I sai,
let a holy servant of God chose out of al his life ye most excellent thing yt
he shall think yt he has done in ye whole course thereof, and let him well
consider al ye parts of it, without dout he shall find somwher somewhat savoring
of ye rottennes of ye flesh forasmuch as to doing well our chereful quicknes is
never such as it ought to be, but in slacking our course our weakness is much.
Although we se yt there ar evident foul blottes wherwt ye works of ye holy are
be spredde, yet grant yt they be nothing but most little spots: shall they
nothing offend ye eyes of God, before whom even ye sterres are not clean?
Thus have we showed yt there comes not so much as one good work out of
holy men, which if it be judged in it self, deserves not just reward of
shame.

Eze. xviij.x^iiii. Iac. ii.x.
as ye prophet says. With whom also James agrees: He yt offe^deth (says
he) in one, is made gilty of al. Now fith this mortal life is never pure or
void from si^ne, whatsoever righteousness we should purchase, being from time to
time with sins following corrupted, oppressed and lost, it should not com into ye
sight of God, nor be accounted to us for righteousness. Finalli when ye
righteousness of works is entreted of, we must not have respect to ye work of ye
law, but to ye commandment. Therefore if we ^eke righteousness by the law, we
shall in vain bring forth one or two works: but a perpetual obedience of ye law
is there necessary. Wherefore the Lord does not but ones (as many
foolishlythinke) impute to us righteousness yt same forgeuenes of sins
whereof we have spoken, that having ones obtained pardon of our life past, we
should afterward seek righteousness in the law: because he should so do
nothing else butte bring us into a false hope, and mock and laughe us to
scorn. For since no perfection cold com to us so long as we are clothed with this
flesh, and since ye law thretneth death and judgment to al the^ yt perform not
full rightousnes in work: it shall always have whereof it may accuse and co^de^ne
us, unless ye mercy of God on ye other side did wtstand it, to acquit us
from time to time with continual forgeuenes of sins. Wherefore this stands
always certain which we said at ye beginning, yt if we be weied by our own
worthiness, whatsoever we purpose or go about, yet we with al our travails, and
endeavors are worthy of death and destruction.

But the lord contrariwise pronou^ceth yt he imputed to Abraham faith for
righteousness, Romans iiii.xiii,
not at the time when he yet served idols, but when he had al ready mani years
excelled in holiness of life. Therefore Abraham had long worshipped God from a
pure heart, and had performed yt obedience of ye law which may be performed of
a mortal man: yet he has righteousness reposed in faith. Wherevpo^ we gather,
according to ye argument of Paul, yt it was not of works. Habac. ii.iiii.
Likewise when it is said in the prophet, The righteous man shall live by faith,
it is not spoken of wicked and profane men, who^ the lord justifies by
co^uerting the^ to faith, but the speech is directed to the faithful, and to
them is promised life by faith. Romans iiii.vii. Psa. xxxii.^
Paul also takes away all Doubt, when for co^firming of that sentence, he
takes this verse of David, Blessed ar they whose iniquities are forgiven. But
it is certain, that David speaks not of the wicked, but of the faithful, such
as him self was: because he spoke out of the feli^g of his own conscience.
Therefore this blessedness we must not have ones in our life, ii. Cor. v.xviii.
but hold it throughout al our life. Last of all he testifies yt the embassage
concerning the fre reconciliatio^ with God is not published for one or two days,
but is perpetual in ye church. Therefore the faithful have even to ye end of
their life no other rigteousnesse than yt which is there set forth. For Christ
euerlastyngly remains the mediator to reconcile ye father to us, and the
effectualnesse of his death is everlasting: namely washing, satistactio^,
expiation,finally perfect obedience, wherwt al our iniquities are covered.
Neither does Paul to the Ephesians say, that we have the beginning of salvation
out of grace, but that we are saved by grace, not of works, yt no man should
glory.

The starting holes which ye scholemen do here seek to escape by, do

If these things be true, verily no works of ours can of them selves all the^
yt continue not in all things. Leui. xviii v.
Whereby the devise of righteousness in part is largely confuted, sith no
other righteousness is admitted into heaven, but a whole observing of the law.
And no whit sou^der is yt which they are wo^t to babble of supplieng of
reco^pense by works of Superero gatio^. For why? Do they not still return to
the same place from whe^se they ar already shut out: yt he which keeps the law
in part, is by works so far righteous? That which no man of sound judgment will
grant the^, they do to shamelesly take for confessed. So often the Lord
testifies yt he acknowlegeth no righteousness of works, but in ye perfect
observing of his law. What obstinatie is it, yt we when we are destitute of yt
observing, least we should seem spoiled of al glory, yt is, to have altogether
given place to God do boste our selves of I wot not what small pieces of a few
works, and go about by satisfactions to redeem yt which wants. Satisfactio^s
have already before been sufficiently overthrown, yt we ought not now so much
as to dream of the^. Only this I say, that they which so play the fools, do
not wey how detestable a thing sin is before God: for truly they should
understand that the whole righteousness of men being laid upon a heap, is not
sufficient to make recompense for one sin. Gene. iii.xvii.
For we se that man was by one offense so cast away and aba^doned of God, yt he
therwithal lost al mean to recover salvation. Therefore the power of
Satisfaction is taken away, wherwt they flatter the^ selves, but surely shall
never satisfy God, to who^ nothing is pleasant or acceptable that proceeds
from his enemies. And his enemies are al they to who^ he purposes to impute
sins. Therefore our sins must be covered and forgiven, before that the lord
have respect to any work of ours. Whereupon follows that the forgiveness of
sins is of fre grace, which they do wickedly blaspheme that thrust in any
satisfactio^s. Let us therefore, Phil. iij.xiii.
after the example of ye Apostle, forgetti^g those things that are behind us,
and hasting forward to those things that are before us, run in our race,
endeavoring to the price of the high calling. etc.

Luke xvii.x.
To say before God, is not to fain or to lie, but to determine with thy self,
that which thou art assured of. The lord therefore commands us unfeignedly to
think and consider with our selves, that we do not any fre beneficial doings
to hi^, but to render due service. And worthily. For we are servants endetted
in so many services, as we are no able to discharge, although al our thoughts
and all our members, were turned into dutieful deeds of the law. And therefore
that which he says, When ye have done all things yt are comanded you etc. is
as much in effect, as if the righteousness of one man were more tha^ all the
righteousness of men. How therefore may we (of whom there is none that is not
most far distant from this mark) be so bold as to boste that we have
added a heap to the full measure? Neither is there any cause why any man may take
exception and say, that nothing withsta^deth but that his endeavor may proceed
beyond necessary duties, which in some behalf ceasseth those yt be from
necessary. For this we must altogether hold, that we ca^ imagine nothing that
avails either to the worship or the love of God, which is not comprehede^d
under the law of God. If it be a part of the law, let us not boaste of
voluntary liberality, where we are bound to neccessitie.

That among the Corinthians he did of his own will yield of his right, i. Cor.
ix.i.
which otherwise he might have used if he had would, and that he has employed
upon the^ not only so much as he ought of duty, but also has given them his
free trauail beyond the bounds of duties. But they should have marked ye reason
there expressed, yt he did this least he should be an offense to the weak. For
false and deceitful workmen did boste the^ selves with this alluring show of
liberality, whereby they might both procure favor to their poisonous
doctrines, and raise up hatred to y^ Gospel, so that Paul was driven of
necessity either to bring the doctrine of Christ into danger, or to mere with
such crafts. Go to: if it be to a christian man an indifferent thing, to
run into offense, when he may refrain it, then I grant that the Apostle did
something of Supererogation for ye Lord. But if this were by right required or a
wise distributer of the Gospel, then I say that he did that which was his
duty to do. Finally although there appear no such cause, yet this saying of
Chrysostom is always true, that al our things are in the same case wherein are
the propre possessions of bondmen, which it is certain by the law to be due
to their Lord. Luc. xvii.vii.
And Christ bath uttered the same in the parable. For he asked what thank we
will give to a bondseruant when having ben all the day travailed with sundry
labors he returns home to us in the evening. But it is possible, that he
has labored with greater diligence than we durst have required. Be it so: yet
he has done no thing but that which by his estate of bondage he ought, for he
with his whole ability is ours. I speak not of what sort their
Supererogatio^s are which these men will boste of to God: for they be trifles,
such as he neither has at any time commanded, nor does approve the^, nor will
allow the^ when account shall be to be made before him. In this signification
only we will grant that they are works of Supererogation, namely of which it
is spoken in the Prophet: Psalm. i.xii.
who has required these things at your hands? But let the^ remember what is
in an other place also spoken of these things: Psalm. lv.ii.
Wherefore do ye wey your silver and not in bread? Ye spend in labor and not in
being satisfied. It is in deed not very hard for these idle Rabbines to dispute
under the shadow in a soft chair: but when the sovereign judge shall sit in
his judgment seat, such windy decrees shall of necessity vanishe away.
This, this was to be sought what affia^ce of defense we may bring to his
judgment seat, not what we may talk of in schools and corners.

In this behalf there are chefely two pestilences to be driven out of Ps.
c.xiiii.ii.
that none shall be justified before him, if he require account of his
servants. But where Job says: Job. ^.xv.
If I have done wickedly, woe to me: but if I do righteously, yet I will not so
lift up my head: though he mean of that most hie righteousness of God,
whereunto the very Angels answer not: yet he therwithal shows that when they
come to ye judgment of God, there remains nothing for all mortal men, but to
hold their peace as du^me. For it te^deth not only to this purpose yt he had
rather willingly yield tha^ da^gerously strive with ye rigorousnes of God: but
he means that he felt no other righteousness in him self, tha^ such as at ye
first moment should fall before ye sight of God. When affiance is driven away,
al glorieng must also necessarely depart. For who can give the praise of
righteousness to these works, ye affia^ce whereof tre^bleth before ye sight of
God? ^sa. xlvi.xx. Esa. lxi.^^
We must therefore come whether Esaie calls us, yt all the seed of Israel may
be praised and glory in God: because it is most true which he says in an
other place, yt we are ye planting of the glory of God. Our mind therefore
shall then be rightly purged, when it shall neither in any behalf rest upon the
confidence of works, nor reioise in the glory of the^. But this error
encouraged folish men to the puffing up of this false a lying affiance, that
they always set the cause of their salvation in works.

John. iii.xvi.
when he says, God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten son,
yt every one which believes in him may not perish, but may have everlasting
life. Now the final cause ye Apostle testifies to be both the showing of ye
righteousness of God and the praise of his goodness: where he reherseth also ye
other three in express words. For he satih thus to ye Romans: Romans iii.xxiii.
al have sined and do need ye glory of god: but they are justified freely by his
grace. Here you have the head and first fountain, namely yt God embraced us with
his free mercy. Then follows. By the rede^ptio^ which is in Christ Jesus. Here
you have as it were ye matter whereof righteousness is made for us through faith
in his blood. Here is showed ye instrume^tall cause, whereby ye righteousness of
Christ is applied to us. Last of al he joins the end, when he says, unto
the showing of his righteousness that he may be righteous and the
righteousmaker of him that is of the faith of Christ. And (to touch by the
way that this righteousness stands of reconciliatio^) he sets expressly by
name, ye Christ was given to us for reconciliatio^. So in the first chap. also
to the Ephesians he teaches ye we are received of God into favor by mear
mercy: that the same is wrought, by the intercession of Christ: received, by
faith: all to this end, that the glory of the goodness of God may fully
shine. When we see that all the parts of our salvation are so without us, what
cause is there that we should now either have affiance or glory in works?
Neither can even ye most sworn ennemies of the grace of God move any
controversy with us about the efficient or fynall cause, unless they will
deny the whole Scripture. In the Material and Formal cause the cast a false
color, as though our works have a half place with faith and the
righteousness of Christ. But this also they teach, the Scripture criynge out
against them, which simply affirms both that Christ is to us for
righteousness and life, and that this benefit of righteousness is possesed by
only faith.

But where as the holy men do oftentimes strengthen and comfort

When therefore ye holy ones do by innoce^cie of conscience confirm their Pro.
xiiii.xxvi.
This therefore that is taught by Solomon, yt in the fea^e of ye Lord is
steadfast assuredness: and this yt sometime ye holy ones use this protestation,
to the intent yt they may be heard of ye Lord, Genesis xxiii^ xl.
yt they have walked before his face in vprightnes and simplicititie: have no
place in laying the fundatio^ of stablishing of conscience: ii. To. xx.iii.
but are the^ only of value, if they be taken of the ensuing effect: because
both ye fear is no where which may stablish a full assuredness, and the holy
ones are privy in their conscience of such an vprightnes, wherewith ar yet
mingled many re^na^tes of the flesh. But forasmuch as of the fruits of
regeneration they gather an argument of the holy Ghost dwelling in them, they
do there by not sclenderly strengthen them selves to look for the help of God
in all their necessities, when they by experience find him their father in so
great a matter. And even this also they can not do, unless they have first
conceived the goodness of God, sealed with no other assuredness, than of the
promise. For if they begin to weye yt by good works, nothing shall be more
uncertain nor more weak: forasmuch as if works be considered by them
selves, they shall no less by their imperfection show proof of the wrath of
God, than they do with how soever imperfect pureness testify his good will.
Finally they do so set out the benefits of God, that yet they turn not away
from the free favor of God, Ephe. iii.^v.ii.
in which Paul testifies that there is the length, breadth, depth and height of
them: as if he should say, Whethersoeuer the senses of the godly do turn
themselves, how hie soever they clyme, how far and wide soever they extend
them, yet they ought not to go out of the love of Christ, but hold them
selves wholly in the meditation thereof, because it comprehends al kinds of
measures in it. And therefore he says that it excels and surmounteth above
all knowledge: and that when we acknowledge how much Christ has loved us,
we are fulfilled into all the fullness of God. Romans viii ^^^vii.
As in an other place, when he glories that all the Godly are vanquishers in
battle, he by and by adds a reason, because of him that loved us.



causes. But whense comes that? Namely, whom the Lord of his mercy has
appointed to the inheritance of eternal life, them with his ordinary dispe^sation
he does by good works bring into the possession thereof. That which goes
before in order of dispensatio^, he calls the cause of that which follows.
After this manner he sometime deriueth eternal life from works: Romans vli^.xxx.
not for that is to be ascribed to the^: but because whom he has chosen, them
he does justify, that he may at length glorify them, he makes the grace yt
goes before which is a step toward that which follows, after a certain
manner the cause of it. But so often as he has occasion to assign the true
cause, he bids us not to flee to works, but holds us in the only thinking
upon ye mercy of God. For what manner of thing is this which he teaches by
the Apostle, Romans vl, xiij.
The reward of sin is death: the grace of ye Lord, is life everlasting? Why
does he not set righteousness in comparison against sin, as he sets life
against death? Why does he not make righteousness the cause of life, as he
makes sin the cause of death? For so should the comparison of contraries
have stand well together, which is much broken by this turning. But the Apostle
meant by this comparison to express that which was truth, that death is due to
the deseruings of men: that life is reposed in the only mercy of God. Finally
in these ma^ners of speaking is rather expressed the order than the cause:
because God in heaping graces upon graces, takes cause of the first to add
the second, that he may leave nothing undone to the enrichyng of his servants:
and he so continually exte^deth his liberality, that yet he would have us
always to look unto the free election which is fountain and beginning of it.
For although he loves the gifts which he daily gives, in so much as they
spring out of that fountain: yet it is our part to hold fast that free
acceptance, which alone is able to uphold our souls: as for such gifts of
his Spirit as he afterward gives us, so to adioyne them to the first cause,
that they minish nothing of it.

The.xv. Chapter. That those things that are commonly boasted concerning the
merits of works, do overthrow as well the praise of God in giving of
righteousness, as also the assuredness of salvation.
NOw we have declared that which is ye chief point in this Howsoever works
suffice not to justify a man, whether yet do they not deserve favor with God?

^.
Let Merits of men here hold their peace, which have perished by Ada^: and let
the grace of God reign, by Jesus Christ. Again, The saints give nothing to
their own Merits: they will give al to none but to thy mercy, (...) 88
O God. In an other place, When man sees yt whatsoever good he has, he has
it not from himself, but from his God, he sees that al yt which is praised in
him, is not of his own Merits, but of the mercy of God. You see how taking
from men ye power of doing well, he also throws down the dignity of Merit.
And Chrysostom says, ^
Our works, if there be any, which follow ye free calling of God, are repayment
and det: but the g^^tes of God are grace and bou^tifulnesse and the greatness
of liberal giving. But, leaving the name, let us rather look upon the thing. I
have verily before alleged a sentence out of Bernard* As it suffices to
Merit, not to presume of Merits: so to want Merits, suffices to judgment.
But by adding forth with an exposition, he sufficiently mitigateth ye
hardiness of ye word, where he says: Therefore care thou to have Merits: when
thou have the^, know y^ they are given: hope for fruit, ye mercy of God: and
so thou have escaped al danger, of poverty, vntha^kfulnesse, and presumption.
Happy is ye church which neither wa^teth Merits without presumption, nor
presumption without merits. And a little before he had largely showed, how
godly a meaning he used. For of Merits (says he) why should the Church be
careful, which has a stedfaster and surer cause to glory of ye purpose of
God? God ca^ not deny himself, he will do yt which he has promised. If there
be no cause why ye should ask, (...). xx^vi ^^ii.
by what merits may we hope for good things? specially since y^ hear it
said, Not for your sakes, but for my sake: it suffices to Merit, to know yt
Merits suffice not.

(...). xv.i.^
because we shall have given nothing freely to ye Lord, but only have performed
our due services, to which there is no thank to be given. But those good
works which he himself has given us, the Lord both calls ours, and
testifies that they are not only acceptable to him, but also that they shall
have reward. It is our duty again for our part, to be encouraged with so
great a promise, and to gather up our hearts, that we be not weried with well
doing, and to yield true thankfulness to so great bou^tifulnesse of God. It is
undoubted that it is the grace of God what soever there is in works that
deserves praise: that there is not one drop, which we ought properly to
ascribe to our selves. This if we do truly and earnestly acknowledge, there
vanishes away not only all affiance but also opinion of Merit. We (I say) do
not part the praise of good works (as the Sophisters do) between god and man:
but we reserve it whole, perfect, and vnminished to ye lord. Only this we
assign to man, that eue^ the self same works that were good he by his
uncleanness corrupts and defiles. For nothing comes out of man, how perfect
so ever he be, yt is not defiled with some spot. Therefore let the Lord call
into judgment eue^ these things that are best in the works of me^: he shall
verily epsy in them his own righteousness, but man's dishonestie and shame.
Good works therefore do please God and are not unprofitable to the doers of
them, but rather they receive for reward the most large benefits of God: not
because they so deserve, but because ye goodness of god has of it self
appointed this price unto the^. But what spitefulness is this, that men not
contented with that liberality of God, which gives undue rewards to works
that deserve no such thing, do with ambition full of sacrilege endeavor further,
that yt which is wholly of the liberality of God, may seem to be re^dred to
the merits of me^. Here I appelle to the common judgment of every man. If any
man that has a taking of profit in a piece of ground by an other man's liberal
grant, do also claim to himself the title of propretie: does he not by such
unthankfulness deserve to lose the very self possession which he had?
Likewise if a bondslaue being made free of his Lord, do hide the baseness of
the estate of a Libertine, Libertine, is he that is free by manumissio^, not by
birth.
and boaste himself to be a freeman borne: is he not worthy to be brought back
into his former bondage? For this is ye right use of enioyeng a benefit, if we
neither claim to our selves more tha^ is given, nor do defraude the author of
the benefit of his praise: but rather do so behave our selves, that yt which
he has given from himself to us, may seem after a certain manner to remain
with him. If this moderation be to be kept toward men, let all men look and
consider what manner of moderation is due to God.

I know yt the Sophisters do abuse certain places, to prove thereby Eccl.
xvi.xiiij.
Mercy shall make place to every man, according to the Merit of his works.
And out of the Epistle to the Hebrews, Hebr. xiij.xvi.
Forget not doing good and communicating, for with such sacrifices men merit
of God. As for my right in resistyng the authority of Ecclesiasticus, I do
now release it. Yet I deny that they faithfully allege yt which
Ecclesiasticus, whatsoever writer he were, has written. For the Greek copy is
thus: (...). He shall make place to every mercy, and every man shall find
according to his works. And that this is the true text, which is corrupted in
the Latin translation, appears both by the framing of these words, and by a
longer joining together of the sentence going before. In the Epistle to the
Hebrews, there is no cause why they should snare us in one little word, when in
the Greek words of the Apostle is nothing else but yt such sacrifices do please
and are acceptable to God. This alone ought largely to suffice to subdue and
beat down the outragiousnesse of our pride, yt we feign not any worthiness
to works beyond the rule of Scripture. Now ye doctrine of the Scripture is,
that all our good works are continually be sprinkled with many filthy spots,
wherewith God may be worthily offended and be angry with us: so far is it of,
that they be able to win him to us, or to provoke his liberality toward us:
Yet because he of his tender kindness does not examine them by extremity of
law, he takes the^ as if they were most pure, and therefore though without
merit, he rewards them with infinite benefits both of this present life
and of the life to come. For I do not allow the distinction set by me^
otherwise learned and godly: that good works deserve the graces that are given
us in this life, and that eternal life is the reward of faith alone. For the
Lord does commonly always set in heaven the reward of labors and the crown of
battle. Again to give it so to the merit of works, yt it be taken away from
grace, that the Lord heapeth us with graces upon graces, is against the
doctrine of the Scripture. For though Christ says that to him that has, Mat.
xiv.xxj. and xxix.
shall be given, and that the faithful and good servant which has showed himself
faithful in few things, shall be set over many: yet he also shows in an other
place, that the increases of the faithful are ye gifts of his free goodness.
All ye that thirst (says he) come to the waters: Esa. lv.i.
and ye that have not money, come and bye milk and honye without money and
without any exchange. What so ever therefore is now given to the faithful for
help of salvation, yea and blessedne^^e it self, is the mere liberality of
God: yet both in this and in those he testifies that he has consideration of
works: because, to testify the greatness of his love toward us, he
vouchsaueth to grant such honor not only to us, but also to ye gifts which he
has given us.

1. Cor.iij.xi.
Paul says yt in ye bulding of Christian doctrine, we must keep still that
fundation which he had laid among the Corinthia^s, biside which no other can
be laid: and that the same fundation is Jesus Christ. What manner of fundatio^
have we in Christ? is it, that he was to us the beginning of salvation: that
the fulfillyng thereof should follow of our selves? and has he but only opened
the way, by which we should go forward of our own strength? Not so: but as he
said a little before, when we acknowledge him, he is given to us for
righteousness. No man therefore is well founded in Christ, but he yt has full
righteousness in him: i. Cor. i.xxx.
for as much as ye Apostle says not yt he was sent to help us to obtain
righteousness, but that he himself might be our righteousness. Namely, yt we
are chosen in him from eternity before the making of the world, Ephesians. i.iiij
by no deseruyng of ours, but according to the purpose of the good pleasure of
God: Col. i.xiiij. and xx.
yt by his death we are redeemed from the damnation of death, and delivered from
destruction: that in him we are adopted of the heavenly father into children
and heirs: that by his blood we are reconciled to the Father: John. x.xxviij.
that being given to him to be kept we are delivered from peril of perishyng
and of being lost: that being so engraffed in him, we are already after a
certain manner partakers of eternal life, being entered into the kingdom of
God by hope: and yet more: that having obtained such partaking of him, how so
ever we be yet fools in our selves, he is wisdom for us before God: howsoever
we be sinners, he is righteousness for us: howsoever we be unclean, he is
cleanness for us: howsoever we be weak, howsoever unarmed and lieng open in
danger of Satan, yet ours is the power which is given him in heaven and earth,
Matthew. xxviij.xvii^
whereby he may tread down Satan for us, and break ye gates of helles:
howsoever we still carry about with us the body of death, yet he is life for us:
brefely that al his things are ours, and we in him have all things, in our
selves nothing: upon this foundation, I say, it behooves that we be bulded, if
we will increase into a holy temple to the Lord.

But ye world has a long time be^ otherwise taught. For there have i. Ih. v.xij
As though the Scripture lies, when it says that they are al in death which
have not possessed ye Son. If they be in death, how should they bring forth
matter of life? To. xiiij.xxiij.
As though it were of no more force, that whatsoever is done without faith, is
sin: as though there may be good fruits of an evil tree. But what have these
most pestilent Sophisters left to Christ wherein he may show forth his power?
They say that he has deserved for us the first grace, namely the occasion of
deseruyng: that it is now our part not to fail the occasion offered. O
desperate shamelessness of ungodliness. Who would have thought that men
professing the name of Christ, durst so strippe him naked of his power, and in
a manner tread him under foot? This testimony is each where spoken of him,
that all they are justified that believe in him: these fellows teach, that
there comes from him no other benefit, but this, that the way is opened to
every man to justify himself. But I would to God they tasted what these
sayenges mean: that all they have life yt have the Son of God: i. Ih. v.xi^
John. v.xxiiii. Romans iii.xxiiii. i. Ioh. iii.xxiii. Ephesians. ii.vi. Col. i.xiii.
that whosoever believes, is already passed from death into life: that we are
justified by his grace, yt we might be made heirs of eternal life: that the
faithful have Christ abidyng in them, by whom they cleave fast to God: that
they which are partakers of his life, do sit with him in heavenly places: that
they are transplanted into the kingdom of God, and have obtained salvation:
and innumerable other such. For they do not declare, that there comes by the
faith of Christ nothing but the power to obtain righteousness or salvation,
but that they are both given to us. Therefore so sone as thou art by faith
engraffed into Christ, thou art already made the son of God, ye heir of
heau^e, partaker of righteousness, possessor of life, and (that their lies may
be better confuted) thou have not obtained ye fit ability to deserve, but even
all ye deseruinges of Christ: for they are communicated to thee.

So ye Sorbonical schools, ye mothers of al errors, have taken from us
righteousness: yt they seem in a manner to name faith in mockage, sith without
great enuiousnesse it could not be passed over in silence, seeing it is so often
repeted of the Scripture. And not yet co^te^ted, they do in the praise of good
works privily steal from God somewhat to give away to man Because they see
that good works little avail to aduau^ce man, and that they can not be
properly called Merits if they be accounted the fruits of the grace of God:
they pick them out of the strength of free will, oil forsothe out of a stone.
And they deny not in deed that the principal cause of the^ is in grace: but
they affirm that thereby is not excluded free will, by which is all merit.
And this not only the later Sopisters do teach, Lib. ^. did. ^8.
but also their Pythagoras, Lo^bard: whom if you compare with these men, you
may say to be sound witted and sobre. It was truly a point of marvelous
blindness, that when they had Augustine so often in their mouth, they saw not
with how great carfulness that man provided yt no piece of the glory of good
works were it never so little, should be conveyed to men. Here before when we
entreated of free will, we recited certain testimonies of his to his purspose,
of which sort there are often times found many like in his writings: as when
he forbids us yt we should no where boste of our merits, (...) Psalm. 14.4.
Epist. 105.
because eue^ they also are the gifts of God: And when he writes, yt all our
merit is only of grace, that it is not gotten by our sufficience, but is al
made by grace. etc. It is no marvel that Lombard was blind at ye light of the
Scripture, in which it appears that he was not so well practiced. Yet nothing
could be desired more plain against him and his disciples, than this word of
ye Apostle. For when he forbids Christians al glorieng, he adioyneth a
reason why it is not lawful to glory: because we are ye handyworke of God,
Ephesians. ii.x.
created to al good works, that we should walk in the^. Sith therefore there
comes out of us no good thing, but in so much as we be regenerate: and our
regeneration is whole of God without exception: there is no right why we should
claim to our selves one ounce in good works. Finally whereas they continually
call upon good works, in the mean time they so instruct consciences, that
they never dare have affia^ce, that they have God well pleased and favorable to
their works. But co^trarywise we, without making any mention of Merit, do yet
by our doctrine raise up the courages of the faithful with singular comfort, when
we teach them yt in their works they please God and are undoubtedly accepted
unto him. Yea and also here we require yt no man attempt or go about any work
without faith, that is to say, unless he do first with assured confidence of
mind determine that he shall please God.

^. Ioh. i^.ixij. i. Pet. iiii.iij. i^. Tim. ^.^x. Luc. i^.xx^^
they put men in mind, that the Son of God has appeared to this end, that he
may destroy the works of the deuel: that they should not sin which are of
God, that the time past is enough for the fulfilling of the desires of the
Gentiles: that the elect of God are velleis of mercy chosen out unto honor,
which ought to be made clean from al filthiness. But al is spoken at ones,
when it is showed that Christ will have such disciples, which forsaking
themselves, and taking up their cross, do follow him. He yt has forsaken
himself, has cut of the root of al euels, that he may no more seek those
things y^ are his own. He that has taken up his cross, has framed himself
to all patience and mildness. But the example of Christ conie^neth both these
and al other duties of godliness and holiness. He showed himself obedient to
his father, even to the death: he was wholly occupied in doing the works of
God: he with his whole heart breathed out the glory of his father: he gave his
soul for his brethren: he both did good and wished good to his enemies. If
there be need of comfort, these will bring marvelous comfort, ii. Cor. iii^
viii.
that we be in affliction, but we are not made careful: that we labor, but we
are not forsaken: we are brought low, but we are not confounded: we are
throwe^ down, but we do not perish: always bearing about with us in our body
the mortifieng of Jesus Christ, that ye life of Jesus may be manifestly showed
in us, ii. Tim. i^. Phil iii.x.
that if we be dead with him, we shall also live together with him: if we
suffer with him, we shall also reign together with him: that we be so fashioned
like to his suffringes, Romans viii.xxix.
till we atteyne to the likeness of his resurrection: For as much as the Father
has predestinate these to be fashioned like the image of his son, whom in
him he has chosen, that he may be the first begotten among all his brethren:
and therefore that neither death, nor present things, nor things to come,
shall sever us from the love of God which is in Christ: but rather all things
shall turn to us to good and to salvation. Lo, me do not justify a man by
works before God: but we say that all they that are of God, are regenerate and
made a new creature, ii. Pet. i.^
that they may pass out of the kingdom of sin into the kingdom of
righteousness, and that by this testimony they make their calling certain,
and are judged as trees by the fruits.

The.xvi. Chapter. A confutation of the sclaunders, whereby the Papists go
about to bring this doctrine in hatred.
WIth this one word may the shamelessness of certain ungodly we have in
readiness easily to declare, if we do but turn to Christ unto whom our faith
is directed, and from whom it receives her whole strength. Why therefore are
we justified by faith? because by faith we take hold of the righteousness of
Christ, by which alone we are reconciled to God. But this thou can not take
hold of, but that thou must also therewithal take hold of sanctification.
For he was given to us, for righteousness, wisdom, sanctification, and
redemption. Therefore Christ justifies none whom he does not also sanctify.
^. Cor. i.xxx
For these benefits are coupled together with a perpetual and inseparable
knot, that whom he enlighteneth with his wisdom, them he redemeth: whom he
redemeth, he justifies: whom he justifies, he sanctifies. But for as much as
our question is only of righteousness and sanctifieng, let us stay upon
these. We may put difference between them, yet Christ contains them both
unseperably in himself. Will thou therefore obtain righteousness in Christ?
Thou must first possess Christ: and thou can not possess him, but that thou
must ^e made partaker of his sanctification: because he can not be torn in
pieces. Sith therefore the Lord does grant us these benefits to be enjoyed
none otherwise than in giving himself, he gives them both together, the one
never without the other. So appears how true it is, that we are justified not
without works, and yet not by works: because in the partaking of Christ,
whereby we are justified, is no less contained sanctification than
righteousness.

Hebr. ix.xiiii. Luc. i.^x^iij.
to serve the living God: that it is a heinous sacrilege, if being ones
cleased, we defile our selves with new filthiness, and profane that holy
blood: that we are delivered from the hands of our enemies, that we may
without fear serve him in holiness and righteousness before him all the
days of our life: Romans vi.xviij.
that we are made free from sin, that we may with a free Spirit follow
righteousness: that our old man is crucified, that we may rise again into
newness of life: again that if we be dead with Christ (as becomes his
members) we must seek those things that are above, Col. iii.i.
and must in the world be wayfaring men from home, that we may long toward
heaven where is our treasure: Tit. ij.xi.
that the grace of God has appeared to this end, that forsakyng al ungodliness
and worldly desires, we may live soberly, holyly, and godlyly in this world,
lokyng for the blessed hope and the appering of the glory of the great God and
savior: therefore that we are not appointed that we should stir up wrath to
our selves, but that we may obtain salvation by Christ: that we are the
temples of the Holy ghost, i. These. v.ix. i. Cor. iij.xvi. Ephesians. ii.xx^. and
v.viii. ii. Cor. vi. i. These. iiii vii. ii. Tim. i.ix. Romans vi.xviii. Ih.
xvi.x. i. Ih. ii.xi. i. Cor. vi.xv.i. and xii.xii. i. Ih. iii.iii ii. Cor.
vii.i.
which it is not lawful to be defiled: that we are not darkness, but light in
the Lord, which must walk as children of light: that we are not called to
uncleanness, but to holiness: because this is the will of God, our
sanctification, that we absteyne from unlawful desires: that our calling is
holy, that the same is not fulfilled but with pureness of life: that we are
for this purpose delivered from sin, that we should obey to righteousness.
Can we be pricked forward to charity with any more lively argument tha^ that
of John, that we should mutually love one an other as God has loved us? that
herein his children do differ from the children of the Deuell, the children of
light from the children of darkness, because they abide in love? Again with
yt argument of Paul, that we if we cleave to Christ, are the members of one
body, which it is mete to be helped one of an other with mutual duties? Can we
be more strongly provoked to holiness, than when we hear again of John, that
all they that have this hope, do sanctify themselves, because their God is
holy? Again of the mouth of Paul: that having the promise of adoption, we
should cleanse our selves from all the defilyng of the flesh and spirit? than
when we hear Christ setting forth himself for an example unto us that we
should follow his steps?

And these few things I have set forth for a taste. For if I should To. xii.i.
when he comes down to moral exhortations, he besecheth them by that mercy
of God which he has vouchesaued to exte^d to us. And truly this one cause
ought to have been sufficient, Matthew. v.xvi.
that God may be glorified in us. But if any be not so vehemently moved with
the glory of God, yet the remembrance of his benefits ought to have been most
sufficient, to stir up such me^ to do well. But these men, which do
paraduenture with thrustyng in of merits beat out some servile and
constrained obediences of the law, do falsely say that we have nothing whereby
we may exhort men to good works, because we go not the same way to work.
As though God were much desired with such obediences, ^
which protests that he loves a cherefull geuer, and forbids any thing
to be given as it were of heaviness or of necessity. Neither do I speak
this for that I do either refuse or despise that kind of exhortation, ^^.
^o^. ix.^ii.
which the Scripture oftentimes uses, that it may leave no mean unattempted
every way to stir up our minds. For it rehearses the reward which God will
render to every man according to his works. But I deny that that is the only
thing, yea or the chief among many. And then I grant not yt we ought to take
beginning thereat. Moreover I affirm that it makes nothing to ye setting up of
such merits as these men boste of, as we shall hereafter see. Last of all I
say that is to no profitable use, unless this doctrine have first taken
place, that we are justified by the only merit of Christ, which is conceived by
faith but by no merits of our works, because none can be fit to the endeavor
of holiness, unless they have first digested this doctrine. Which thing also
the Prophet very well signifies, when he thus speaks to God: ^^. x.xxx.
with thee is mercy, that thou may be feared. For he shows that there is
no worshippyng of God, but when his mercy is acknowleged, upon which alone it
is both founded and stablished. Which is very worthy to be noted, that we may
know not only that the beginning of worshippyng God aright is the affiance of
his mercy, but also that the fear of God (which the Papists will have to be
meritorious) can not have the name of merit, because it is grounded upon the
pardon and forgiveness of sins.

Cant. 5.3.
Now it is evident, whether sort do both more abace the forgiveness of
sins, and do more make vile the dignity of righteousness. They babble that
God is appeased with their own trysting satisfactions, that is, their donge:
We affirm that the giltinesse of sin is more grievous than can be purged
with so light trifles: that the displeasure of God is more heavy than can be
released with these satisfactions of no value, and that therefore this is the
prerogative of the only blood of Christ. They say that righteousness (if it
fail at any time) is restored and repaired by satisfactorie works: we think
it more precious than that it can be matched with any recompense of works,
and that therefore for the restoryng thereof we must flee to the only mercy of
God. As for the rest of those things that perteyne to the forgiveness of
sins, let them be sought out of the next chapter.

The.xvii. Chapter. The agreement of the promises of the law and the Gospel.
NOw let us also go through the other arguments wherewith Deuteronomy. vii.xi^.
For thus says the Lord: And it shall be, if thou shall hear these
commandments and judgments, and shall keep them and do them, the Lord also
shall keep with thee his covenant and mercy which he has sworn to thy
fathers, he shall love thee and multiply thee, Ier. vii.ii^ and xxiii.
and bless thee, etc. Again, If ye shall well direct your ways and your
endeavors, if ye walk not after strange Gods, if ye do judgment between man
and man, and go not back into malice, I will walk in y^ midst of you. I
will not recite a thousand pieces of the same sort, which sith they nothing
differ in sense, shall be declared by the solutio^ of these. Deuteronomy. xi.xxvi.
In a sum, Moses testifies that in the law is set forth blessyng and curse,
death and life. Thus therefore they reason, that either this blessyng is made
idle and frutelesse, or that justification is not of faith alone. We have
already before showed, how if we stick fast in the law, over us being
destitute of al blessing, hangs only curse which is thretened to al
transgressors. For the Lord promises nothing but to the perfect kepers of his
law, such as there is none found. This therefore remains, that all mankind
is by the law accused, and subject to curse and the wrath of God: from which
that they may be loosed, they must needs go out of the power of the law, and
be as it were brought into liberty from the bondage thereof: not that carnal
liberty which should withdraw us from the keeping of the law, should allure us
to think all things lawful and to suffer our lust, as it were the stays
being broken and with loose reyn^s to run at riot: but the spiritual
liberty, which may comfort and raise up a dismayed and overthrown
conscience, showing it to be free from the curse and damnation wherewith the
law held it down bond and fast tied. This deliverance from the subjection of
the law, and Man^mission (as I may call it) we obtain when by faith we take
hold of the mercy of God in Christ, whereby we are certified and assured of
the forgiveness of sins, with the felyng whereof the law did prick and bite
us.

By this reason even the promises that were offered us in the law, should be
all ineffectual and void, unless the goodness of God by the Gospel did
help. For, this condition that we keep the whole law, upon which the promises
hang, and whereby alone they are to be performed, shall never be fulfilled. And
the Lord so helps, not by leauyng part of righteousness in our works, and
supplyeng part by his mercieful bearyng with us, but when he sets only
Christ for the fulfillyng of righteousness. For the Apostle, when he had
before said that he and other Jews believed in Jesus Christ, knowing that man
is not justified by the works of the law, (...), xvi
adds a reason: not that they should be helped to fullness of righteousness
by the faith of Christ, but by it should be justified, not by the works of the
law. If the faithful remove from the law into faith, that they may in faith
find righteousness which they see to be absent from the law: truly they
forsake the righteousness of the law. Therefore now let him that list,
amplify the rewardinges which are said to be prepared for the keeper of the
law, so that he therewithal consider that it comes to pass by our
perverseness, that we feel no fruit thereof till we have obtained an other
righteousness of faith. So David, when he made mention of the rewardyng which
the Lord has prepared for his servants, by and by descends to the
reknowledging of sins, whereby that same rewarding is made void. ^
Also in the xix. Psalm, he gloriously sets forth the benefits of the law,
but he by and by cries out: Who shall understand his faults? Lord cleanse me
from my secret faults. This place altogether agrees with the place before,
where when he had said that all the ways of the Lord are goodness and truth
to them that leave him, P^. ^^^.x.
he adds: For thy names sake Lord, thou shall be merciful to my
perverseness, for it is much. So ought we also to reknowledge, that there is
in deed the good will of God set forth unto us in the law, if we might
deserve it by works, but that the same never comes to us by the deseruyng of
works.

How then? Are they given that they should vanish away without fruit: I have
eue^ now already protested that the same is not my meaning. I say verily that
they utter not their effectualnesse toward us, so long as they have respect to
the merit of works, and that therefore if they be considered in themselves,
they be after a certain manner abolished. If the Apostle teaches that this
noble promise: ^
I have given you commandments, which who so shall do, shall live in them, is
of no value if we stand still in it, and shall never a whit more profit than if
it had not ben given at all: because it belongs not even to the most holy
servants of God, which are all far from the fulfillyng of the law, but are
compassed about with many transgressions. But when the promises of the Gospel
are put in place of them, which do offer free forgiveness of sins, they
bring to pass that not only we our selves be acceptable to God, but that our
works also have their thank: and not this only that the Lord accepts them,
but also exte^deth to them the blessings which were by covenant due to the
keeping of the law. I grant therefore, that those things which the Lord has
promised in his law to the folowers of righteousness and holiness, are
rendered to the works of the faithful: but in this rendryng, the cause is
always to be considered that powers grace to works. Now causes we see that
there be three. The first is, that God turnyng away his sight from the works
of his servants, which always deserve rather reproach than praise, embraces
them in Christ, and by the only mean of faith reconcileth them to himself
without the mean of works. The second, that of his fatherly kindness and
tender mercifulness, he lifts up works to so great honor, not weyeng the
worthiness of them that he accompteth them of some value. The third, that he
receives the very same works with pardon, not imputyng the imperfection,
wherewith they al being defiled, should otherwise be rather reckened among
sins than virtues. And hereby appears how much the Sophisters have been
deceived, which thought that they had gaylye escaped al absurdities when they
said that works do not of their own inward goodness avail to deserve
salvation, but by the form of the covenant, because the Lord has of his
liberality so much esteemed them. But in the mean time they considered not,
how far those works which they would have to be meritorious, were from the
condition of the promises, unless there went before both justification
grounded upon only faith, and the forgiveness of sins, by which eue^ the
good works themselves have need to be wiped from spots. Therefore of three
causes of Gods liberality, by which it is brought to pass that the works of
the faithful are acceptable, they noted but one, and suppressed two, yea and
those the principal.

They allege ye saying of Peter, which Luke rehearses in ye Acts: Act.
x.xxxiiii.
but in every nation he that does righteousness is acceptable to him. And
hereupon they gather that which seems to be undoubted, that if man does by
right endeavors get himself the favor of God, it is not the beneficial gift of
God alone that he obteyneth salvation: yea that God does so of his mercy help
a sinner, that he is by works bowed to mercy. But you can in no wise make the
Scriptures agree together, unless you note a double acceptyng of man with God.
For, such as man is by nature, God finds nothing in him whereby he may be
inclined to mercy, but only misery. If therefore it be certain that man is
naked and needy of all goodness, and on the other side full stuffed and laden
with all kinds of euels, when God first receives them: for what quality, I
pray you shall we say that he is worthy of the heavenly calling* Away therefore
with the vain imaginyng of merits, where God so evidently sets out his
free mercifulness. For, that which in the same place is said by the voice of
the Angel to Cornelius, that his prayers and alms had ascended into the sight
of God, is by these men most lewdly wrested, that man by endeavor of good works
is prepared to receive the grace of God. For it must needs be that Cornelius
was already enlightened with ye Spirit of wisdom, sith he was endued with
true wisdom, namely with ye fear of God: yt he was sanctified with the same
Spirit, since he was a follower of righteousness, which the Apostle teaches to
be a most certain fruit thereof. ^al. v.v.
Al those things therefore which are said to have pleased God in him, he had
of his grace, so far is it of yt he did by his own endeavor prepare himself to
receive it. Truly there ca^ not one syllable of the Scripture be brought
forth, that agrees not with this doctrine, yt there is none other cause for
God to accept man unto him, but because he sees that man should be every way
lost, if he be left to himself: but because he will not have him lost, he
uses his own mercy in deliueryng him. Now we see how this accepting has not
regard to the righteousness of man, but is a mere token of the goodness of
God toward men being miserable and most unworthy of so great a benefit.

Deuteronomy. vij.ix.
The Lord thy God keeps covenant, to a thousand generations: which sentence
was afteward used of the people for a common manner of speech. So Solomon in
his solemn prayer, i. ^in. viij.xxiij.
says, Lord God of Israel, which kepest covenant and mercy to thy servants
which walk before thee in their whole heart. The same words are also repeted
of Nehemias. ^
For, as in all ye couena^tes of his mercy, ye Lord likewise on their behalues
requires of his servants uprightness and holiness of life, Deuteronomy. xx^.xviii.
that his goodness should not be made a mockery, and that no man swelling
with vain rejoicing by reason thereof should bless his own soul, walking in
the mean time in the perverseness of his own heart: so his will is by this way
to keep in their duty them that are admitted into the communion of the
covenant: yet nevertheless the covenant it self is both made at the beginning
free, and perpetually remains such. ii. Sam^. xxij.i.
After this manner David when he glories yt there was re^dred to him reward of
the cleanness of his hands, yet omitteth not that fountain which I have
spoken of, that he was drawn out of the womb, because God loved him: where he
so sets out the goodness of his cause, that he abateth nothing from the
free mercy which goes before all gifts, whereof it is the beginning.

And here by ye way it shall be profitable to touch what these forms Esa.
xxxii^.xiiij.
etc. Again in Esaie, Who shall dwell with devouring fire? He that does
righteousness, he that speaks right things etc. For there is not described
the stay whereupon the faithful may stand before the Lord, but the manner
wherewith the most merciful father brings the^ into his fellowship, and
therein defends and stre^gtheneth them. For, because he abhors sin, he
loves righteousness: who^ he joins to himself, them he cleanses with his
spirit, yt he may make the^ of like fashion to himself and his kingdom.
Therefore if ye question be of ye first cause whereby the entry is made open to
the holy ones into the kingdom of God, from whense they have yt they may stand
fast and abide in it, we have this answer ready, because the Lord by his mercy
both has ones adopted them, and perpetually defends them. But if the
question be of the manner, then we must come down to regeneration and the
fruits thereof, which are rehearsed in that Psalm.

Deuteronomy. vi.xxv.
This shall be our righteousness, if we keep all these commandments. And if
thou take exception and say that this is a promise of the law, which being knit
to a condition impossible, proves nothing. There be other of which you ca^ not
make ye same answer, as this, And yt shall be to thee for righteousness before
the Lord, Deu. xxiiij xiii. Ps. ^vi.x^x.
to redeliuer to the poor man his pledge etc. Again, that which the Prophet
says, yt the zele in revenging the shame of Israel, was imputed to Phinees
for righteousness. Therefore the Pharisees of our time think yt here they have
a large matter to triu^ph upon. For when we say, that when the righteousness
of faith is set up, ye justification of works gives place, by the same right
they make this argument, If righteousness be of works, then it is false that
we are justified by faith only. Though I grant that the commandments of the
law are called righteousnesses: it is no marvel: for they are so in deed.
Howebeit we must warn the readers that the Grecians have not fittly
translated the Hebrew word Hucmi, Dikaiomata, righteousnesses for
co^maundeme^ts. But for the word, I willingly release my quarrel. For neither
do we deny this to the law of God, that it contains perfect righteousness.
For although, because we are detters of all the things that it commands,
therefore even when we have performed full obedience thereof, we are unprofitable
servants: yet because the lord has vouchsaued to grant it the honor of
righteousness, we take not away that which he has given. Therefore we
willingly confess that the full obedience of the law is righteousness: that
the keeping of every commandment, is a part of righteousness, if so be that
the whole sum of righteousness were had in the other parts also. But we
deny that there is any where any such form of righteousness. And therefore
we take away the righteousness of the law, not for that it is maimed and
imperfect of it felfe, but for that by reason of the weakness of our flesh it
is no where seen. But ye Scripture not only calls simply the commandments
of the Lord, righteousnesses: but it also gives this name to the works of the
holy ones. As when it reports that Zachary and his wife walked in the
righteousnesses of the Lord: Luc. i.vi.
truly when it so speaks, it weyeth works rather by ye nature of ye law,
tha^ by their own propre estate. Howbeit here again is that to be noted,
which I eue^ now said, that of the negligence of the Greek translator is not a
law to be made. But for as much as Luke would alter nothing in ye received
traslation, I will also not strive about it. For God has commanded these
things that are in the law to men for righteousness: but this righteousness
we perform not but in keeping the whole law: for by every transgression it is
broken. Whereas therefore the law does nothing but prescribe righteousness: if
we have respect to it, all ye several commandments thereof are righteousness:
if we have respect to men of whom they are done, they do not obtain the
praise of righteousness by one work, being trespassers in many, and by that
same work which is ever partly faulty by reason of imperfection.

But now I come to the second kind, in which is the chief hardness. Be.
iiii.iii^. Psalm. c. vi.xxxi.
that his faith was imputed to him for righteousness. Since therefore it is
said that the act done by Phinees was imputed to him for righteousness: what
Paul affirms of faith, the same may we also conclude of works. Whereupon our
adversaries, as though they had won the victory, determine that we are in
deed not justified without faith, but that we are also not justified by it
alone, and that works accomplish our righteousness. Therefore here I beseache
the godly, that if they know that the true rule of righteousness is to be
taken out of the Scripture only, they will religiously and earnestly weie with
me, how the Scripture may without cauillations be rightly made to agree with it
self. For as much as Paul knew yt the justification of faith is ye refuge for
them yt ar destitute of their own righteousness, he does boldly conclude yt al
they yt ar justified by faith, ar excluded from the righteousness of works.
But since it is certain that the justification of faith is common to all the
faithful, he does thereof with like boldness conclude that no man is
justified by works, but rather contrariewise that men are justified without any
help of works. But it is one thing to dispute of what value works are by
themselves, and an other thing what account is to be made of them after the
stablishing of the righteousness of faith. If we shall set a price upon works
according to their worthiness, we say that they are unworthy to come into the
sight of God: and therefore that man has no works whereof he may glory
before God: then, that being spoiled of al help of works he is justified by
only faith. Now we define righteousness thus, that a sinner being received
into the communion of Christ, is by his grace reconciled to God, when being
cleansed with his blood he obteineth forgiveness of sins, and being clothed
with his righteousness as with his own, he stands assured before the
heavenly judgment ^eate. When the forgiveness of sins is set before, the
good works which follow have now an other valuation than after their own
deserving: because whatsoever is in them imperfect, is covered with ye
perfection of Christ: whatsoever spots or fylthinesse there is, it is wyped
away with his cleanness, yt it may not come into ye examination of the
judgment of God. Therefore when the giltines of al trespasses is blotted out,
whereby men are hindered yt they can bring forth nothing acceptable to God, and
when the fault of imperfection is buried, which is wont also to defile good
works: ye good works which the faithful do, are compted righteous, or (which
is all one) are imputed for righteousness.

Now if any man object this against me to assail the righteousness or two
holy works, being in the rest of the works of his life a trespasser of the law.
This is more than an absurdity. Then I will ask if he be compted righteous
for many good works, if he be in any part found gilty. This also he shall not
be so bold to affirm, when the penal ordinance of the law cries out against
it, and proclameth al them accursed which have not fulfilled all
commandments of the law to the uttermost. Deuteronomy. xxvij
Moreover I will go further and ask, whether there be any work yt deserves to be
accused of no uncleanness or imperfection. And how could there be any such
before those eyes, to whom eue^ the very stars are not clean enough, Job.
iiii, xviii.
nor the Angeles righteous enough? So shall he be compelled to grant that there
is no good work which is not so defiled with transgressions adjoined with it,
and with ye corruptnesse of it self, that it can not have the honor of
righteousness. Now if it be certain that it proceeds from the
righteousness of faith yt works which are otherwise vnpure, unclean, and
but half works, not worthy of ye sight of God, much less of his love, are
imputed to righteousness, why do they with boasting of the righteousness of
works destroy the justification of faith, whereas if this justification were
not they should in vain boaste of that righteousness? Will they make a vipers
birth^ For thereto end the saiengs of the ungodly me^. They can not deny that
the justification of faith is the beginning, foundation, cause, matter, and
substance of ye righteousness of works: yet they conclude ye man is not
justified by faith, because good works also are accounted for righteousness.
Therefore let us let pass these follies and confess as the truth is, yt if the
righteousness of works of what sort soever it be accounted, hangs upon the
justification of faith, it is by this not only nothing minished but also
confirmed, namly wherbi the strength thereof appears more mighty. Neither yet
let us think yt works ar so co^me^ded after fre justification, yt they also
afterward come into ye place of justifying a man, or do part yt office between
them and faith. For unless the justification remain always whole, the
uncleanness of works shall be uncovered. And it is no absurdity, yt a man is so
justified by faith yt not only he himself is righteous, but also his works
are esteemed righteous above their worthynesse.

To. iiii.vii
So Paul, to drive men to confess yt our blessedness consists of ye mercy
of God, not of works, chefli enforces that saying of David, Blessed are they
whose iniquitties are forgeuen, Ps. x^xii.
and whose sins are covered. Blessed is he to whom ye Lord has not imputed
sin. If any man do thrust in to ye contrary innumerable sayings wherein
blessedness seems to be given to works: Psa. cxxii. Pra. xiiii. xxi. Psalm.
i.i. ^am. i.x^i Ps. cvi. ii^ and cxix. i. Mat. v.ii^
as are these: Blessed is the man which fears the Lord, which has pity on
the poor, which has not walked in the council of the wicked, which bears
temptation: Blessed are they which keep judgment, the undefiled, the poor in
Spirit, the meek, the merciful. etc. they shall not make but that it shall
be true which Paul says. For because those things that are there commended are
never so in man, that he is therefore allowed of God, it follows ye man is
alwai miserable, unless he be delivered from misery by forgiveness of sins.
For as much as therefore all the kinds of blessedness which are extolled in the
scriptures, do fall down void, so ye man receives fruit of none of the^, til he
have obtained blessedness by forgeuenes of sins, which may afterward make place
for the^: it follows yt this is not only ye hiest and the chief but also the
only blessedness: unless paraduenture you will have that it be weakened of those
which consist in it alone. Now there is much less reason why the calling of me^
righteous should trouble us, which is co^monli given to ye faithful. I grant
verili yt they ar called righteous of ye holiness of li^: but for as much as they
rather endeavor to ye folowi^g of righteousness, than do fulfill righteousness it
self, it is mete yt this righteousness such as it is, give place to the
justification of faith, from whence it has that which it is.

But they say that we have yet more business with James, namelye Iam. i.xii
For he teaches both yt Abraham was justified by works, and also that al we
are justified by works, not by faith only. What then? will they draw Paul to
fight with James? If they hold James for a minister of Christ, his saying must
be so taken that it disagre not from Christ speaki^g by the mouth of Paul. The
holy ghost affirms by the mouth of Paul, that Abraham obtained righteousness
by faith, not by works: and we also do teach that all are justified by faith
without the works of ye law. The same holy ghost teaches by James that both
Abraham's righteousness and ours consists of works, not of only faith. It is
certain that the holy ghost fights not with himself. What agreement shall there
be therefore of these two? It is enough for ye adversaries, if they pluck up the
righteousness of faith which we would have to be fastened with most deep roots:
but to render to consciences their quietness, they have no great care. Whereby
verily you may see yt they gnaw ye justification of faith, but in ye mean tim
do apoint no mark of righteousness where consciences may stay. Therefore let them
triumph as they list, so yt they may boaste of no other victory than yt they
have taken away all certainetie of righteousness. And this wretched victory
they shall obtain, where ye light of truth being quenched, ye lord shall suffer
the^ to ouerspred ye darkness of lies. But whersoeuer ye truth of God shall
stand, they shall nothing prevail. I deny therefore yt the saying of James
which they still continually hold up against us as it were ye shield of Achilles
does any thing at al make for the^. That this may be made plain, first we must
look at ye mark yt the apostle shoots at: and then we must note where they be
deceived. Because there were the^ many (which mischefe is wont to be continual
in ye Church) which openly bewraied their infidelity, in neglecting and
omitting al ye propre works of ye faithful, and yet cessed not to boaste of ye
false name of faith: James does here mock ye folish boldness of such me^.
Therefore it is not his purpose in any point to diminish ye force of true faith,
but to show how ^ondly those trifles did challenge so much ye vain image of it,
yt being contented herwt they carelessly ran dissolutely abroad into all
licentiousness of vices. This ground being conceived, it shall be easy to
perceive where our adversaries do miss. For they fall into two deceites in ye
word, the one in ye name of faith, yt other in ye word of justifying. Whereas
the Apostle names faith a vain opinion far distant from ye truth of faith,
it is spoken by way of granting, which is no derogation to the matter: which
he shows at ye beginning in these words. What profits it, my brothre^, If
any man say yt he has faith, and has no works? He does not say, if any have
faith without works, but, If any man boast. More plainly also he speaks a
little after, where he in mockery makes yt worse than the devils knowledge:
last of al, when he calls it dead. But by the definition you may
sufficiently perceive what he means. Thou beleuest (says he) yt there is a
God. Truly if nothing be contained in this faith but to believe that there is a
God, it is now no marvel if it do not justify. And when this is taken from it,
let us not think that any thing is a bared from the Christian faith, the nature
whereof is far otherwise. For after what manner does true faith justify us,
but when it co^ioyneth us with Christ, that being made one with him, we may enjoy
the partakyng of his righteousness. It does not therefore justify us by this
that it conceiueth a knowledge of the being of God, but by this that it
rests upon the assuredness of the mercy of God.

he had said. Whosoever are righteous by true faith, they do prove their
righteousness with obedience and good works, not with a bare and imagelike visor
of faith. In a su^me, he disputes not by what mean we are justified, but he
requires of ye faithful a working righteousness. And as Paul affirms yt
me^ be justified without ye help of works: so James does here suffer the^ to be
accounted righteous which want good works. The considering of this end, shall
deliver us out of al dout. For our adversaries are hereby chefely deceived, yt
they think yt James defines ye manner of justifying, whereas he trauaileth
about nothing else but to overthrow their perverse carelesnes, which did vainly
pretend faith to excuse their despisinge of good works. Therefore into how
many ways soever they wrest ye words of James, they shall wring out nothing
but two sentences: y^ a vain bodilesse show of faith does not justify, and
yt a faithful man not contented with such an Imaginatiue show, does declare his
righteousness by good works.

As for yt which they allege out of Paul the same meaning, yt the doers To.
ii.xiii.
not ye hearers, ar justified, it nothing helps them. I will not escape away
with the solutio^ of Ambrose, yt that is therefore spoken because the fulfilling
of the law is faith in Christ. For I see yt it is but a meare starting hole,
which nothing needs where there is abroad way open. There ye Apostle throws
down yt Jews from folish confidence, which boasted themselves of the only
knowledge of the law, when in the mean time they were the greatest despisers of
it. Therefore that they should not stand so much in their own conceit for the
bare knowledge of ye law he warns the^, yt if righteousness be sought out of
the law, not ye knowledge but ye observing of it is required. We verily make no
doubt of this yt the righteousness of the law stands in works: nor yet of
this also, that the righteousness consists in the worthiness and merits of
works. But it is not yet proved, yt we are justified by works, unless they
bring forth some man yt has fulfilled ye law. And yt Paul meant none
otherwise, ye hanging together of ye text shall be a sufficient testimony. After
that he had generally condemned the Gentiles and the Jews of unrighteousness,
then he descends to the particular showing of it, and says yt they which
sinned without the Law, do perish without the law: which is spoken of ye Gentiles:
but they which have sinned in ye law, are judged by ye law: which pertains
to the Jews. Now because they winkinge at their own trespassinges, proudly
gloried of the only law: he adioyneth yt which most fitly agreed, yt the law
was not therefore made, yt me^ should be made righteous by only hearing of ye
voice thereof: but then and not til then when their obeyed: as if he should say:
Sekest thou righteousness in the law? allege not ye hearing of it, which of it
self is of small importance: but bring works, by which ye may declare yt
the law was not set for thee in vain. Of these works because they were all
destitute, it followed yt they were spotled of glorie^g of ye law. Therefore we
must of ye meaning of Paul rather frame a contrary argument. The righteousness
of the law consists in ye perfection of works. No man can boast yt he has by
works satisfied ye law. Therefore there is no righteousness by ye law.

Now they allege also these places, wherein ye faithful do boldly offer Psa.
vii.i
Of which sort are these: Judge me O lord according to my righteousness, Ps.
xvii.i.
and according to my innocence, which are in me. Again, Hear my
righteousness, O God. Thou haste proved my heart, and have visited it in the
night, and there was no wickedness found in me. Psalm. xviii xxi.
Again, The Lord shall render to me according to my righteousness, and he
shall recompense me according to ye cleanness of my hands. Because I have kept
ye ways of ye Lord, and have not wickedly departed from my God. And I shall be
unspotted and shall keep me from my iniqui^ie. Psa. xxvi.i.
Again, Judge me, Lord, because I have walked in mine innocence. I have not
sit with lieng men, I will not enter in with the^ yt do wicked things. Destroy not
my soul with ye ungodly, my life with men of blood: in whose hands ar iniquities:
whose right hand is filled with gifts. But I have walked innocently. I have
above spoken of the affiance which ye holy ones do seem simply to take to
themselves of works. As for these testimonies yt we have here alleged, they
shall not much acco^bre us if they be understood according to their compass,
or (as they commonly call it) their circumstance. Now ye same is doble. For
neither would they have them to be wholly examined, yt they should be either
condemned or acquitted according to ye continual course of their whole life: but
they bring into judgment a special cause to be debated. Neither do they claim
to them selves righteousness in respect of ye perfection of God, but by
comparison of naughty and wicked me^. First when ye justifying of man is
entreated of, it is not only required yt he have a good cause in some
particular matter, b^t a certain perpetual agreement of righteousness in his
whole life. But ye holy o^es, when they call upon ye judgment of God to approve
their innocence, do not offer themselves free from al giltinesse and in every
behalf faultlesse: but verily when they have fastened their affiance of
salvation in his goodness only, yet trusting yt he is ye revenger of ye poor
afflicted against right and equity, they commend to him ye cause wherein ye
innocent are oppressed. But when they set their adversaries wc the^ before ye
judgment seat of God, they boast not of such an innocence as shall answer to
ye pureueise of God if it be severely searched, but because in comparison of ye
malice, obstinancie, suttletie and wickedness of their adversaries they know
yt their plainnes, righteousness, simplicity, and cleanes is known and
pleasing to God: they fear not to call upon him to be judge between themselves
and the^. i. Sa. xxvi xiii.
So when David said to Saul: The lord render to every man according to his
righteousness and truth: he meant not that the lord should examine by himself
and reward every man according to his deseruings, but he took ye lord to
witness, how great his innocency was in co^pariso^ of ye wickedness of Saul.
And Paul himself, when he bosteth with this glorieng yt he has a good witness
of conscience, ^i. Cor. i.xii.
yt he has trauayled with simplicity and uprightness in ye Church of God,
means not yt he stands upon such glorie^g before God: but being compelled
with ye sclau^ders of ye wicked, he defe^deth his faithful and honest dealing,
which he knew to be pleasing to ye merciful kindness of God, against al euel
speaking of me^ whatsoever it be. i. Cor. iiij.xiij.
For we se what he says in an other place, that he knows no euel by himself,
but ye he is not thereby justified: namly because he knew yt the judgment of god
far surmu^teth ye bleareyed sight of me^, Howsoever therefore ye godly do defend
their innoce^ce against ye hypocrisy of ye ungodly, by ye witnessing and
judgment of God: yet when they have to do with God alone, they all cry out
with one mouth: If thou mark iniquity, Ps. c.xxx^.iii. etc.xl.^ Ps.
xxxvi.iiii.
Lord, Lord who shall abide it: Enter not into judgment with thy servants:
because every one that lives shall not be justified in thy sight: and
distrusting their own works, they gladly sing, Thy goodness is better than
life.

There are also other places not unlike to these before, in which a Pro. xx.vi^
and.xxii.xv.^. Ez. xviii.ix. and xxxii^.xv.
Solomon says, that he which walks in his uprightness, is righteous.
Again, That in the path of righteousness is life, and that in the same is not
death. After which manner Ezechiell reports that he shall live life that does
judgment and righteousness. None of these do we either deny or darken. But
let there come forth one of the sons of Adam with such an uprightness. If
there be none, either they must perish at the sight of God, or flee to the
sanctuary of mercy. Neither do we in the mean time deny but that to the
faithful their uprightness, though it be but half and imperfect, is a step
toward immortality. But whence comes that but because whom the Lord has
taken into the covenant of grace, he searches not their works according to
their deseruinges, but kisseth them with fatherly kindenes? Whereby we do not only
understand yt which the scholemen do teach, yt works have their value of ye
accepting grace. For they mean, yt works which are otherwise in sufficient to
purchase righteousness by ye covenant of ye law, are by ye accepting of God
auau^ced to the value of equality. But I say yt they being defiled both with
other trespassinges and with their own spots, are of no other value at al,
than in so much as the lord tenderly grants pardon to both: yt is to say,
gives free righteousness to man. Ephesians. i.iiii i. These. iii.xiii.
Neither are here those prayers of the Apostle seasonaly thrust in place, where
he wissheth so great perfection to ye faithful, that they may be faultlesse and
unblameable in the day of ye lo^^. These words in deed ye Celestines did in
old tune turmoile, to affirm a perfection of righteousness in this life. But,
which we think to be sufficient, we answer brefely after Augustine, that all the godly ought in deed to endeavor toward this mark, yt they may one day
appear spotless and faultlesse before ye face of God: but because the best
and most excellent manner of this life is nothing but a going forward, we shall
then and not til then atteine to this mark, when being unclothed of this flesh
of sin we shall fully cleave to ye lord. Yet will I not stiffely strive with him
which will give the title of perfection to the holy ones, so yt he also limit
the same with the words of Augustine himself. Lib. ad Bo. 3. cap. 7.
When (saich he) we will call ye virtue of the holy ones, perfect: to the same
perfection also belongs the acknowledging of imperfection both in truth and
in humility.

The.xviii. Chapter. That of the reward, the righteousness of Works is ill
gathered.
NOw let us pass over to those saiengs which affirm, ye God Mat. xvi.xxvii.
ii. Cor. v.x To. ii vi. John. v.xxix. Mat. xxv.xxxiiii.
of which sort are these. Every man shall bear away yt which he has done in
ye body, either good or euel. Glory and honor to him that works good:
trouble and distress upon every soul of him that works euel. And they
which have done good things, shall go into the resurrection of life: they
which have done evil, into the resurrection of judgment. Come ye blessed of
my father: I have hungered, and ye gave me meat: I have thirsted, and ye gave
me drink, etc. And with the let us also join these saiengs, which call eternal
life ye reward of works. Of whithe sort ar these. Pro. xii.xxiii. ^ xiii.x^^i.
Mat v.x^ Luke. v^.xiii. ii. Cor. iii.viii. To. ii.vi. and viii.xxx.
The rendering of ye hands of a man shall be restored to him. He yt fears ye
commandment, shall be rewarded. Be glad and reioise, behold, your reward is
plentiful in heaven. Every man shall receive reward according to his labor.
Where it is said yt God shall render to every man according to his works, ye same
is easily assoiled. For, yt manner of speaking does rather show ye order of
following, than ye cause. But yt is out of dout, yt the lord does accomplish our
salvation by these degrees of his mercy when those whom he has chose^ he
calls to him: those who^e he has called, he justifies: those whom he has
justified, he glorifieth. Although therefore he do by his only mercy receive
them ye be his into life, yet because he brings them into ye possession
thereof by the race of good works, yt he may fulfill his work in them by such
order as he has appointed: it is no marvel if it be said yt they be crowned
accordig to their works, by which without doubt they are prepared to receive the
crown of immortality. Phi ii.xii
Yea and after this manner it is fittly said that they work their own
salvation, when in applieng themselves to good works, they practice themselves
toward eternal life: namly as in an other place they are commanded to work ye
meat which perishes not, Ihon. vi.xxvii.
when by believing in Christ they get to themselves life: and yet it is by and
by afterward added: Which yt son of man shall give you. Whereby appears yt
the word of Working is not set as contrary to grace, but is referred to
endeavor: and therefore it follows not, yt either ye faithful arthe^selues
authors of their own salvation, or yt the same proceeds from their works. How
then? So sone as they are taken into the fellowship of Christ, by the knowledge
of the Gospel, and the enlightening of the holy ghost, eternal life is begone
in them. Now the same good work which God has begone in them, must also be
made perfect until the day of the lord Jesus. Phi. i.vi.
And it is made perfect, when resembling the heavenly father in righteousness
and holiness, they prove themselves to be his children not swarued out of
kind.

Ep. i.xviii Gal. iiii.xxx.
and for no other cause, but for this adoption. For, the son of ye bond woman
shall not be heir, but ye son of ye sre woman. And in ye very same places, in
which ye holy ghost promises to works eternal glory for reward, in
expressing ye inheritance by name, he shows ye it comes from else where.
Matt. xxv ^xxiiii.
So Christ rehearses works, which he recompenseth with ye rewarding of heaven,
when he calls ye elect to ye possession thereof: but he therwtal adioyneth yt
it must be possessed by right of inheritance. So Paul bids servants, Colos.
iii.xxiiii.
which do their duty faithefully, to hope for reward of ye lord: but he
adds, of inheritance. We see how they do as it were by express words proved
yt we impute not eternal blessedness to works, but ^o ye adoption of god. Why
therefore do they therwtal together make mention of works? This question shall be
made plain with one example of scripture. Before ye birth of Isaac, there was
promised to Abraham a seed in which al ye nations of ye earth should be
blessed: Ge. xv.v. and xvij.^.
and a multiplieng of his sede, which should match ye stars of ye sky, and
the sands of the sea, and other like. In many years afterward, Abraham, as
he was commanded by ye oracle, prepared himself to offer up his son in
sacrifice. Ge. xxii.iii and xvii.
When he had performed this obedience, he received a promise. I have sworn by
my self (says ye lord) because y^ have done this thing, and have not spared
thine own only begotten son, I will bless thee and multiply thy sede as ye
stars of the sky, and the sands of ye sea: thy sede shall possess ye gates
of their enemies, and all the nations of the earth shall be blessed in thy seed,
because y^ have obeyed my voice. What hear we? Has Abraham by his obedience
deserved the blessing, the promise whereof he had received before yt the
commandment was given? Here verily we have it without circumstances showed, yt
the lord rewards ye works of ye faithful with those benefits which he had
already given the^ before yt the works were thought of, having yet no cause why
he should do good to them but his own mercy.

Yet does the Lord not deceive nor mock us, when he says that he Col. i.iiii.
For when he says yt they knew by the Gospel, yt there was hope laid up for
them in heaven, he declares yt the same is by Christ only, not underpropped with
any works. Wherewt accords yt saying of Peter, i. Pet. i.v.
yt the godly are kept by the power of God, through faith, unto the salvation
which is ready to be manifestli showed at the time appointed for it. When he
says yt they labor for it, he signifies that the faithful must run all the
time of their life, that they may atteine to it. But least we should think
that the reward which the lord promises us, is not reduced to the measure
of merit, he did put forth a parable, Mat. xii.^^
in which he made himself a householder, which sent al them that he met, to
the trimming of his vineyarde, some at the first hour of the day, some at the
second, some at the third, yea and some a^o at the xi. At evening he paid to
every one egall wages. The exposition of which parable, that same old writer
what soever he was, whose book is carried abroad under the name of Ambrose of
the calling of the Gentiles, has breefely and truly set out. I will use
rather his words than mine own. The Lord (says he) by the rule of this
comparison, ^
has stablished the dyuersitie of manifold calling, belonging to one grace:
where without doubt they which being let in into the vineyard at ye xi.
hour, are made egal with them yt had wrought the whole day, do represe^t ye
estate of the^, whom for the aduanci^g of the excellency of grace, the tender
kindenes of the lord has rewarded at the wauing of the day, and at the ending
of their life: not paieng wages for their labor, but pouring out ye richesse
of his goodness upon the^ whom he has chosen without works, yt even they also
which have swet in great labor, and have received no more than the last, may
understand yt they have received a gift of grace, not a reward of works. Last
of al, this also is worthy to be noted in these places, where eternal life is
called ye reward of works, yt it is not simply taken for ye communicating
which we have with God to blessed immortality, when he embraces us with fatherly
good will in Christ: but for the possessing or enjoying (as they call it) of
blessedness, Mar. x.xxx. Mat. xxv.xxxiiii. Romans viii xviiii
as also yt very words of Christ do sound, In time to come life everlasting.
And in an other place, Come and possess ye kingdom, etc. After this manner
Paul calls adoption, ye reueling of ye adoption which shall be made in ye
resurrection: and afterward expounds it ye rede^ptio^ of our body. Otherwise
as estranging from God is eternal death, so when man is received of God into
favor, yt he may enjoy ye communicating of him and be made one with him, he is
received from death to life: which is done by the beneficial mean of adoption
only. And if, as they are wont, they stiffely enforce the reward of works, i.
Pet. i.ix
we may turn against them that

Therefore let us not think, yt the holy ghost does with such promise set forth
ye worthiness of our works, as if they deserved such reward. For the
scripture leaves nothing to us, whereof we may be aduau^ced in ye sight of God.
But rather it wholly endeuoreth to beat down our arrogance, to humble us, to
throw us down, and altogether to break us in pieces. But our weakness is so
succored, which otherwise would by and by slip and fall down, unless it did
sustain it self with this expectation, and mitigate her tedious greues with
comfort. First how hard it is for a man to forsake and deny not only al his
things, but also himself, let every man consider for himself. And yet with this
introduction Christ traineth his scholars, yt is, all the godly. Then
throughout all their life he so instructs the^ under the discipline of the
cross, yt they may not set their heart either to the desire or co^fide^ce of
present good things. Brefely he so handles them for the most part, yt which
way so ever they turn their eyes throughout ye whole wideness of ye world,
they have on every side nothing but desperation present before the^: so yt Paul
says, yt we are more miserable then al me^, if our hope be only in this world.
That they should not faint in these so great distresses, ye lord is present with
them, which puts them in mind to lift up their head hyer, to cast their
eyes further, yt they find with him ye blessedness which these not in ye world.
i. Cor. xv.xix.
This blessedness he calls, reward, wages, recompense, not weying ye merit of
works, but signifieng yt it is a reco^pensing to their troubles, sufferinges,
sclaunders. etc. Wherefore nothing wtsta^deth, but yt we may after ye example of
the scripture, call eternal life a rewarding, because in it the lord receives
his from labors into rest, from affliction in to prosperous and happy state,
from sorrow into gladness, from poverty into flowinge wealth, from shame
into glory, and changes al ye euels which they have suffered for greater
good things. So it shall also be no inconvenience, if we think holiness of life
to be a way, not which opens an entry into ye glory of ye heavenly
kingdom, but whereby ye elect ar led of their God in to ye disclosing of it:
forasmuch as this is his good will, to glorify them whom he has sanctified.
Romans viii.xxx.
Only let us not imagine a cauilatio^ of merit and reward, wherein the
Sophisters do fondly stick fast, because they consider with this end which we set
forth. But how vnordrely is it, when ye lord calls us to one end, for us to
look to an other? Nothing is more the weakness of our flesh with some
comfort, nor to puff up our minds with glory. Whosoever therefore does
thereby gather the merit of works, or does in one balance weie work with
reward, he erreth far from the right mark of God.

Wherefore when the Scripture says that God the just judge will ii. Ti.
iiii.viii. Aug ad V^ lent. de gr. and lib. ^rb.
I do not only take exception with Augustine, and say. To whom should he being
a just judge, tender a crown, if he had not being a merciful father given
grace? and how should there be righteousness, unless grace went before
which justifies the unrighteous? How should these due things he rendered,
unless these undue things were first given? But also I add an other thing.
How should he impute righteousness to our works, unless his tender
mercifulness did hide ye unrighteousness that is in them? How should he judge
them worthy of reward, unless he did by immeasurable bountifulness take away
that which is worthy of punishment? For he is wont to call eternal life, grace:
because it is rendered to the free gifts of God when it is repaied to works.
But the Scripture does further humble us, and therwithal raise us up. For
beside this yt it forbids us to glory in works, because they are the free
gifts of God, it therwithal teaches that they are always defiled with some
dregs, that they can not satisfy God, if they be examined by the rule of his
iudgmente: butte least our courage should faint, it teaches that they please by
only pardon. But although Augustine speaks somewhat otherwise than we do: yet
that he does not so disagree in the matter, shall appear by his words in his
third book to Boniface. Cap. 5.
Where when he had compared two men together, ye one of a life even miraculously
holy and perfect, the other honest in deed and of vncorrupt ma^ners, but not so
perfect but that much wants in him: at the last he concludes thus. Even this
man which in manners seems much inferioure, by reason of the true faith in God
whereof he lives and according to which he accuses himself in all his
offenses, in all his good works praises God, giving to himself the shame, and
to him ye glory, and taking from himself both ye pardon of sins, and the
love of weldoings, when he is to be delivered out of this life, he passes into
the feloship of Christ. Wherefore, but because of faith? Which although it
save no man without works (for it is it, which works by love, not a reprobate
faith) yet by it also sins are released, Haba^. ^^ iiii.
because ye righteous man lives of faith: but without it even the same which
seem good works are turned into sins. Here verily he does plainly confess
yt which we so much trauail to prove, that the righteousness of good works
hangs hereupon, that they are by pardon allured of God.

A very near sense to the places above recited, have these: Make to your
selves friends of the Mammon of wickedness, Luke xvi.ix. i. Tim. vi.xvij.
that when you shall fail, they may receive you into everlasting tabernacles.
Command the rich men of this world not to be proudly minded, nor to trust in
uncertain richesse but in the living God, to do well, to become rich in good
works, to lay up in store for themselves a good foundation against the time
to come, that they may obtain eternal life. For good works are compared to
ye richesse, which we may enjoy in ye blessedness of eternal life. I answer, yt
we shall never come to ye understanding of the^, unless we turn our eyes to
the mark whereunto the holy ghost directs his words. If it be true which
Christ says, that our mind abides there where our treasure is, as the
children of the world are wont to be earnestly bent to the getting of those
things which serve for the delites of this present life: so the faithful must
look, sith they have learned that this life shall by and by vanishe away like
a dream, that they send those things which they would enjoy, thither
where they shall have perfect life. We must therefore do as they do which
purpose to remove into any place, where they have chosen to rest their whole
life. They send their goods before, and do not miscontentedly want the^ for a
time: because they think them selves so much more happy, how much more goods
they have where they shall tarry long. If we believe yt heaven is our country,
it behooves us rather to send away our richesses thither than to keep the^
here where we must lose them with sodeine removing. But how shall we send them
thither? If we communicate to the necessities of the poor: Mat. xxv.xl. Pro.
xix.xvii. ii. Cor. ix.vi.
to whom whatsoever is given, the lord accompteth it given to himself.
Whereupon comes that notable promise. He that gives to the poor, lends
for gain to the Lord. Again: He that liberallye sows, shall liberally
reap. For those things are delivered into the hand of the lord to keep, which
are bestowed upon our brothren by the duty of charity. He, as he is a faith
full keeper of yt which is delivered to him, will one day restore it with
plentiful gain. Are the^ our dutiefull doings of so great value with God,
that they be as richesse laid up in store for us in his hand? Who shall fear
so to say, when the Scripture does so often and plainly witness it? Butte if
any man will leap from the mere goodness of God to the worthiness of works,
he shall be nothing helped by these testimonies to the stablishing of his error.
For you ca^ gather nothing rightly thereof but ye mere inclination of Gods
tenderness toward us: forasmuch as to encourage us to well doing, although the
services which we do to him are not worthy of so much as his only loking
upon them, yet he suffers none of them to be lost.

ii. These. i.^.
reaches that the same are sent to them, yt they may be accounted worthy of
the kingedome of God, for which they suffer. For (says he) it is righteous
with God, to render trouble to the^ that trouble you: but to you, rest with us
when the lord Jesus shall be showed from heaven. But the authore of the epistle
to the Hebrews says, Heb. vi.x.
God is not unrighteous, yt he should forget your work, and ye love which you
have showed in his name for yt you have ministered to the saints. To the first
place I answer, that there is no worthiness of merit spoken of: To. ^
viii.xxi^. Luc. xxiiii.xxvi. Act. ii.j.xxii.
but because God the father wills that we whom he has chosen to be his
children, should be made like to Christie his first begotten son: as it
behooved that he should first suffer, and then enter into the glory appointed
for him: so must we also by many tribulations enter into the kingdom of
heaven. Therefore when we suffer tribulations for the name of Christ, there are
as it were certain marks printed upon us, wherewt God uses to mark the
sheep of his stock. Gal. vi.xvii.
After this manner therefore we are accounted worthy of ye kingdom of God,
because we bear in our body the marks of our lord and master which are ye
signs of ye children of God. To this purpose make these saiengs. i. Co, iiii.x
That we bear about in our body ye mortificatio^ of Ie^ Christ yt his life
may be showed in us. That we be fashioned like to his suffringes, that we
may come to the likeness of his resurrection from the dead. The reason which
is adioined serves not to prove any worthiness, but to confirm ye hope of ye
kingdom of God: as if he had said, As it agrees with the just iudgmente of God,
to take vengeance of your enemies for the vexations that they have done to you:
so agrees it also to give to you release and rest from vexations. The other
place, which teaches that it so becomes the righteousness of God not to
forgett the obediences of them that be his, that it declares it to be in a
manner unrighteous if he should forget them, has this meaning: God to quicke^
our ^outhfulnesse, has given us assurance yt the labor shall not be vain
which we shall take for his glory. Let us always remember that this promise, as
all other should bring us no profit, unless the free covenant of mercy went
before, whereupon the whole assuredness of our salvation should rest. But
standing upon that covenant, we ought assuredly to trust, there shall also not
want reward of the liberality of God to our works howsoever they be
unworthy. The Apostle, to confirm us in yt expectation, affirms yt God is
not unrighteous, but will stand to his promise ones made. Therefore this
righteousness is rather referred to the truth of Gods promise, than to his
justice of rendering due. According to which meaning there is a notable saienge
of Augustine, which as ye holy man sticks not to rehearse often as notable, so
I think it not unworthy yt we should continually remember it. In psalm. 32. and
109.
The lord (says he) is faithful, which has made himself decter to us, not by
receiving any thing of us, but by promising all things to us.

There are also alleged these saienges of Paul. If I have al faith, i. Cor.
xiii
but have not charity, I am nothing. Again, Now there remain hope, faith and
charity, but the greatest among these is charity. Colos. iii.xiiii.
Again, Above all things have charity, which is ye bo^d of perfection. By ye
first two places our Pharisees affirm that we are rather justified by charity
than by faith, namely by ye chefer virtue as they say. But this fond argument
is easily wyped away. For we have in an other place already declared, yt those
things which ar spoken in ye first place perteine nothing to true says. The
other place we also expound of true faith, tha^ which he says yt Charity is
greater: not yt it is more meritorious, but because it is more fruteful,
because it exte^deth further, because it serves mo, because it remains always
i^ force, whereas the use of faith continues but for a time. If we have regard
so excellence, ye love of God should worthily have the chief place, of which
Paul here speaks not. For he enforces this thing only, yt we should with
mutual charity edify one an other in ye Lord, but let us imagine yt charity
does every way excel faith: yet what man of sound judgment, yea or of
sound brain, will gather thereof yt it does more iustifie^punc; The power of
justifying which faith has, consists not in the worthiness of ye work. Our
justification stands upon ye only mercy of God and the deserving of Christ,
which justification when faith takes hold of, it is said to justify. Now if
you ask our adversaries in what cause they assign justification to charity,
they will answer yt because it is a dutiefull doing acceptable to God, therefore
by ye deserving thereof righteousness is imputed to us by the acceptatio^ of
the goodness of God. Here you see how well the argument proceeds. We say yt
faith justifies, not because by ye worthiness of it self it deserves
righteousness to us, but because it is an instrument by which we freely obtain
the righteousness of Christ. These men, omitting the mercy of God, and passing
over Christ, (where the sum of righteousness stands) do affirm that we
are justified by the benifite of charity because it excels above faith:
even as if a man would reason that a king is fitter to make a shoe than is a
shooemaker, because he is an infinite way more excellent. This only argument is
a plain example that all the Sorbonicall schools do not so much as taste
with the vttermoste part of their lips what ye justification of faith is. But
if any wrangler do yet carpe and ask, why in so small distance of place we
take the name of faith in Paul so diversely: I have a weighty cause of this
exposition. For sith those gifts which Paul rehearses are after a certain
manner under faith and hope, because they perteine to ye knowledge of God, he
contemns them al by way of recapitulation under ye name of faith and hope: as
if he should say by ye prophecy, and tongues, and the grace and knowledge of
interpretation tend to this mark to lead us to ye knowledge of God. And we know
God in this life none otherwise but by hope and faith. Therefore when I name
faith and hope, I comprehend al these things together. And so there remain
these three, Hope, Faith, Charity: yt is to say, how great diversity of gifts
so ever there be, they ar al referred to these. Among these ye chief is
charity* etc. Out of ye third place they gather, If Charity be the bond of
perfection, then it is also ye bond of righteousness which is nothing else but
perfection. First, to speak nothing how Paul there calls perfection, when ye
members of ye Church well set in order do cleave together, and to grant yt we
are by charity made perfect before God: yet what new thing bring they forth?
For I will alwaie on ye contrary side take exception and sai yt we never come
to this perfection, unless we fulfill al ye parts of charity, and thereupon I
will gather, yt since all me^ ar most far from ye fulfilling of charity,
therefore al hope of perfection is cut of from them.

I will not go through al ye testimonies which at this day ye folish Sorbonistes
rashly snatch out of ye scriptures, as they first come to hand, and do throw
them against us. For, some of the^ are so worthi to be laughed at, yt I my
self also can not rehearse them, unless I would worthily be compted fond.
Therefore I will make an end, when I shall have declared the saying of Christ,
wherwt they maruelously please themselves. For, to ye lawyer which asked him
what was necessary to salvation, he answered: if yt wilt enter into life, Mat.
xix.xvii.
keep ye co^maundeme^ts. What would we more (sai they) when we are commanded by
ye author of grace himself to get ye kingdom of God by ye keeping of his
co^maundeme^ts. As though forsooth it were not certain, yt Christ te^pered his
answers to the^ with whom he saw yt he had to do. Here a doctor of ye law asks
of ye mean to obtain blessedness, and not ye only, but with doing of what thing
men may atteine unto it. Both ye person of him yt spoke and the question it
self led ye Lord so to answer. The lawyer being filled with ye persuasio^ of ye
righteousness of ye law, was blind in conscience of works. Again, he sought
nothing else but what were yt works of righteousness, by which salvation is
gotten. Therefore he is worthily sent to ye law, in which there is a perfect
mirrore of righteousness. We also do with a loud voice pronounce yt the
commau^deme^ts must be kept, if life be sought in works. And this doctrine is
necessary to be known of Christians. For how should they flee to Christ if they
did not acknowledge y^ they ar fallen from ye way of life into ye hedlo^ge
downefal of death? But how should they understand how far they have straied from
ye way of life, unless they first understand what is yt way of life? For the^
they are taught yt the sanctuary to recover salvation, is in Christ, when
they see how great difference there is between their life and y^ righteousness
of God which is contained in ye keeping of the law. The sum is this, that if
salvation be sought in works, we must keep ye commandments by which we are
instructed to perfect righteousness. But we must not stick fast her, unless we
will faint in our midde course: for none of us is able to keep ye
commandments. Since therefore we are excluded from ye righteousness of ye
law, we must of necessity resort to an other help, namly to ye faith of
Christ. Wherefore as here ye lord calls back ye doctor of the law whom he knew
to swel with vain confidence of works, to the law whereby he may learn yt he is
a sinner subject to the dreadful judgment of eternal death: so in other
places, without making mention of ye law, he comforts other yt are already
humbled with such knowledge, Matt. xi.xxxix.
with promise of grace, as, Come to me all ye yt labor and are laden, and I
will refresh you, and ye shall find rest for your souls.

At the last when they are weary with wresting the Scripture, they fall Ihon.
v^.xxix.
As though forsothe faith in yt it is an obeying of the will of God, does
with her own deserving procure unto us righteousness, and not rather because
by embracing the mercy of God, it seals in our hearts the righteousness
of Christ offered to us of it in the preaching of ye Gospel. The readers shall
pardon me if I do not tarry upon confuting of such follies, for they
themselves witho^t any assault of other, are sufficiently overthrown with
their own feebleness. But I will by the way confute one objection which
seems to have some show of reason, least it should troble some that are not so
well practiced. Since common reason teaches that of contraries is all one rule,
and all particular sins are imputed to us for unrighteousness, they say it
is meet that to al particular good works be given the praise of
righteousness. They do not satisfy me which answer, that the damnation of men
proprely proceeds from only unbelief, not from particular sins. I do in
deed agree to them, that unbelief is the fountain and root of all euels. For
it is the first departinge from God, after which do follow the particular
trespassinges against ye law. But whereas they seem to set one self same
reason of good and evil works in weieng of righteousness or
unrighteousness, therein I am compelled to disagree from them. For the
righteousness of works is the perfect obedience of the law. Therefore thou
can not be righteous vi works, unless thou do follow it as a straight line in
the whole continual course of thy life. From it so sone as thou haste swarued,
thou art fallen into unrighteousness. Hereby appears that righteousness
comes not of one or a few works, but of an vnswaruing and vnweried observing
of ye will of god. But ye rule of judging unrighteousness is most co^trar^. For
he yt has committed fornication, or has stolen, is by one offense gylty of
death, because he has offended against the majesty of God. Therefore these
our subtle arguers do stumble, for that they mark not this saying of James,
Iam. ii.x.
that he which sins in one, is made gylty of al, because he that has
forbidden to kill, has also forbidden to steal, etc. Therefore it ought to
seem no absurdity when we say that death is the just reward of every
sin, because they are every one worthy of the just dyspleasure and vengeance
of God. But thou shall reason foolishly, if on ye contrary side thou gather
that by one good work man may be reconciled to God, which with many sins
deserves his wrath.

The.xix. Chapter. Of Christian liberty.
Lucian, a godless man.
because in ye spiritual darkness wherwyth they be taken, every wanton
railing is lawful for them. Wherefore it shall now come forth in fi^t season: and
it was profitable to differ to this place ye plainer discoursing of it, (for we
have already in diverse places lightly touched it) because so sone as any
mention is brought in of Christian liberty, then either filthy lusts do
boil, or mad motions do arise, unless these wanton wits be timely met
withal, which do otherwise most naughtily corrupt the vest things. For,
some men by pretense of this liberty, shake of all obedience of God, and
break forth into an unbridled licentiousness: and some men disdain it,
thinking that by yt all moderation, order and choice of things is taken away.
What should we here do, being compassed in such narrow streightes? Shall we
bid Christian liberty farewell, and so cut of all fit occasion for such
periles? But, as we have said, unless yt be fast holden, neither Christ, nor
the truth of the Gospel, nor the inward peace of the soul is rightly known.
Rather we must endeavor that so necessary a part of doctrine be not
suppressed, and yet that in the mean time those fond objections may be met
withal which are wont to rise thereupon.

law. Therefore taking away al mention of the law, and layinge aside al thinking
upon works, we must embrace the only mercy of God, when we entreat of
justification: and turning away our sight from our selves, we must behold
Christ alone. For there the question is not how we be righteous: but how
although we be unrighteous and unworthy, we be taken for worthy. Of which
thing if consciences will atteine any certainty, they must give no place to
ye law. Neither can any man hereby gather that the law is superfluous to the
faithful, whom it does not therefore cease to teach and exhort, and prick
forward to goodness, although before the judgment seat of God it has no
place in their consciences. For these two things, as they are most diverse, so
must be well and diligently distinguished of us. The whole life of Christians
ought to be a certain meditation of godliness, Ephesians. i.iiii. i. ^hes. ^ii^ v.
because they are called into sanctification. Herein stands the office of the
law, yt by putting them in mind of their duty, it should stir them up to the
endeavor of holiness and innoce^cie. But when co^scie^ces are careful how they
may have God merciful, what they shall answer, and upon what affiance they
shall stand if they be called to his judgment, there is not to be reckened
what ye law requires, but only Christ must be set forth for righteousness,
which passes all perfection of the ^awe.

Upon this point hangs almost all the argument of the Epistle to the Gala.
iii.xiii. and v.i.
Of which sort are these. That Christ was made a curse for us, that he might
redeem us from the curse of the law. Again, Stand fast in the liberty
wherewith Christ has made you free, and be not again entangled with the yoke
of bondage. Behold, I Paul say, if ye be circumcised, Christ shall nothing
profit you. And he which is circumcised is deitor of the whole law. Christ is
made idle to you whosoever ye be yt are justified by the law: ye are fallen
away from grace. Wherein truly is contained some hier thing than the liberty
of ceremonies. I grant in deed yt Paul there entreareth of ceremonies,
because he co^tendeth with ye false Apostles, which went about to bring again
into the Christian Church ye old shadows of law which were abolished by ye
coming of Christ. But for the discussing of this question, there were hier
places to be disputed, in which the whole controversy stood. First because by
those Jewish shadows ye brightness or ye gospel was darkened, he shows that
we have in Christ a fu^ giving in de^de of al those things which were
shadowed by the ceremonies of Moses. Secondly, because these deceivers filled
ye people with a most noughty opinion, namely yt this obedience auailed to
deserve ye favor of God: Here he stands much upon this point, that the
faithful should not think yt they ca^ by any works of the law, much less by
those little principles, obtain righteousness before God. Gal. iix^, xxx.
And therwithal he teaches, yt they are by the cross of Christ free from the
da^natio^ of the law, which otherwise hangs over al men, y^ they should with
full assuredness rest in Christ alone. Which place proprely pertains to this
purpose. Last of al he mainteineth to the consciences of the faithful their
liberty, that they should not be bound with any religion in things not
necessary.

The second part, which hangs upon that former part, is that consciences obey
the law, not as compelled by the necessity of the law: but being free from the
yoke of the law it self, of their own accord they obey the will of God. For,
because they abide in perpetual terrors, so long as they be under the dominion
of the law, they shall never be with chereful readiness framed to ye obedience
of God, unless they first have this liberty given the^. By an example we shall
both more briefly and more plainly perceive what these things mean. Deuteronomy. vi.v
The commandment of the law is, yt we love our God with al our heart, with all
our soul, with al our stre^gths. That this may be done, our soul must first be
made void of all other sense and thought, our heart must be clea^sed of al
desires, al our stre^gths must be gathered up and drawn together to this only
purpose. They which have gone most far before other in the way of the Lord, are
yet very far from this mark. For though they love God with their mind, and
with sincere affection of heart, yet they have still a great part of their
heart and soul possessed with the desires of the flesh, by which they are
drawn back and stayed from going forward with hasty course to God. They do in
deed travail forward with great endeavor: but the flesh partly febleth their
strengthes, and partly draws them to it self. What shall they here do, when
they feel that they do nothing less tha^ perform the law? They will, they
covet, they endeavor, but nothing with such perfection as ought to be. If they
look upon the law, they see that whatsoever work they attempt or purpose, is
accursed. Neither is there any cause why any man should deceive himself with
gathering that the work is therefore not altogether evil, because it is
imperfect: and therefore that God does nevertheless accept that good which is
in it. For, the law requiring perfect love, conde^neth al imperfection, unless
y rigor of it be mitigated. Therefore his works should fall to naught which he
would have to seem partly good: and he shall find yt it is a transgression of
the law, even in this because it is imperfect.

Mala. iii.xvii.
Where this word Spare, is set for to bear with al, or ge^tly to wink at
faults, forasmuch as he also makes mention of service. And this affiance is
not a little necessary for us, without which we shall go about all things in
vain. For God accompteth himself to be worshipped with no work of ours but
which is truly done of us for the worshipping of him. But how can that be done
among these terrors, where it is douted whether God be offended or worshipped
with our work?

And that is the cause why the author of the Epistle to the Hebrews, Romans xi.i^
to faith, and weyeth the^ only by faith. To. vi.^ii*
Touching this liberty there is a place in the Epistle to the Romans, where
Paul resoneth yt some ought not to have dominion over us, because we are not
under the law, but under grace. For when he had exhorted the faithful that
sin should not reygne in their mortal body, and that they should not give
their members to be weapons of wickedness to sin, but should dedicate them
selves to God, as they that are alive from the dead, and their members,
weapons of righteousness to God: and whereas they might on the other side object
that they do yet carry with them the flesh full of lusts, and that sin
dwells in them, he adioyneth that comfort by the liberty of the law, as if
he should say. Though they do not yet thoroughly feel sin destroyed and ye
righteousness yet lives not in the^, yet there is no cause why they should fear
and be discouraged as though they had been alwaidispleased with the^ for the
remnantes of sin, forasmuch as they are by grace made free from the law, that
their works should not be examined by the rule of the law. As for them that
gather yt we may sin because we are not under the law, let the^ know that this
liberty

The third part is, that we be bound with no conscience before God of outward
things which are by them selves indifferent, but that we may indifferently
sometime use the^, and sometime leave them unused. And the knowledge of this
liberty also is very necessary for us: for if it shall be absent, there shall be
no quiet to our consciences, no end of superstitions. Many at this day do
think us fond to move disputation about the free eating of flesh, about the
free use of days, and garments and such other small trifles as they in deed
think them: but there is more weight in them than is commonly thought. For
when consciences have ones cast the^ selves into the snare, they enter into a
long and combersome way, from whence they can afterward find no easy way to
get out. If a man begin to doubt whether he may occupye linen in shetes,
shertes, hankercheifes, and napkines. neither will he be out of doubt whether he
may use hemp, and at the last he will also fall in doubt of matters, for he will
way with himself whether he can not suppe without napkins, whether he may
not be without handkerchifes. If any man think deyntye meat to be unlawful,
at length he shall not with quietness before the Lord eat either brounebreade
or common meats, when he remembers that he may yet sustain his body with
bacer fode. If he doubt of pleasant wine, afterward he will not drink dead
wine with good peace of conscience, last of al he will not be so bold to touch
sweter and cleaner water than other. Finally at the length he will come to this
point, to think it unlawful (as the common saying is) to tread upon a
straw lying a cross. For here is begone no light strife, but this is in
question, whether God will have us to use these or those things, whose will
ought to guide al our counsels and doings. Hereby some must needs be carried
with desperatio^ into a confuse deuouryng pit: some must, despising God, and
casting away his fear, make themselves away through destruction when they have
no ready way. For whosoever are entangled with such doubting, which way soever
they turn themselves, they see every where present offense of conscience.

To. xiiii.xiiij.
to him it is common. In which words he makes al outward things subject to
our liberty, provided always yt our minds have the assurance of ye liberty
before god. But if any superstitious opinion cast into us any dout, those
things which of their own nature were clean, are defiled to us. Wherefore he
adds: Blessed is he ye judges not himself in yt which he allows. But he yt
judges, if he eat, is condemned, because he eats not of faith. And yt which
is not of faith, is sin. Among such narrow streightes, who so nevertheless
with carelessly venturing on al things show themselves bolder, do they not as much
turn themselves away from god? But they which are thoroughly pierced with some
fear of God, when they themselves also are compelled to do many things against
their conscience, are discouraged and do fall down with fear. All that are such,
do receive none of ye gifts of God with tha^kesgeuing, by which above yet
Paul testifies yt they al are sanctified to our use. I mean the
thankesgeuing yt proceeds from a heart yt acknowlegeth ye liberality and
goodness of God in his gifts. For, many of them in deed do understand that
those are ye benefits of God which they use, and they praise God in his
works: but since they are not persuaded that they are given to themselves, how
should they thank God as ye geuer of them? Thus in a sum we see, whereto this
liberty tends, namely that we should use the gifts of God to such use as he
has given the^ unto us, without any scruple of conscience, without any trouble
of mind: by which confidence our souls may both have peace with him and
acknowledge his liberality toward us. For here are co^prehe^ded al ceremonies
yt are at liberty to be observed, yt our consciences should not be bound with any
necessity to keep the^, but should remember ye she use of the^ is by Gods
benefit subject to themselves unto edification.

They say that they are things indifferent: I grant, so that a man
indifferently use them. But when they are to gredily coueted, when they are
proudely bosted, when they are wastefully spent, it is certain that those
things which otherwise were of themselves lawful, are by these faults
defiled. This saying of Paul does very well put difference between things
indifferent: All things are clean to ye clean: but to the defiled and
unbelieving, Tit. i.xxv,
nothing is clean, because their mind and conscience is defiled. For why are
accursed the rich men, they which have their comfort, Luke. vi.xxiiii. Amos.
vi. Esa. v.vii^
which are satisfied with meat, which do now laugh, which sleep in beds of
iuory, which join land to land, whose bankets have lute, harp, taber and
wine? Uerily both iuorie, and gold, and richesse, are the good creatures of
God, permitted yea and appointed by the providence of God for men to use.
Neither is it any where forbidden either to laugh, or to be satisfied with
meat, or to join new possessions to their own old possessions or of their
au^cesters, or to be delited with musical melody, or to drink wine. This is
true in deed. But when they have plenty of things, to wallow in delites, to
glut themselves, to make their wit and mind drunk with present pleasures and
always to gape for new, these doings are most far from the lawful use of ye
gifts of God. Therefore let them take away immeasurable desire, let them take
away immeasurable wasting, let them take away vanity and arrogance, yt they
may with a pure conscience purely use the gifts of God. When the mind shall be
framed to this sobriety, they shall have a rule of ye lawful use. On the
other side let this moderation be wanting, even base and common delicates are
to much. For this is truly said, that oftentimes in frise and course cloth
dwells a purple heart, and sometime under silk and purple, lies simple
humility: Let every man in his degree so live either poorly, Phil. iii^*
or meanly, or plentifully, that they al remember that they are fed of God to
live, not to be riotous: and let them think, yt this is the law of Christian
liberty, if they have learned with Paul to be contented with those things
which they presently have: if they can skill both to be humble and to excel:
if they be taught in all places and in all things to be both full and hungry,
to have plenty and to suffer want.

Herin also many men do err, because as though their liberty should because
they nothing regard the weakness of their brethren, which we ought so to
bear with, that we rashly commit nothing with offense of them. But sometime
also it behooves that our liberty be set forth before men. And this I grant.
But there is a measure most heedefully to be kept, that we cast not away the
care of the weak of whom the Lord has so earnestly given us charge.

To. xiiij.i. and xiij.
Bear (says he) the weak in faith. Again, Let us not herafter judge one an
other: but this rather, let there not be laid before our brother any offense
or occasion of falling: and many other sayengs to ye same intent, which are
more fit to be red in ye place it self, tha^ to be here rehearsed. The sum
is, yt we which are strong should bear with ye weaknesses of our brethren, and
not please our selves, but every one of us please his neighbor unto good for
edifieng. i. Cor. viij ix. i. Cor. x.xxv.
In an other place, But see yt your liberty be not in any wise an offense to
the^ yt are weak. Again, Eat ye al things yt are sold in the sha^bles,
asking no question for conscience: of your conscience (I say) not an other
man's. Finally be ye such, that ye give no offense, neither to the Jews, nor to
the Greeks, nor to ye Church of God. Gal. v.xiii
Also in an other place, ye are called, brethren, into liberty: only give not
your liberty to be an occasion to the flesh, but by charity serve ye one an
other. Thus it is. Our liberty is not given toward our weak neighbors, whose
servants charity makes us in all things: but rather, that having peace with
God in our minds, we may also live peaceably among men. As for the offense of
the Pharisees, how much it is to be regarded, we learn by the words of the
Lord, whereby he bids them to be let alone, because they are blind, and
guides of the blind. Matt. xv.xiiii.
The disciples had warned him, that ye Pharisees were offended with his
sayenges: he answered that they were to be neglected, and the offendyng of them
not to be cared for.

But yet still the matter hangs doutfull, unless we know who are Act.
xvi.iij. Gal. ^.iij.
When he took Timothee into his company, he circumcised him: but he could not
be brought to circumcise Titus. Here were diverse doings, and no change of
purpose nor of mind: namely in circumcising Timothee, when he was free from
all men, he made himself servant to all men* and he was made to the Jews, i.
Cor. ^^.xix. and xx^.
as a Jew, that he might win the Jews: to them that were under the law, as
if he himself were under the law, that he might win them which were under the
law: al things to al me^, yt he might save many, as he writes in an other
place. Thus we have a right moderation of liberty, if it may be indifferently
restrained with some profit. What he had respect unto when he stoutely refused
to circumcise Titus, he himself testifies, Gal. ii.iiii
writing thus, But neither was Titus* which was with me, although he was a
Grecian, compelled to be circumcised, because of the false brethren which were
com in by the way, which had priu^y crept in to epsy our liberty which we
have in Christ Jesus, (...) might bring us into bondage, to whom we gave not
place by su^^e^^^o^ so much as for a time, yt the truth of ye gospel might
(...) with y^^. There is also a time when we must of necessity defend our
liberty, if the same be in weak consciences enda^gered by the unjust
exa^^^nges of false Apostles. We must in every thing study to preserve
charity, and have regard to the edifieng of our neighbor. i. ^or. ^.xx.^.
Al thin^^ (says he) are lawful for me, but not al things are expedi^t al
things are lawful for me but not al things do edify. Let no man seek yt which
is his own, but yt which is an others. There is nothing now plainer by this
rule, tha^ yt we must use our liberty, if it may turn to the edifieng of our
neighbor: but if it be not so expedient for our neighbor, then we must ^o^beare
it. There be some which counterfeit ye wisdom of Paul in forbearing of
liberty, while they do nothing less tha^ apply same to ye duties of
charity. For, so yt they may provide for their own quietness, they wish al
mention of liberty to be buried, whereas it is no less behoueful for our
neighbors, sometime to use liberty for their benefit and edificacio^, than in
fit place to restrain it for their commodity. But it is the part of a godly
man to think, that free power in outward things is therefore granted him, that
he may be the freer to all duties of charity.

But whatsoever I have spoken of avoiding of offenses, my meaning which when
they be leaders of men into a thousand sorts of ungodliness, yet do feign
that they must behave themselves so that they be no offense to their
neighbors. As though they do not in the mean edify the consciences of their
neighbors to evil, specially whereas they stick fast in the same mire without
any hope of gettyng out. And the pleasant me^ forsothe, whether their neighbor
be to be instructed with doctrine or example of life, say that he must be fed
with milk, whom they fill with most evil and poisonous opinions. Paul
reports that he fed the Corinthia^s with drinking of milk: i Cor. iij.ij
but if the popish Mass had then ben among them, would he have sacrificed to
give them the drink of milk? But milk is not poison. Therefore they lie in
saying that they feed them whom under a show of flattering allureme^tes they
cruelly kill. But, grauntyng that such dissemblyng is for a time to be allowed,
how long yet will they feed their children with milk? For if they never grow
bigger, that they may at the least be able to bear some light meat, it is
certain that they were never brought up with milk. There are two reasons that
move me why I do not now more sharply contend with them: first, because
their follies are scarcely worthy to be confuted, sith they worthily seem
filthy in the sight of all men that have their sound wit: secondly, because I
have sufficiently done it in peculiar books, I will not now do a thing already
done. Only let the readers remember this, that with whatsoever offenses Satan
and the world go about to turn us away from the ordinances of God or to
stay us from following that which he apointeth yet we must nevertheless go
earnestly forward: and then, that whatsoever dangers hang upon it, yet it is
not at our liberty to swerve one hear breadth from the commandment of the
same God, neither is it lawefull by any pretense to attempt any thing but that
which he gives us leave.

i. Pet. i.^^^^. Gal. v.i.^ii^.
but with his own blood: so that Paul sticks not to say, that his death is
made void, if we yield our selves into subjection to men. For he trauaileth
about nothing else in certain chapters of the Epistle to the Galathians, but to
show that Christ is darkened or rather destroyed to us, unless our consciences
stand fast in their liberty, which verily they have lost if they may at the
will of men be snared with the bonds of laws and ordinances. But, as it is a
thing most worthy to be known, so it needs a longer and plainer declaration.
For so sone as any word is spoken of the abrogating of the ordinances of men,
by and by great troubles are raised up partly by seditious men, partly by
sclaunderers, as though the whole obedience of men were at ones taken away and
overthrown.

Therefore, that none of us may stumble at this stone, first let us Romans
xiij.i. and v.
that Paul teaches yt the Magistrate ought to be obeyed, not only for fear
of punishment, but for conscience. Whereupon follows that consciences are also
bound by the civil laws. If it were so, all should come to naught which we
both have spoken and shall speak of the spiritual government. For the losyng
of this knot, first it is good to know what is conscience. And the definition
thereof is to be fetched from the propre deriuatio^ of the word. For, as when
men do with mind and understanding conceive the knowledge of things, they are
thereby said (Scire) to know, whereupon also is derived the name of science,
knowledge: so when they have a felyng of the judgment of God, as a witness
joined with them which does not suffer them to hide their sins but yt they
be drawn accused to the judgment seat of God, that same felyng is called
Conscience. For it is a certain mean between God and man, because it suffers
not man to suppress in himself that which he knows, but pursues him so
far till it bring him to giltinesse. This is it which Paul means, Romans
ij.xv
where he says that conscience does together witness with me^, when their
thoughts do accuse or acquit them in the judgment of God. A simple knowledge
might remain as enclosed within man. Therefore this felyng which presents
man to the judgment of God, is as it were a keeper joined to man, to mark and
epsy al his secrets, that nothing may remain buried in darkness. Whereupon
also comes that old Proverb, Conscience is a thousand witnesses. And for
the same reason Peter has set the examination of a good conscience for
quietness of mind, ^. Pet. iij.x^i.
when being persuaded of the grace of Christ, Heb. x.ii.
we do without fear present our selves before God. And the author of the
Epistle to the Hebrews, sets to have no more conscience of sin, instead
of to be delivered or acquitted that sin may no more accuse us.

ii. Tim. i.v.
In which sense Paul writes that charity is the fulfillyng of the law out
of a pure conscience and faith not fained. Afterward also in the same chapter
he shows how much it differs from understanding, saying that some had
suffered shipwreck from the faith, because they had forsaken good Conscience.
For in these words he signifies that it is a lively affection to worship God,
and a sincere endeavor to live holyly and godlyly. Sometime in deed it extends
also to men, Act. xxiiii.xvi.
as in Luke where the same Paul protests that he endeavored himself to walk
with a good conscience toward God and men. But this was therefore said, because
the fruits of good conscience do flow and come even to men. But in speaking
properly, it has respect to God only, as I have already said. Hereby it
comes to pass that the law is said to bind the conscience, which simply
binds a man without respect of men, or without having any consideration of
them. As for example. God commands not only to keep the mind chaste and
pure from al lust, but also forbids al manner of filthiness of words and
outward wantonness whatsoever it be. To the keeping of this law my conscience
is subject although there lived not one man in the world. So he that behaueth
himself intemperantly, not only sins in this yt he gives an euel example to
the brethren, but also has his conscience bound with giltinesse before God. In
things that are of themselves mean, there is an other consideration. For we
ought to abstain from them if they bread any offense, but the conscience still
being free. So Paul speaks of flesh consecrate to Idols. i. Cor. x.xxviii.
If any (says he) move any dout, touch it not for co^scie^ces sake: I say for
conscience, not thine but the others. A faithful man should sin, which being
first warned should nevertheless eat such flesh. But howsoever in respect of
his brother, it is necessary for him to abstain as it is prescribed of God,
yet he cesseth not to keep still ye liberty of conscience. Thus we see how
this law bindyng the outward work, leaves the conscience unbound.

The.xx. Chapter. Of prayer, which is the chief exercise of faith, and whereby
we daily receive the benefits of God.
OF these things that have been hitherto spoken, we plainly Romans viii.xxvi.
that the Spirit of adoption, which seals in our hearts the witness of the
Gospel, rayseth up our spirits that they dare show forth their desires to
God, stir up unspeakable gronynges, and cry with confidence Abba, Father. It
is mete therefore that this last point, because it was before but only spoken
of by the way and as it were lightly touched, should now be more largely
entreated of.

This therefore we get by the benefit of prayer, that we atteyne to matters:
and of his power, by which he susteineth us being weak and in a manner
fayntyng: and of his goodness, by which he receives us into favor being
miserably laden with sins: finally whereby we call him al whole, to give
himself present to us. Hereby grows singular rest and quietness to our
consciences. For when we have disclosed to the Lord the necessity which
distressed us, we largely rest though it were but in this only that none of
our euels is hidden from him, who^ we are persuaded both to be most well
willing toward us, and most able to provide well for us.

i. kin. xviii xiii.
yet busily prays between his knees, and sends his servant seven times to
epsy it: not for that he did discredit the oracle of God, but because he knew
that it was his duty, least his faith should wax drowsy and sluggish, to lay
up his desires with God. Wherefore although while we lie senseless and so dull
that we perceive not our own miseries, he waketh and watches for us, and
sometime also helps us undesired, yet it much behooves us, that he be
continually called upon of us, that our heart may be enflamed with earnest and
fervent desire to seek, love, and worship him, while we accustom our selves in
every necessity to s^ee to him as to our shoot anchare. Again, that no
desire and no wish at all may enter into our mind, whereof we should be
ashamed to make him witness, while we learn to present our wishes, yea and to
pour out our whole heart before his eyes. Then, y^ we may be framed to receive
al his benefits with true tha^kfulnesse of mind, yea and with outward
thankesgeuyng, of which we are put in mind by our prayer yt they come to us
from his hand. Moreover, yt when we have obtained yt which we desired, being
persuaded that he has answered to our prayers, we may be thereby ye more
ferue^tly carried to think upon his kindness, and therewithal embrace with
greater pleasure those things which we acknowledge to have been obtained by
prayer. Last of all, that very use and experience may according to the
measure of our weakness assure our minds of his providence, when we
understand that he not only promises that he will never fail us, and that he
does of his own accord open us the entry to call to him in the very point of
necessity, but also has his hand always stretched out to help them that be
his, and that he does not feade them with words, but defends them with
present help. For these causes, the most kind Father, although he never
slepeth or is sluggishe, yet oftentimes makes a show as though he slept and
were sluggish, that so he may exercise us, which are otherwise sloughtfull and
sluggish to come to him, to ask of him, to require him to our own great
benefit. Therefore they do to foolishly, which to call away the minds of men
from prayer, babble that the providence of God, which makes for the safekeping
of al things, Psa. ^xiii.xviii.
is in vain weried with our callinges upon him: Whereas the lord contrariwise
not in vain testifies that he is ^^e to al the^ that call upon his name in
truth. And of none other sort is that which other do triffingly say, that it is
superfluous to ask those things which the Lord is of his own will ready to
give: whereas even the very same things which flow to us from his own free
liberality, he will have us acknowledge to be granted to our prayers. Which
thing that notable sentence of the Psalm does testify, wherewith many like
sayenges do accord. Ps. xxxiiii.xvi.
The eyes of the Lord are upon the righteous, and his ears unto their prayers.
Which saying so sets out the providence of God bent of his own accord to
provide sor the safety of the godly, that yet he omitteth not the exercise of
faith, whereby sloughtfulnesse is wiped from the minds of men. The eyes of God
therefore do wake, that he may succor the necessity of the blind: but he will
again on our behalues hear our groninges, that he may the better prove his
love toward us. Psa. xxxi.iiii.
And so both are true, that the watcheman of Israel slepeth not, nor
slombreth, and yet that he sits still as having forgotten us when he sees
us dull and dumme.

Now, to frame prayer rightly and well, let this be the first rule, that

Both these things are specially worthy to be noted, yt whosoever and lose
from al fear. In which thing we must so much more earnestly labor, as we find
it more hard, for no man can be so bent to pray, but that he shall feel many
biethoughtes to crepe upon him, either to break of, or by some bowing and
swaruing to hinder the course of his prayer. But here let us call to mind, how
great an unworthiness it is, when God receives us unto familiar talk with him,
to abuse his so great gentelnesse, with minglyng holy and profane things
together, when the reverence of him holds not our minds fast bound unto
him: but as if we talked with some mean man, we do in the midst of our
prayer, forsaking him, leap hither and thither. Let us therefore know that none
do rightly and well prepare themselves to prayer, but they whom the majesty of
God pearceth, that they come to it vncumbred of earthly cares and affections.
And that is meant by the ceremony of lifting up of hands, that men should
remember that they be far distant from God, unless they lift up their
senses on hie. As also it is said in the Psalm. Psa. xxv. ^
To thee have I lifted up my soul. And the Scripture oftentimes uses this
manner of spech, to lift up prayer: that they which desire to be hard of God,
should not sit still in their dregs. Let this be the sum: that how much more
liberallye God deals with us, gently alluring us to unload our cares into his
bosom, so much less excusable ar we unless his so excellent and
incomparable benefit do with us ouerwey al other things and draw us unto it
self, that we may earnestly apply our endeavors and senses to pray: which can
not be done unless our mind be strongly wrestling with the hindrances do rise
up above the^. An other point we have set forth* yt we ask no more than God
gives leave. For though he bids us to pour out our hearts, yet he does
indiffe^rently give loose reins to folyshe and froward affections: and when he
promises that he will do according to the will of the Godly, Psa. ixii.ix
he proceeds not to so tender bearing with them that he submits himself to
their will. But in both these points men do commonly much offend. For not only
the most part of me^ presume without shame, without reverence, to speak to God
for their follies, and shamelesly to present to his throne whatsoever liked
the^ in their dream: but also so great folishenes or senlesse dullness
possesses the^, that they dare thrust into the hearing of God, even al their
most filthy desires, whereof they would greatly be ashamed to make men privy.
Some profane men have laughed to scorn, yea and detested this boldness, yet
the vice it self has always reigned. And hereby it came to pass that
ambitious men have chosen Jupiter to be their Patron: covetous men, Mercury:
the desirous of learning, Apollo and Minerua: warri^rs Mars: and Lechorous
folk, Uenus. Like as at this day (as I have even now touched) men do in
prayers grant more license to their unlawful desires, than when they
sportinglye talk with their Egalles. But God suffers not his gentleness to be
so mocked: but claiming to himself his right, makes our prayers subject to
his aucthorite, i. Ihon. v.x^^.
and restrains the^ with a bridle. Therefore we must keep fast this saying of
Ihon, This is our affiance, yt if we ask any thing according to his will, he
hears us. But forasmuch as our abilities ar far from being sufficient to
perform so great perfection, we must seek a remedy to help us. As we ought
to bend the sight of our mind to god so the affection of the heart ought also
to follow to the same end. But both do stay far benethe it, yea rather do
faint and fail or be carried a contrary way. Therefore God, to succor this
weakness, in our prayers gives the spirit to be our Scholemaister, to
instruct us what is right, and to govern our affections. For because we know
not what we ought to pray as we ought, Romans viii.xxvi.
the spirit comes to our succor, and makes intercession for us with
unspeakable groninges, not that it in deed either prays or groneth, but
stirs up in us affiance, desires, and sighynges, which the strength of
nature were not able to conceive. And not without cause Paul calls them
unspeakable groninges which so the faithful send forth by the guidyng of the
Spirit, because they which are truly exercised in prayers, are not ignorant
that they be so holden in perplexity with blind cares, that they scarcely
find what is profitable for them to speak: yea while they go about to utter
stammeryng words, they stick fast encombred. Whereupon it follows, that the
gift of prayeng rightly is a singular gift. These things are not spoken to
this purpose, that we favoring our own slothfulness should give over the
charge of prayeng to the Spirit of God, and lie dull in that carelessness, to
which we are to much inclined: (as there are heard the wicked sayenges of
some, that we must lie negligently gapyng to wait until he prevent our minds
occupied else where) but rather that we lothyng our own slothfulness and
sluggishnesse, should crave such help of the Spirit. ii. Cor. xiiii xxvi.
Neither does Paul, when he bids us to pray in Spirit, therefore cesse to
exhort us to wakefulnesse: meaning that the instinct of the Spirit so uses his
force to frame our prayers, that it nothing hinders or slacketh our own
endeavor: because God will in this behalf prove how effectually faith moves our
hearts.

Let also an other law be, that in prayeng we always feel our own which have
only conceived this principle that we must sacrifice to God with prayers, do
mumble up prayers without any musyng of mind upon them. But the Godly must
principally take heed, that they never come into the sight of God to ask any
thing, but because they do both boil with earnest affection of heart, and do
therewithal desire to obtain it of him. Yea and also though in those things
which we ask only to the glory of God, we seem not at the first sight to
provide for our own necessity, yet the same ought to be asked with no less
feruentnesse and vehementnesse of desire. As, when we pray that his name be
hallowed, we must (as I may so speak) fervently hunger and thirst for that
hallowyng.

Iac. v.xiii.
Is any man heavy among you? Let him pray. Who so is merry, let him sing.
Therefore even common felyng teaches us, that because we are to slothful,
therefore as ye matter requires we are the more sharply pricked forward of God
to pray earnestly. And this David calls the fit time, Psa. xxxii.^^.
because (as he teaches in many other places) how much more hardly troubles,
discommodities, fears, and other kinds of tentations do press us, so much
freer access is open for us, Ephe. vi.xviii.
as though God did call us unto him. But yet no less true is that saying of
Paul, that we must pray at all times: because howsoever things prosperously
flow according to our hearts desire, and matter of mirth does compass us on
every side, yet there is no minute of time wherein our need does not exhort
us to pray. If a man have abundance of wine and wheat: yet sith he can not
enjoy one morsel of bread but by ye continual grace of God, whole cellars or
barnesful shall be no let why he should not crave daily bread. Now if we call
to mind how many dangers do every moment hang over us, the very fear it
self will teach us yt we have no time free from prayer. But this we may better
perceive in spiritual things. For, when shall so many sins, whereof we know
our selves gilty, suffer us to sit still without care and not in humble wise
crave pardon both of the fault and the peine? When do tentations grant us
truce, so that we need not to have unto help? Moreover the desire of the
kingdom and glory of God ought so to pluck us to it self, not by fittes but
continually, that it should always be fit time for us. Therefore not without
cause we are so often commanded to pray continually. I do not yet speak of
perseverance in prayer, whereof mention shall be made herafter: but when the
Scripture warns us that we ought to pray continually, it accuses our
slouth^ulnesse, because we do not perceive how necessary this care and
diligence is for us. By this rule all hypocrisy and craftiness of lyeng to
God, is debarred, yea driven far away from prayer. God promises that he will
be nere to al them that call upon him in truth, and he pronounces that they
shall find him which seek him with their whole heart. But they aspire not
thither which please themselves in their own filthiness. Therefore a right
prayer requires repe^ta^ce. Whereupon this is commonly said in the scriptures,
yt God hears not wicked doers, and yt their prayers are accursed, like as
their sacrifices also be: because it is rightful yt they find ye ears of God
shut, which do lock up their own hearts: and that they should not find God easy
to vow, which do with their own hardness provoke his stiffenesse. In Esaie he
threatens after this manner. Esa. v.xv
When ye shall multiply your prayers, I will not hear you: for your hands are
full of blood. Again in Jeremy: Ier. xi.vii and xi.
I have cried, and they have refused to hear: they shall likewise cry, and I
will not hear: because he takes it for a most hie dishonor, that wicked men
should boast of his covenant, which do in all their life defile his holy name.
Wherefore in Esaie he co^playneth, Esa. xxix.xxxix.
that when the Jews come near to him with their lips, their heart is far
from him. He speaks not this of only prayers, but affirms that he abhors
fayninge in all the parts of whorshipinge him: To which purpose makes that
saying of James. Iam. iiii.iij.
Ye ask, and receive not: because ye ask il, that ye may spend it upon your
pleasures. It is true in deed (as we shall again show a little herafter) that
the prayers of y^ godly which they pour out, do not rest upon their own
worthiness: yet is not y^ admonition of Ihon superfluous: i. Ihon. i^^ xxii.
If we ask any thing, we shall receive it of him, because we keep his
commandments: forasmuch as an euel conscience shuts the gate against us.
Whereupon follows that none do rightly pray, nor are heard, but the pure
worshippers of God. Therefore whosoever prepares himself to pray, let him be
lothful to himself in his own euels, and (which can not be done with out
repentance) let him put on the person and mind of a beggar.

Hereunto let the third rule be joined, that whosoever presents Daniel.
ix.xviii.
said: We pour not out our prayers before thee in our righteousnesses, but
in thy great mercies. Hear us Lord, Lord be merciful to us: Hear us, and do
these things that we ask, for thine own sake: because thy name is called upon
over the people, and over thy holy place. Neither does he by a crooked figure
(as men sometime speak) mingle him self with the multitude as one of the
people, but rather severally confesses his own gyltinesse and humbly flees
to the sanctuary of forgiveness, as he expressly says: When I confessed my
sins and the sins of my people. And this humbleness David also sets out
with his own example, when he says: Enter not into judgment with thy servant,
because in thy sight every one that lives shall not be justified. Ps.
c.xiiii.ij.
In such manner Esaie prays: Lo, thou art angry because we have sinned:
the world is founded in thy ways, Es. lxxiiii.v.
therefore we shall be sa^ed: And we have been all filled with uncleanness, and
al our righteousnesses as a defiled cloth: and we have al withered away as a
leaf, and our iniquities do scatter us abroad as the wind: and there is none
that calls upon thy name, that rayseth up himself to take hold of thee:
because thou have hid thy face from us, and have made us to pine away in the
hand of our wickedness. Now therefore O Lord, thou art our father, we are
claye, thou art our fasshioner, and we are the work of thy hand. Be not angry
O Lord, neither remember wickedness for ever. Behold, look upon us, we are al thy
people. Lo, how they stand upon no affiance at al, but upon this only, that
thinking upon this that they be Gods, they despire not that he will have care of
them. Likewise Jeremy: Ie. xiiii.^^^.
If our iniquities answer against us, do thou for thy names sake. For it is
both most truly and most holyly written, of whom soever it be, which being
written by an unknown author is fathered upon ye Prophet Baruch: A soul heavy
and deosolate for ye greatness of euel, crooked, and weak, a hungrye soul, and
fainting eyes give glory to thee O Lord. Not according to ye righteousnesses
of our fathers do we pour out prayers in thy sight, and ask mercy before
thy face O Lord our God: but because thou art merciful, have mercy upon us,
because we have sinned before thee.

Psa. xxv.vi. and. xviii.
says: Remember not ye sins of my youth, remember me according to thy
mercy for thy goodnesses sake O lord. Again, Look upon my affliction, and my
labor, and forgive al my sins. Where we also see yt it is not enough, if we
every several day do call our selves account for our new sins, if we do not
also remember those sins which might seem to have been long ago forgotten.
Psa. li.vii.
For, ye same Prophet in an other place, having confessed one heinous offense
by this occasion returns eue^ to his mothers womb wherein he had gathered ye
infectio^: not to make ye fault seem less by ye corruption of nature, but ye
heaping together ye sins of his whole life, how much more rigorous he is in
co^demning himself, so much more easy he may find God to entreat. But
although ye holy ones do not always in express words ask forgiveness of
sins, yet if we diligently weie their prayers which the Scripture
rehearses, we shall easily find yt which I say, yt they gathered a mind to
pray of ye only mercy of God, and so always took their beginning at appeasing
him: because if every man examine his own conscience, so far is he from being
bold to open his cares familiarlie with God, y^ he trembles at every coming
toward him, except yt he stands upon trust of mercy and pardon. There is also
an other special confession, where they ask release of peines, that they also
pray to have their sins forgeuen: because it wear an absurdity to will
that the effect to be taken away while the cause abides. For we must beware
that God be favorable unto us, before that he testifye his favor with
outward signs: because boothe he himself will keep this order, and yt
should little profit us to have him benefytiall, unless our conscience
feelynge him appeased should througely make him louelye unto us. Which we
are also taught by the answer of Christ. For when he had decreed to
heal the manne sick of the Palsy. Mat. ix.ii
he said, Thy sins are forgeuen thee: lifting up our minds thereby to yt
which is chefely to be wisshed, that God first receive us into favor, and
then show forth the fruit of reconciliation in helping us. But byside yt
special confession of present gyltynesse, whereby the faithful make
supplication to obtain pardon of every special fault and peine, that general
preface, which procures favor to prayers, is never to be omitted, because
unless they be grounded upon the free mercy of God, they shall never obtain
any thing of God. Whereunto may be referred that saying of Ihon: i. Ihon. i.ix.
If we confess our sins, he is faithful and righteous to forgive us, and
cleanse us from al iniquity. For which cause it behooved prayers in the time of
the law to be hallowed with expiatio^ of blood, that they might be acceptable,
and that so the people should be put in mind that they are unworthy of so
great a prerogotiue of honor, til being cleansed from their defilinges they
should of the only mercy of God conceive affiance to pray.

But whereas ye holy ones seem sometime for ye entreating of God to Ps.
lxxxv^.ii. kin. xx.ii.
Keep my soul, because I am good. Again Ezechias: Remember lord I beseech
thee, yt I have walked before thee in truth, and have done good in thine eyes)
by such forms of speaking they mean nothing else than by their very
regeneration to testify themselves to be ye servants and children of God, to
whom he himself pronounces yt he will be merciful. Ps. xxxiiii.xvi. i. Iho^.
iii.
He teaches by yt prophet (as we have already seen) yt his eyes are upon ye
righteous, and his cares unto their prayers. Again by ye apostle, that we shall
obtain whatsoever we ask, if we keep his co^maundeme^ts. In which sayenges he
does not value prayer by ye worthiness of works: but his will is so to stablish
their affiance, whose own conscience well assures the^ of an un^ayned
vprightnes and inocenci, such as al ye faithful ought to be. For ye same is
taken out of ye very truth of God, which ye blindeman yt had his sight
restored, says in Ihon, Ih. ix.xxi.
yt God hears not sinners: if we understand sinners after ye common use of
ye scripture, for such as without al desire of righteousness do altogether sleep
and rest upon their sins: forasmuch as no heart can ever break forth into
unfeigned calling upon God which does not also aspire to godliness. Therefore with
such promises accord ye prayers of ye holy ones, wherein they make mention of
their own pureness or innocence yt they may feel yt to be given the^ which is to
be looked for of all the servants of God. Again it is then commonly found yt they
use this kind of prayer, when they do in ye presence of ye lord compare them
selves with their enemies, from whose unjust dealing they wished themselves to be
delivered by his hand. In this comparison it is noe marvel if they brought
forth their righteousness and simplicity of heart to move him ye rather by
ye rightfulnes of their cause to help the^. This therefore we take not away
from the godli heart of a good man, but y^ he may use the pureness of his
conscience before the Lord, to strengthen himself in the promises wherewith the
Lord comfort and vpholdeth his true worshippers: but our meaning is, that
the trust of obteining stand upon the only mercy of God, laieng away al
thincking of their own deserving.

The fourth rule is, yt being so thrown down and subdued with true humility,
feeling of ye just vengeance of God sure affiance of favor: which things do
yet very well agree together, if ye only goodness of God raise us up being
oppressed with our own euels. For, as we have before taught that repentance and
faith are knite as companio^s together with an inseperable bond: of which yet ye
one afraieth us, ye other chereth us: so in prayers they must mutually meet
together. And this agreement David expresses in few words: Ps. v.viii.
I (says he) will in ye multitude of thy goodness enter into thy house: I will
worship in the temple of thy holiness with tear. Under ye goodness of God he
co^prehendeth faith, in ye mean time not excluding fear: because not only
his majesty drives us to reverence, but also our own unworthiness holds us
in fear forgetting al pride and assuredness. But I mean not such an affiance
which should stroke ye mind losed from al feling of carfulness with a sweet
and full quietness. For, to rest so peasably is the doing of the^ which having
al things flowing as they would wish it, are touched with no care, are kindled
with no desire, do swel with no fear. And it is a very good spur to ye holy
ones to call upon God, when being distressed with their own necessity, they ar
vexed with most great unquietness* and are almost dismayed in themselves, til
faith come in fit time to their succors, because in such distresses ye
goodness of God so shines to them, that they do in deed groan being wearied
with weight of present euels, they ar also in peine and grieved with fear of
greater, yet being so vpholde^ by it, they both releue and comfort ye hardness
of bearing the^, and do hope for escape and deliverance. Therefore ye prayer of
a godly man must arise out of both affections, and must also contain and show
both: namly to groan for present euels, and to be carefully afraid of new,
and yet thet wtal to fle to God, not douring yt he is read^ to reach his
helping hand. For God is maruelously provoked to wrath by our distrustfulnes,
if we ask of him ye benefits which we hope not to obtain. Therefore there is
nothing more agreeable with ye nature of prayers, tha^ yt this law be prescribed
and appointed to the^, yt they break not forth rashli, but follow faith going
before the^. To this principle Christ calls us all with this saying: Matthew.
xi.xxiiii. Matt. xxi.xxii.
I say unto you, whatsoever things ye require, believe yt ye shall receive them,
and they shall happen to you. The same also he confirms in an other place.
Whatsoever ye ask in prayer believing, ye shall receive. Wherewith agrees
James saying, If any need wisdom, let him ask yt of him which gives to al
men freely, Iam. v.xv.
and vpbraydeth not: butte let him ask in faith not doubtinge. Wherein
setting doubtinge as contrary to faith, he does most fitly express the
nature of it. And no less is that to be noted which he adds, yt they
obtain nothing which call upon God in waueringe and doubt, and do not
determine in their hearts whether they shall be heard or not. Whom he also
compares to waves which are dyuersly tossed and driven about of the wind.
Whereupon in an other place he calls a right prayer, the prayer of faith.
Again when God so often affirms that he will give to every one according to
his faith, he signifies that we obtain nothing without faith. Finally it is
faith that obteineth what soever is granted by prayer. This is meante by that
notable saying of Paul, which the foolyshe men do take noe heed unto.
How shall any manne call upon him, To. x.xiiii
in whom he has not believed? Butte who shall believe, unless he have
heard? But faith comes of hearing, and hearing of the word of God. For,
conueying by degrees the beginning of prayer from faith, he plainly
affirms that God can not be syncerely called upon of any other, than the^ to
whom by the preachinge of the Gospel his merciefulnesse and gentilenesse has been made known, and familiarly declared.

This necessity our adversaries do not think upon. Therefore when Heb.
iiii.xvi. Ep. iii.xii
yt we may obtain grace: and when in an other place he teaches yt we have
boldness and access in confidence by the faith of Christ. We must therefore
hold fast with both hands this assuredness to obtain what we ask (since both
ye lord with his own voice so commands us, and al ye holy ones teach it by
their example) if we will pray with fruit. For, ye only prayer is pleasing to
God, which springs out of such a presumption of faith (as I may so call it)
and is grounded upon a dredlesse certainty of faith. He might have been content
with ye bare name of faith, but he not only added confidence, but also
furnished ye same with liberty or boldness, by this mark to put difference
between us and unbelievers, which do in deed also pray to God as we do, but at
adventure. For which reason ye whole Church prays in ye psalm: Ps. xxxiii.
Let thy mercy be upon us, as we put our trust in thee. The same condition is
also spoken of in an other place by ye prophet: Ps. lxvi.x Ps. v.xv.
In what day I shall cry, this I know yt God is with me. Again, In ye morning I
will direct my self to thee, and I will watch. For of these words we gather, yt
prayers ar in vain cast into the air, unless hope be adjoined, from whense
as out of a watchtoure we may quietli wait for ye lord. Wherwt agrees ye
order of Paul's exhortation. For before yt he move ye faithful to pray in
spirit at al times with wakefulnes and diligence, Ephesians. vi, xvi.
he first of al bids the^ to take ye sheld of faith, yt helmet of salvation,
and ye swerd of the spirit, which is the word of God* Now let ye readers here
call to remembrance which yt I have before said, yt faith is not overthrown
where it is joined with acknowledging of our misery, nedinesse, and filthiness.
For with how heavy weight so ever of evil doings ye faithful feel themselves to
be ouerloden or grieved, and ye they be not only void of al things which may
procure favor with God, but also yt they be burdened with many offenses which
may woorthily make him dreadful to the^: yet they cesse not to present
themselves, neither does this feling make the^ so afraid but yt they still
resort to him, forasmuch as there is no other way to come to him. For, prayer
was not ordained, whereby we should arrogantli advance our selves before God, or
esteem at great value any thing of our own, but wherbi confessing our giltines,
we should bewail our miseries to him, as children do familiarli open their
complaints to their parents. But rather ye unmeasurable heap of our euels
ought to be full of spurs or pricks to prick us forward to pray. As also ye
prophet teaches us by his example, Ps. lxiiii.v
saying. Heal my soul, because I have sinned against thee. I grant in deed
that in such saiengs should be deadli prickings unless god did help: but ye
most good father of his incomparable tender kindness has brought remedy in fit
season, whereby appeasing al troble, assuaging al cares, wiping away fears, he
might gently allure us to him, yea and taking away all doubts (much more
all stoppes) he might make us an easy way.

Ps. l.xv.
But forasmuch as among all ye duties of godliness, ye scripture commends
none more often, I need not to tarry longer upon this point. Mat. vii.vii.
Ask (says our master) and ye shall receive: knock, it shall be opened to you.
Howbeit here is also with ye commandment joined a promise as it is necessary.
For though all men confess yt the commandment ought to be obeyed, yet the
most part would flee from God when he calls, unless he promised yt he would
be easy to be entreated, yea and would offer himself. These two things being
stablished, it is certain yt whosoever make delays yt they come not straight
to god, are not only rebellious and disobedient, but also are proved gilty of
infidelity, because they distrust ye promises. Which is so much more to be
noted, because hypocrites under ye color of humility and modesty do as well
proudly despise ye commandment of God, as discredit his gentile calling, yea
and defraud him of ye chief part of his worship. For after yt he has refused
sacrifices, in which at ye time al holiness seemed to stand, he declares yt
this is ye chief thing and most precious to him, above al other, to be called
upon in ye day of need. Therefore where he requires his own, and encourages us
to cherefulnesse of obeing, there ar none so gay colors of doubtting yt may
excuse us. Wherefore how many testimonies ar commonly found in ye scriptures
whereby we are commanded to call upon God, so many sta^ddardes ar set up before
our eyes to put affiance into us. It were rushenesse to rushe into ye sight of
God, unless he did prevent us with calling us. Therefore he opens us ye way with
his own voice saying: Zach. xiii.ix.
I will say to them, Ye ar my people: and they shall say to me, ye art our God.
We se how he preuenteth them ye worship him, and wills them to follow him,
and therefore it is not to be feared that this should not be a very sweet
melody which he tuneth. Specially let this notable title of God come in our
mind, whereupon if we stay, we shall easily pass over al stoppes. Thou God
that hear prayer, Ps. lxv.iii.
even to thee shall all flesh come. For what is more lovely or more allurynge,
than that God be granyshed with this title which may ascertayne us that
nothing is more propre to his nature, than to grant the desire of humble
suitors? Hereby the prophet gathers that the gate stands open not only to a
few, but to all men: because he speaks even to all in this saying: Psa. l.xv.
Call upon me in the day of trouble: I will deliver thee, and you shall glorify
me. According to this rule David lays for himself that a promise was given
him, ii. Sa. vii.xxvii.
that he may obtain what he asks: Thou lord have reveled into the ear of
thy servant: therefore thy servant has found his heart to pray. Whereupon we
gather yt he was fearful, saving in so much as the promise had encouraged him.
So in an other place he armeth himself with this general doctrine. Ps. c.xlv.xix.
He will do ye will of them that fear him. Yea and this we may note in ye
psalms, yt as it were breaking his course of praieng he passes over sometime
to ye power of God, sometime to his goodness, sometime to ye truth of his
promises. It might seem that David by unseasonable thrusting in of these
sentences, made mangled prayers: but ye faithful know by use and experience, yt
feruentnesse faints unless they put new nourishmentes unto it, and therefore
in praieng ye meditation both of ye nature of God, and of his word is not
superfluous. And so by ye example of David, let it not grieve us to thrust in
such things as may refresh fainting hearts with new lively strength.

And it is wonderful that with so great sweetness of promises we are Pro.
xviii.x.
(says Solomon) to it the righteous man shall flee, and he shall be saved. And
Joel, after that he had prophesied of that horrible destruction which was at
hand, Joel. ii.xxxii.
added this notable sentence. Whosoever calls upon ye name of the lord,
shall be safe: which sentence we know to perteine proprely to the course of the
Gospel. Psa. xxlv.xxiii.
Scarcely every hundredth man is moved to go forward to meet God. He himself
cries by Esaie: Ye shall call upon me, and I will hear you, yea before that ye
cry I will answer you. And this same honor also in an other place he
vouchesaueth to give in common to ye whole Church, as it belongs to all the
me^bres of Christ. He has cried to me, Ps. xci.xv
I will hear him, I am in trouble with him, yt I may deliver him. Neither yet
(as I have already said) is it my purpose to reckon up all the places, but to
choose out the chief, by which we may take a taste how kindly God allureth us
unto him, and with how straight bonds our unthankfulness is bound, when among so
sharp prickinges our sluggishnesse still makes delay. Wherefore let these
saienges always sound in our ears: Ps. c.xlv.
The lord is nie to al the^ that call upon him, that call upon him in truth:
also these saiengs which we have alleged out of Esaie and Joel, by which God
affirms that he is hedeful to hear prayers, yea and is delited as with a
sacrifice of sweet sauoure, when we cast our cares upon him. This singular
fruit we receive of the promises of God, when we make our prayers not
doubtingly and ferefulli: but trusting upon his word, whose majesty would
otherwise make us afraid, we dare call upon him by the name of Father,
forasmuch as he vouchesaueth to put this most sweet name into our mouths. It
remains that we having such allurementes should know that we have thereby
matter enoughe to obtain our prayers: forasmuch as our prayers stand upon no
merit of our own, but al their worthiness and hope of obteining ar grounded
upon the promises of God, and hang upon them: so that it needs none other
vnderproppinge, nor looks upward hither or thither. Therefore we must
determine in our minds, yt although we excel not in like holiness as is praised
in ye holy fathers, prophtes and Apostles, yet because ye co^ma^deme^t of
prayer is common to us, and faith is also common, if we rest upon ye word of
God, in this right we are fellows with the^. For, God (as we have before showed)
promisi^g yt he will be gentle and merciful to al, gives cause of hope to al
eue^ ye mos^ miserable yt they shall obtein what they ask. And therefore ye
general forms ar to be noted, from which no man (as they sai) from ye first to
ye last is excluded: only let there be present a pureness of heart, misliking of
our selfs, humility, and faith: let not our hypocrisy vnholily abuse the name
of God with deceitful calli^g upon it: ye most good father will not put back the^,
who^ he not only exhorts to com to hi^, but also moves the^ by all the means
yt he ca^. Herupo^ comes yt manner of prayi^g of David which I have eue^ now
rehearsed. (...). vii xxvii.
Lo you have promised, Lord, to thy ser^^^t: for this cause thy servant at this
dai gathers courag, and has found what prayer he might make before the. Now
therefore O Lord God, ye art god, and thy words shall be true. Thou have spoken to
thy servant of these benefits: Ps. ^.xix.lxivi.
begin therefore, and do the^. As also in an other place, Perform to thy servant
according to thy word. And al ye Israelits together, so often as they arm
themselves with remembrance of the covenant, do sufficiently declare yt we should
not prai fearfully, ^e. xxxii.^.
whereas ye lord so apoiteth. And herin the^ folowd ye examples of ye fathers,
specially of Jacob, which after yt he had confessed yt he was unworthy of so
many mercies which he had received at ye hand of God, yet he says yt he is
e^coraged to require greater things because God had promised yt he would do
the^. But whatsoever colors yt unbelievers do pretend, when they flee not to God
so often as necessity presses the^, when they seek not him nor crave his help,
they do as much defraud hi^ of his due honor as if they made to the^selfs new
gods, and idols: for by this mean they deny yt he is to them y^ author of al
good things. On ye other side there is nothing stronger to deliver ye godly from
al dout, tha^ to be armed with this thought, yt no stop ought to stay the^ while
they obey ye co^mandme^t of God, which pronou^ceth y^ nothing is more pleasing
to him tha^ obedience. Here again yt which I said before more clerel^ appears,
yt a dredles spirit to pray agrees well with fear, reverence, and carefulnes: and
that it is no absurdity to say yt God raises up ye overthrown. After this
manner those forms of speech agree well together which in seming ar contrary.
Jeremy and Daniel say yt they throw down prayers before god. Iere. xiii.i^.
Dani. ix.xviii. Ie. xlii. ii.li.^^.xx.^. Psa. ^.xli.
In an other place Iereme says. Let our prayer fall down in ye sight of God, yt
he may have mercy on ye remnant of his people. On the other side, ye faithful
are oftentimes said to lift up prayer. So speaks Ezechias, requiring ye
prophet to make intercession for him. And David desires yt his prayer may
ascend as incense. For although they being persuaded of ye fatherly love of
God, cherefully co^mitt themselves into his faithful keeping, and dout not to
crave the help which he freely promises: yet does not an idle carelessness
lift them up, as though they had cast away shame, but they ascend so upward by
degrees of promyses, yt they still remain humble suppliants in ye abaceme^t of
themselves.

nor well framed. Uerili for a just cause: Ioatham had auowed ye inahbitants of
Siche^, Iu. ix.xx.
to ye destruction which afterward ca^e upon the^: but yet god kindled with
ferue^tnes of anger and ve^gea^ce following his execratio^ seems to allow
ilte^pered violent passions. Iud. vi.xxviii.
Such heat also carried Samso^ when he said, Strengthen me O god, yt I may take
vengeance of ye uncircumcised. For though there were some piece of good zele
mi^gled with it: yet a hot, and therefore faulti gredines of vengeance did bear
rule therein. God granted it. Whereupon it seems yt it may be gathered, yt
although ye prayers be not framed according to ye prescribed rule of ye word,
yet they obtain their effect. I answer first yt a general law is not taken
away by singular examples: again, yt so^time special motions have been put into
a few me^, whereby it came to pass yt there was an other consideration of the^
tha^ of ye common people. Luke ix.^^
For ye answer of Christ is to be noted, when ye disciples did indiscreetly
desire to cou^terfait ye example of Elias, yt they knew not with what spirit
they were endued. But we must go yet further, and say yt the prayers do not
alwai please god which he gra^teth: but yt, so much as serves for example yt
is by clear praise made plain which ye scripture teaceth namely y^ he
succoureth ye miserable, hears ye gronings of the^ which being vniustli
trobled do crave his help: yt therefore he executes his judgments, when ye
complaints of ye poor rise up to hi^, although they be unworthy to obtein
anithi^g be it never so little. For how often has he taking vengeance of ye
cruelties, robberies, violence, silthi lusts and other wicked doings of ye
ungodly, subdui^g their boldness and rage, and also ouerthrowi^g their tyra^nous
power, testified yt he helps ye vnworthili oppressed, which yet did beat ye
air with praieng to an uncertain godhed? Ps. c.vii.
And one psalm plainly teaches yt the prayers want not effect, which yet do
not pearce into heaven by faith. For he gathers together those prayers which
necessity wringeth no less out of ye unbelievers tha^ out of ye godly by ye
very feli^g of nature: to which yet he proves by ye effect yt god is
favorable. Is it because he does with such gentleness testify yt that they be
pleasing to him? No. but to enlarge or to set out his mercy by this
circumstance, for y^ even to unbelievers their prayers are not denied: and then
ye more to prick forward his true worshipers to pray, when they see that
profaine waili^gs sometime want not their effect. Yet there is no cause why ye
faith full should swerve from ye law laid upon the^ by God, or should envy ye
unbelievers, as though they had gotten some great gain, when they have obtained
their desire. i. king. xxi.xxxix.
After this manner we have said, yt the lord was bowed with ye repentance of
Achab, yt he might show by this example how easy he is to entreat toward his
elect, when true turning is brought to appease him. Therefore in ye psalm he
blames ye Jews, Psa. c.^^
yt they having by experience proved him so easy to grant their prayers, yet
wtin a little after returned to ye stubbornes of their nature. Which also
plainly appears by ye history of ye Judges: namely yt so often as they wept,
although their tears were deceitful* yet they were delivered out of the hands
or their enemies. As therefore ye lord indifferently brings forth his sun
upon the good and the euel: so does he also not despise their weepinges, whose
cause is righteous and their miseries worthy of help. In ye mean time he no
more hears these to salvation, tha^ herein ministers food to ye despisers
of his goodness. The question seems to be somewhat harder of Abraham and Samuel:
^e. xviii.xiij. i. Sam. x^
of whom ye one being warra^ted by no word of god, prayed for ye Sodomites: ye
other against a manifest forbiddi^g prayed for Saul. ^.
Likewise is i^ of Jeremy, which prayed yt the city might not be destroyed.
For though their requests were denied, yet it seems hard to take faith from
them. Butte this solution shall (as I trust) satisfy sober readers: yt t^ei
being instructed with ye general principles, whereby God commands the^ to be
merciful eue^ also to ye unworthy, were not altogether without faith, although in
a special case their opinion deceived the^. ^.
Augustine writes wisely in a certain place. How (says he) do the holy ones
pray by faith, to ask of God contrary to yt which he has decreed? Even
because they pray according to his will: not yt hidden an vnchea^geable will, but
ye will which he inspireth into them, yt he may hear them after an other
manner: as he wisely makes difference. This is well said: because after his
inco^prehensible counsel he so te^pereth ye successes of things, yt the prayers
of ye holy ones be not void which are wrapped both with faith and errore
together. Neither yet ought this more to avail to be an example to follow, tha^
it excuses ye holy ones themselves, whom I deny not to have passed measure.
Wherefore where appears no certain promise, we must ask of God with a co^ditio^
adioined. To which purpose serves ye saying of David. Psa. vii.vii.
Watch to ye judgment which yt have commanded: because he tells that he was
warranted by a special oracle to ask a temporal benefit.

do not sufficiently weie what is lawful and expedient. Whatsoever prayers are
spotted with these faults, they deserve to be refused: yet if ye holy ones do
bewail, correct themselves, and by and by come to themselves again, God
pardons them. So they offend also in the second rule, because they are
oftentimes driven to wrestle with their own coldenesse, and their need and
misery does not sharply enoughe prick the^ to pray earnestly. And
oftentimes it happens yt their minds do slip aside, and in a manner wander
away into vanity. Therefore in this behalf also there is need of pardon,
least our faint, or imperfect, or broken and wanderinge prayers have a denial.
This God has naturally planted in ye minds of men, y^ prayers are not perfect
but with minds lifted upward. Hereupon came ye ceremony of lifting up of
hands, as we have before said, which has been used in all ages and nations, as
yet it is in ure. But how many a one is there, which when he lifts up his
hands, does not in his own conscience find himself dull, because his heart
rests upon ye ground? As touching ye asking of forgiveness of sins,
although none of the faithful do ouerpasse it, yet they which are truly
exercised in prayers do feel yt they bring scarscely ye tenth part of that
sacrifice, of which David speaks. Ps. xv.xi^.
An acceptable sacrifice to God is a troubled spirit: a broken and humbled
heart O God you wilt not despise. So there is always doble pardon to be asked,
both because they know themselves gilty in consciences of many faults, with
feeling whereof they are not yet so touched, that the^ mislike themselves so much
as they ought: and also yt, so much as it is given them to profit repentance
and in the fear of God, they being throwe^ down with just sorrow for their
offenses, should pray to escape ye punishment of ye judge. Chefely ye
feblenesse or imperfection of faith corrupts ye prayers of ye faithful,
unless ye tender mercy of God did help them. But it is no marvel yt God
pardons this default, which does oftentimes exercise them yt be his with sharp
instructions, as if he would of purpose quench their faith. This is a most
hard tentation, when the faithful are compelled to cry: Psa. lxxx.
How long wilt y^ be angry upon the prayer of thy servant? as though ye very
prayers made God more angry. So when Jeremy says. Lam. iii.viii.
The lord has shut out my prayer, it is no dout yt he was shaken with a violent
pange of troble. Innumerable such examples are commonly found in ye scriptures,
by which appears yt the faith of the holiones was oftentimes mingled and
tossed with doutinges, y^ in believing and hoping they bewraied yet some
unfaithfulness: but because they come not so far as it is to be wished, they
ought to endeavor so much ye more that their faults being amended, they may
daily com nerer to ye perfect rule of praying, and in ye mean time to feel in
how great a depth of eueis they be drowned, which eue^ in ye very remedies do
get to themselves new diseases: since there is no prayer, which ye lord does not
worthily loathe, unless he wink at ye spots wherwt they ar al besprinkled. I
rehearse not these things to this end yt the faithful should carelessly pardon
themselves any thing, but y^ in sharply chastising themselves they should
travail to overcome these stoppes, and although Satan labor to stop up all the ways, y^ he may keep them from praieng, yet nevertheless they should
break through, bring certainly persuaded, yt although they be not vncombred of
all hindrances, yet their endeavors do please God, and their prayers are
allowed of him, so yt they travail and bend themselves thetherward, whether
they do not by and by atteine.

i. Tim. i.v. i. Ioh. ii.i.
by whose leading we may boldly come to him, trusting that we have such an
intercessor, nothing shall be denied us which we ask in his name, as nothing
can be denied him of the Father. And here unto must all be referred
whatsoever we have heretofore taught concerning faith: because as the promise
setter out unto us Christ for our Mediator, so unless our hope of obteining
stay upon him, it takes from it self the benefit of praieng. For so sone as
the terrible majesty of God comes in our mind, it is impossible but that we
should tremble for fear, and the acknowledging of our own unworthiness
should drive us far away, till Christ come mean between us and him, ^e.
iiii.xv
which may change the throne of dreadefull glory into the throne of grace: as
also ye Apostle teaches that we may be bold to appear withal confidence
which shall obtain mercy and find grace in help coming in fit season. And as
there is a law set yt we should call upon God like as there is a promise given,
that they shall be heard which call upon him: so ar we peculiarly commanded to
call upon him in ye name of Christ, and we have a promise set forth, yt we shall
obtain ye which we shall ask in his name. Iho^. xiiii.xiii. and xvi.xxvii.
Hitherto (says he) ye have not asked any thing in my name: ask and ye shall
receive. In ye day ye shall ask in my name, and whatsoever ye ask, I will do, yt
ye father may be glorified in ye son. Hereby it is plain without
controversy, yt they which call upon God in any other name than of Christ, do
stubbornly break his co^maundeme^nts, and regard his will as nothing, and that
they have no promise to obtain any thing. ii. Cor. i.xx.
For (as Paul says) all the promises of God ar in Christ, yea and Amen, that is
to say, they are confirmed and fulfilled.

Ioh. xvi.xxvi.
In ye hour (says he) ye shall ask in my name. It is certain yt even from ye
beginning none were heard yt prayed, but by mean of ye Mediator. For this
reason ye lord had ordained in the law, ye the pres^ alone entering into ye
sanctuary, Ex. xxviii.ix. and xii.xxi.
should bear upon his sholders ye names of the tribes of Israel, and as many
precious stones before his breast: but the people should stand a far of in the
porche, and from thense should join their prayers with the pressed. Yea and the
sacrifice auailed hereto, that the prayers should be made sure and of force.
Therefore that shadowish ceremony of the law taught that we are all shutt
out from the face of God, and that therefore we need a Mediator, which may
appear in our name, and may bear us upon his sholders, and hold us fast
bound to his breast, that we may be heard in his person: then that by
sprynkeling of blood our prayers are cleansed, which (as we have already
said) are never vorde of filthiness. And we see that the holy ones, when
they desired to obtain any thing, grounded their hope upon sacrifices,
because they knew them to be the stablishinges of all requests. Let him
remember thy offrynge (says David) and make thy burnt offringe fatt. Herupon
is gathered that God has been from ye beginning appeased by ye intercession of
Christ, to receive ye prayers of the godly. Why then does Christ apoint a new
heir, when his Disciples shall begin to pray in his name, but because this
grace, as it is at this day more glorious, so deserves more commendation wi^h
us. And in this same sense he had said a little before. Hitherto ye have not
asked any thing in my name: now ask. No: that they understood nothing at all
of the office of the Mediator (whereas all the Jews were instructed in the
principles) but because they had not yet clearly known that Christ by his
ascending into heaven should be a surer patron of the Church than he was before.
Therefore comfort their grief of the abscence with some special fruit, he
claims to himself the office of an advocate, and teaceth that they have
hitherto wanted the che^e benefit, which it shall be granted them to enjoy,
when being a^ded by his mediation, they shall more freely call upon God: Heb. x.xx*
as the Apostle says that his new way is dedicate in his blood. And so much
less excusable is our frowardnes, unless we do with both arms (as the
saying is) embrace so inestimable a benefit, which is proprely appointed for
us.

Now whereas he is the only way, and the only entry by which i. Ti. ii.i.
whereby they do mutually commend the safety one of an other to God, of which
the Apostle makes mention: but those be such as hang upon that one only
intercession: so far is it of, that they minish any thing of it. For as they
spring out of the affection of love, wherewith we embrace one an other, as the
members of one body: so they are al^o re^erred to the vnt^ie of the head.
Sithe therefore they also are made in the name of Christ, what do they else
butte testify that noe manne can be helped by any prayers at al, butte with
the intercession of Christ? And as Christ with his intercession with
stands not, butte that in the Church we may with prayers be advocates one
for an other: so let this remain certain, that all the intercessors of the
whole Church ought to be directed to that only one. yea and for this cause
we ought specially to be beware of unthankfulness, because God pardoning our
unworthiness, does not only give leave to every one of us to pray for
himself, but also admits us to be entreaters one for an other. For, where
God appoints advocates for his Church which deserve worthily to be rejected
if they pray pryuately every one for himself: what a pride were it to abuse
this liberty to darken the honor of Christ?

Now yt is a meare trifelynge, which the Sophisters babble, that forfoothe
they handle him, that cut away so little a portion of honor from him. But
the Scripture says far otherwise, with the symplicitie whereof a godly man
ought to be contented, leauinge these deceyuers. For where Ihon says, ^.
John. ii. ^^.
that if any do sin, we have an advocate with the Father, Christ Jesus:
does he mean that he was ones in old time a patron for us, and not rather
assigns to him an everlasting intercession? Iho. viii.xxxii. i. Ti. ii.v.
To. xv.xxx
How say we to this that Paul also affirms, that he sits at the right
hand of God the Father and makes intercession for us? And when in an other
place he calls him the only Mediatoure of God and men: means he not of
prayers, of which he had a little before made mention? For when he had before
said that intercession must be made for all men: for proof of that saying,
he by and by adds, that of all men there is one God and one Mediatore. And
none otherwise does Augustine expound it, Lib. contra Par. 2. Ca. 8.
when he says thus: Christian men does mutually commend themselves in
their prayers. But he for whom none makes intercession, but he for all, he is
the only and true Mediatoure. Paul the Apostle, though he were a principal
membre under the head (yet because he was a membre of the body of Christ,
and knew that the greatest and truest preeste of the church entered, not by a
figure, into ye inward places, of ye veil, to ye holy of holy places, but by
express and steadfast truth into the innermost places of heaven, Romans xv.xxx.
Ephesians. vi.ix. Colo. iiii. i. Cor. xii.xxv.
^o a holiness not shadowish but eternal) commends himself also to ye
prayers of the faithful. Neither does he make himself a Mediatore between ye
people and God, but prays yt al ye me^bres of the body of Christ should
mutually pray for him: because the members are careful one for an other: and
if one membre suffer, the other suffer with it. And that so the mutual prayers
one for an other of all the members yet trauayling in earth, may ascend to
the head which is gone before into heaven, in whom is appeasement ^or our
sins. For if Paul were a Mediatoure, the other Apostles should also be
Mediatores: and if there were many Mediatoures, then neither should Paul's own
reason stand fast, in which he had said, For there is one God, Ephesians.
iiii.iii.
one Mediatoure of one God and men, ye manne Christ, in whom we also are
one if we keep the unity of faith in the bond of peace. Again in an other
place. But if thou seek for a Priest he is above ye heavens, In psa. 94.
where he makes intercession for thee, which in earth died for thee. Yet do we
not dream yt he falls down at the fathers knees and in humble wise
entreats for us: but we understand with the Apostle, that he so appears
before the face of God, that the virtue of his death avails to be a
perpetual intercession for us: yet so that being entered into the sanctuary
of heaven, unto the end of the ages of the world he alone carries to God the
prayers of the people abiding a far of in the porche.

desire to make for our selves an entry by them, that we should be led a
way from him without whom even they them selves have no entry open. But,
that this has been usually done in certain ages past, and yt it is at this
day done whersoeuer Papistrie reigns, who can deny? Their merits ar from
time to time thrust in, to obtain ye good will of God: and for ye most part,
Christ being passed over, God is prayed to by their names. Is not this, I
beseech you to co^uey away to the^ ye office of yt only intercession, which we
have affirmed to belong to Christ alone? Again, what Angel or Deuel ever
reveled to any man any one syllable of this their intercession which these men
fame? For in the Scripture is nothing of it. What is the reason therefore of
inuentinge it? Trueli, when the wit of man so seeks for it self succoures,
wherewith we are not sertified by ye word of God, it plainli bewraieth his own
distrustfulnesse. If we appeal to al their consciences yt are delited with ye
intercession of saints, we shall find yt the same comes from no other
ground, but because they ar grieved with carefulnes, as though Christ were in this
behalf either to weak or to rigorous. By which doubtfulnesse first they
dyshonoure Christ, and rob him of the title of only Mediatoure, which as
it is given him of the Father for a singular prerogative, so ought not also to
be conveyed away to any other. And in this very doing they darken the glory
of his birth, they make void his cross, finally what soever he has done or
suffered they spoil and defraude of the due praise thereof: for all tend to
this end that he may be in deed and be accounted the only Mediatoure. And
therewith they cast away the goodness of God, which gave himself to be
their Father. For he is not their father, unless they acknowledge Christ to be
their brother. Which they utterly deny unless they think that he bears a
brotherly affection toward them, than which there can nothing be more kind or
tender. Wherefore the Scripture offers only him to us, sends us to him, Lib.
de Isa* and any. (...).
and stays us in him. He (says Ambrose) is our mouth, by which we
speak to the Father: our eye, by which we see the Father: our right hand,
by which we offer us to the Father, otherwise than by whole intercession
neither we nor all the Saints have any thing with God. If they answer that
the common prayers which they make in churches, ar ended with this conclusion
adjoined, Through Christ our Lord: this is a trifeling shifte: because ye
intercession of Christ is no less profained when it is mingled with ye prayers
and merits of dead men, than if it were utterly omitted and only dead me^ were
in our mouth. Again, in all their Letanies, Hymns, and Proses where no honor is
left vngeuen to dead saints, there is no mention of Christ.

But their folysh dullness proceeded so far, yt here we have ye nature of
Superstition expressed, which when it has ones shaken of ye bridle, is Iere.
^^. xviii. ^^^, xiii.
but eue^ to ye number of persons. But since the Saints refer their desires
to the only will of God, and behold it and rest upon it: he thinks foolishly,
and fleshly, yea and sclau^derously of them, which assigns to them any other
prayer, then whereby they pray for the coming of the kingdom of God: from
which that is most far distant which they feign to them, ye every one is with
private affection more partially bent to his own worshipers. At length many
absteined not from horrible sacrilege, in calling now upon the^ not as helpers
but as principal rulers of their salvation. Lo whereunto foolish men do fall when
they wander out of their true standing, yt is, ye word of God. I speak not of
ye grosser mounstruousnesses of ungodliness, wherein although they be abominable
to God, Angels, and men, they are not yet ashamed nor weary of the^. They
falling down before ye image or picture of Barbara, Catharine, and such other,
do mu^ble Pater noster, Our father. This madness the Pastors do so not care to
heal or restrain, yt being allured with the swe^e savor of game they allow it
with reioising at it. But although they turn from themselves the blame of so
heinous an offense, yet by what color will they defend this ye Loy or Medard
are prayed unto to look down upon and help their servants from heaven? yt the
holy Uirgin is prayed unto, to co^mau^d her son to do yt which they ask? In
y^ old time it was forbidden in the Council at Carthage, yt at the alter no
direct prayer should be made to Saints. And it is likely yt when ye holy men
could not altogether suppress ye force of ye naughty custom, yet ye added at
least this restrai^t yt the public prayers should not be corrupted with this
form: Saint Peter pray for us. But how much further has their deuellish
importunacie ranged, which stick not to give away to dead men that which
proprely belonged only to God and Christ?

De. i.xiiii Esa. xcxi.xi Ps. xxxiiii viij.
to Angels: they should prove yt they ar ministering spirits, to whom is committed
ye ministry to look to our safety, to who^e ye charg is given to keep us in all our ways, to go about us, to admonish and counsel us, to watch for us: al
which things are given to Angels, but not to the^. How wrongfully they wrappe
up dead holy me^ with Angels, appears largly by so many diverse offices, wherbi
ye scripture puts difference between some and other some. No man dare
execute the office of an advocate before an earthely judge, unless he be
admitted, from whense then have worms so great liberty, to thruste unto God
those for patrons to whom it is not read yt the office is enjoined? Gods will
was to appoint ye Angels to look unto our saftie, wherefore they do both
frequent holy asse^bles, and ye Church is a stage to the^, wherein they wander
at ye diverse and manifold wisdom of God. Who so co^uey away to other yt which
is peculiar to the^, verily they confound and pervert ye order set by God,
which ought to have been inviolable. With like ha^dsomnesse they proceed in
alleging other testimonies. Iere. xv.i.
God said to Jeremy: If Moses and Samuel should stand before me, mi soul is
not to this people. Now (saithe^) could he have spoken thus of dead men,
unless he knew that they made intercession for the living? Butte I on the
contrary side gather thus, that sithe yt thereby appears that neither Moses
nor Samuel made intercession for the people of Israel, there was then no
intercession at al of dead men. For which of the Saints is to be thought to be
careful for ye safety of ye people, when Moses cesseth, which in this behalf
far passed al other when he lived? But if they follow such flight suttelties,
to say that the dead make intercession for the living, because the Lord said If
they should make intercession: I will much more colorably reason in this manner:
In the extreme necessity of the people Moses made not intercession, of whom it
is said, if he shall make intercession. Therefore it is likely that none other
makes intercession, sith they are al so far from the gentleness, goodness,
and fatherly carfulness of Moses. This forsooth they get with cauilling, that
they be wounded with the same weapons, wherewith they thought themselves gaylye
fensed. But it is very fond that a simple sentence should so be wrested,
because the Lord pronounces only yt he will not spare the offenses of ye
people, although they had seen Moses to be their patron, or Samuel, to whose
prayers he had showed himself so tender. Which sense is most clearly gathered
out of a like place of Ezechiel. Eze. xi^^i.xiiii.
If (says the Lord) these three men were in the city, Noe, Daniel, and Job,
they shall not deliver their sons and daughters in their righteousness: but
they shall deliver only their own souls. Where it is no dout that he meant if
two of the^ should happen to revive again, for the third was then alive,
namely Daniell, who (as it is known) did in the first flouring of his youth
show an incomparable example of godliness: let us then leave them whom the
Scripture plainly shows to have ended their course. Act. xiii.xxxvi.
Therefore Paul, when he speaks of David, teaches not that he does with
prayers help his posterity, but only that he served his own time.

They answer again: shall we then take from them all prayer of Eccl. ix.v
and. vi.
which two things have always the chief place in prayer. All such
considerations are far from the dead, whom when the Lord has conveyed from
our company, he has left to us no enterchange of doings with them, nor to
them with us, so far as we may gather by conjectures. But if any man allege ye
it is impossible but ye they must keep the same charity toward us, as they be
joined in one Faith with us: yet who has reveled ye they have so long eres to
reach to our voices* and so pearcing eyes to watch our necessities? They prate
in their shadows I wot not what of the brightness of the countenance of God
extending his beams upon them, in which as in a mirror they may from on hye
behold the matters of men beneath. But to affirm that, specially with such
boldness as they dare, what is it else but to go about by the dronken dreams
of our own brain, Romans viii vi.
without his word to pearce and break into the hidden iugementes of God, and
to tread the Scripture under fete which so often pronounces that the wisdom of
ye flesh is enemy to the wisdom of God, which wholly condemns the vanity
of our natural wit, which wills al our reason to be thrown down, and the
only will of God to be looked unto of us.

(...). xlviii xvi.
First let us see what form of calling upon this is among the Israelites. For
they call not upon their Fathers, to help them: but they beseech God to
remember his servants Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. Therefore their example makes
nothing for them that speak to ye Saints themselves. But because these
blocks (such is their dullness) neither understand what it is to call upon
the name of Jacob, nor why it is to be called upon: it is no marvel if in the
very form also they so childishly srumble. This manner of speech is not seldom
found in the Scriptures. Esa. iiii.i.
For Esaie says that the mean of the men is called upon over the w^men, when
they have them as their husbands under whoes charge and defense they live.
Therefore the calling upon of the name of Abraham upon the Israelites, stands
in this when they convey their pedigree from him, and do with solemn memory
honor him for their author and parent. Neither does Jacob this because he is
careful for the enlarging of the renome of his name: but for as much as he knew
that the whole blessedness of his posterity consisted in the enheritance of
the covenant which God had made with him: he wishes that which he sees should
be ye chief of al good things to them, that they be accounted in his kynred:
For, that is nothing else but to co^uey to them the succession of the covenant.
They again when they bring such remembrance into their prayers, do not flee
to the intercessions of dead me^: but do put ye lord in mind of his covenant,
whereby the most kind father has promised that he will be favorable and
beneficial to them for Abraha^s, Isaacs, and Jacobs sakes. How little the holy
ones did otherwise lean upon the merits of their father, the common saying of
the Chirch in the Prophet testifies, Thou art our Father, and Abraham knew us
not, Esa. ^^ii.^vi.
and Israel was ignorant of us. Thou Lord art our Father and our redemer. And
when they thus, they add therwithal, Return O Lord for thy servants sakes:
yet thinking upon no intercession, but bending their mind to the benefit of
the covenant. But now since we have the Lord Jesus, in whoes hand ye eternal
covenant of mercy is not only made but also confirmed to us: whoes name should
we rather use in our prayers? And because these good masters will have the
Patriarchs so ^e by these words made intercessors. I would said know of
them why in so great a route Abraham the Father of the Chirch has no place at
al among them. Out of what sink they fetch their advocates, it is not
unknown. Let them answer me, how fit it is ye Abraham, who^ God preferred
above al other, and whom he aduan^ced to the highest degree of honor, should be
neglected and suppressed. Uerily when it was evident that such use was unknown
to ye old Chirch, they thought good for hiding of the newness to speak
nothing of the old Fathers: as though ye diversity of names excused the new
and forged manner. But whereas some object yt God is prayed unto, to have mercy
on the people for David's sake, it does so nothing at al make for def^se of
their error, yt it is a most strong proof for ye confutation thereof. For if we
consider what person David did bear: he is severed from al ye asse^bly of ye
Saints, ye God should stablish ye covenant which he has made in his hand. So
both ye covenant is rather considered tha^ ye man, and under a figure ye only
intercession of Christ is asfirmed. For it is certain ye yt which belo^ged
only to David, in so much as he was the image of Christ, accords not with any
other.

But this forsothe moves some, yt it is oftentimes red yt the prayers of Psalm
xxii.v.
Therefore let us also pray as they did, yt we may be heard as they were. But
these men, otherwise than they ought, do wrongfully reason, that none shall be
heard but they that have ones ben heard. How much better does James say? Elias
(says he) was a man like to us: and he prayed with prayer that it should not
rain, Iam. v xvii.
and it rained not upon the earth in three years and six months. Again he
prayed, and the heaven gave rain, and the earth gave her fruit. What? does he
gather any singular prerogative of Elias, to which we ought to ^^ee? No. But
he teaches what is the continual strength of godly and pure prayer, to
exhort us likewise to pray. For we do niggardly costrue the readiness and
gentleness of God in hearing them, unless we be by such experiences confirmed
into a more sure affiance of his promises, in which he promises that his ear
shall be inclined not to one, or two, nor yet to a few, but to all that call upon
his name. And so much less excusable is this foolishness, because they seem
as it were of set purpose to despise so many admonitions of Scripture. David
was often delivered by the power of God. Psa. cxiii viii. Psa. lii.viii. Psalm.
xxxiiii.vii
Was it that he should draw that power to himself, that we should be
delivered by his help? He himself affirms far otherwise: The righteous
look for me, til thou render to me. Again, The righteous shall see and they
shall rejoice, and trust in the Lord. Behold, this poor man has cried to
God, and he has answered him. There be in the Psalms many such prayers, in
which to crave that which he requires, he moves God by this manner, that the
righteous be not made ashamed, but may by his example be raised up to hope well.
Let us now be contented with this one example. Therefore every holy one shall
pray to thee in fit time. Which place I have so much the more willingly
rehearsed, because the lewd babblers which do let out to hire the service
of their waged tongue have not ben ashamed to allege it to prove the intercession
of the dead. As though David meant any thing else, than to show the fruit
that shall come of the mercifulness and gentleness of GOD, when he shall be
heard. And in this kind we must learn, that the experience, of the grace of
God, as well toward our selves as other, is no sclender help to confirm the
credit of his promises. I leave vnrehearsed many places, where David sets
before himself the benefits of God for matter of confidence, because the
reders of the Psalms shall commonly find them without seking. This self same
thing had Jacob before taught by his own example: Ge. xxxii.x.
I am unworthy of al thy mercies, and of the truth which ye have performed to
thy seruante. I with my staff have passed over this Jordan, and now I come
fourth with two ^andes. He allegeth in deed the promise, but not alone: but he
also ioineth the effect, that he may the more courageously in time to come
trust that God will be the same toward him. For he is not like to mortal men,
which are weary of their liberality, or whoes ability is wasted: but he is to
be weyed by his own nature, Psa. xxxi.vi.
as David wisely does where he says, Thou have redeemed me, O God that speak
truth. After yt he has given to God ye praises of his salvation, he adds
that he is a true speaker: because unless he were continually like himself,
there could not be gathered of his benefits a sufficiently strong reason of
affiance and calling upon him. But when we know that so often as he helps us*
he shows an example and proof of his goodness, we need not to fear that our
hope shall be put to shame or disapoint us.

Psa. xl^iii xxi.
Again, whereas God will not be called upon, but of Faith, and expressly
commands prayers to be framed according to the rule of his word: finally
whereas Faith founded upon the word, is the mother of right prayer: so sone as
we swerve from the word, our prayer must needs be corrupted. But it is already
showed, that if ye whole Scripture be sought, this honor is therein challenged to
God only. As touching the office of intercession, we have also showed that it
is peculiar to Christ, and that there is no prayer acceptable to God, but
which that mediator halloweth. And though the faithful do one for an other
offer prayers to God for their brethren, we have showed that this abaeth
nothing from the only intercession of Christ: because they altogether standing
upon it do commend both themselves and other to God. Moreover we have taught
that this is vnfittly drawn to dead men, to whom we never read that it has been commanded that they should pray for us. The Scripture does oftentimes
exhort us to mutual doings of this duty one for an other: but of dead me^
there is not so much as one syllable: yea and James joining these two things
together, that we should confess our selves among our selves, and mutually
pray one for an other, does secretly exclude dead men. Therefore to condemn
this error, Iame. v.viii.
this one reason suffices, that the beginning of prayeng rightly, spryngeth
out of Faith, and that Faith comes of the hearing of the word of God, where
is no mention of the fained intercession, because superstition has rashly
gotten to it self patrones which were not given them of God. For whereas the
Scripture is full of many forms of prayer, there is no example found of this
patroneshyp* without which in the papacy they believe that there is no prayer.
Moreover it is certain that this superstition has growe^ of distrustfulnesse:
either because they were not content with Christ to be their intercessor, or
have altogether robbed him of this praise. And this later point is easily
proved by their shamelessnesse: because they have no other stronger argument to
prove that we have need of the intercession of Saints, than when they object
that we are unworthy of familiar access to God. Which we in deed grant to be
most true: but thereupon we gather, that they leave nothing to Christ, which
esteem his intercession nothing worth, unless there be adjoined George,
Hyppolite, or such other visors

But although prayer properly signifies only wishes and petitions: yet Psa. i
xv.
Call upon me in the day of necessity: I will deliver thee, and thou shalt
glorify me. The Scripture not in vain commands us to use both. For we have
said in an other place that our nedinesse is so great, and the experience it
self cries out that we are on every side pinched and pressed with so many and
so great distresses, that all have cause enough why they should both sighe to
God, and in humble wise call upon him. For though they be free from
adversities, yet the gyltynesse of their wicked doings, and their innumerable
assaults of tentations ought to prick forward the most holy to ask remedy.
But in the sacrifice of praise and thankesgeuing there can be no interruption
without heinous sin, forasmuch as God cesseth not to heap upon diverse men
diverse benefits to drive us though we be slack and slow, to tha^kfulnesse.
Finally so great and so plentuous largess of his benefits does in a manner
ouerwhelme us: there are so many and so great miracles of his seen on every
side which way soever thou turn thee, yt we never want ground and matter of
praise and thankesgeuing. And, that these things may be somewhat plainlier
declared: since al our hopes and wealth stand in God (which we have before
sufficiently proved) yt neither we nor all our things can be in prosperity but
by his blessing: we must continually commit our selves and al our things to
him. Ihon. iiii.xiiii. Esa. xxx and. xxxi.i.i.
The^, whatsoever we purpose, speak, or do, let us purpose, speak, and do
under his hand and will, finally under ye hope of his help. For, al are
pronounced accursed of God, which devise or determine any purposes upon trust
of themselves or of any other, which without his will, and without callig upon him
do enterprise or attempt to begin any thing. And whereas we have diverse times
already said, yt he is duly honored when he is acknowleged ye author of al good
things: thereupon follows that al those things are so to be received at his
hand, ye we yield continual thanks for them: and ye there is no other right
way for us to use his benefits, which flow and proceed from his liberality to
no other end, but ye we should be continually busied in confessing his praise
and giving of thanks. i. Timo. iiii.v. Metonymia. Ps. xl.iiii.
For Paul, when he testifies yt they are sanctified by the word and prayer,
does therwithal signify that they are not holy and clean to us without the
word and prayer, understanding by ye word, faith by figure. Therefore David
says very well, when having received the liberality of the Lord, he
declares that there is given him into his mouth a new song: whereby verily he
signifies that it is a malicious silence, if we pass over any of his
benefits without praise: sith he so often gives us matter to say good of him,
as he does good to us. As also Esaie setting out the singular grace of God,
exhorts the faithful to a new and unwonted song. Esa. ii.x. Psalm. li.xvii.
Esai. xxxviii.xx Ion. xi.x. Psa. cxvi.iii. Psa cvi.x^vii. Psa. cx.xviii.
In which sense David says in an other place, Lord open thou my lips, and my
mouth shall show fourth thy praise. Likewise Ezethias and Jonas testify that
this shall be to them the end of their deliverance, to celebrate the goodness
of God with songs in the temple. This same Law David prescribes to all the
godly. What shall I repay to the Lord (says he) for all the things that he
has bestowed upon me? I will take the cup of saluations, and will call upon the
name of the Lord. And ye same law ye Chirch follows in an other Psalm, Save
us our God, yt we may confess to thy name and glory in thy praise. Again, He
has looked unto the prayer of the solitary, and he has not despised their
prayers. This shall be written to the generation that shall follow, and the people
created shall praise ye Lord, that they may declare his name in him and his
praise in Jerusalem. Yea so often as the faithful beseech God to do for his
names sake: as they profess themselves unworthy to obtain any thing in their
own name, so they bind themselves to give thanks, and they promise that this
shall be to them the right use of the bountifulness of God yt they shall be
publishers of it. So Osee speaking of the redemption to come of the Chirch,
says: Ose. xiiii.iii.
Take away iniquity O God, and lift up good: and we will pay the calves of
lyppes. And the benefits of God do not only claim to themselves the praise
of the tongue, but also do naturally procure love. I have loved (says David)
because the Lord has heard the voice of my prayer. Ps. cxvi.i Ps. xviii.i
Again in an other place, rehearsing yt helps which he had felt, he says: I
will love thee O God my strength. Neither shall the praises ever please God,
which shall not flow out of this sweetness of love. Yea and also we must hold
fast this saying of Paul, Phil. iiii.vi.
that all prayers are wrongful and faulty to which is not adjoined giving of
thanks. For thus he says, in all prayer and beseching with thankesgeuing, let
your petetions be known with God. For, sith testiness, tediousness,
impatie^ce, bitterness of grefe, and fear do move many in prayeng to murmr,
he commands that our affections be so tempered, that the faithful ^re they
have obtained ye which they desire, should nevertheless cherefully bless God.
If this knot ought to have place in things in a manner contrary, with so much more
holy ba^d does God bind us to sing his praises, so often as he makes us to enjoy
our requests. But as we have taught yt our prayers are hallowed by ye
intercession of Christ, which otherwise should be unclean: so ye Apostle,
where he commands us to offer a sacrifice of praise by Christ, puts in
mind yt we have not a mouth clean enough to praise ye name of God, Heb.
^iii.xv.
unless ye presthode of Christ become ye mean. Whereupon we gather yt me^ have been mo^struously bewitched in ye papacy, where ye greater part marueleth yt
Christ is called an advocate. This is the cause why Paul commands both to
pray and to give thanks without cessing: i. Tess. v.xiii.
namely for that he wills that with so great continuing as may be, at every
time, in every place, in all matters and businesses, the prayers of all men
should be lifted up to God, which may both look for all things at his
hand, and yield to him the praise of all things, as he offreth us continual
matter to praise and pray.

But this continual diligence of prayeng, although it specially concern to i.
Cor. x^.xl.
But this makes nothing to the contrary but that every Chirch ought both
from time to time to stir up it self to often use of prayers, and when it is
admonished by any greater necessity, to be fervent with more earneste endeavor.
As for perseruerance which has a great affinity with continual diligence,
there shall be a fit place to speak of it about the end. Now these make
nothing for the much babbling which Christ willed that we should be forbidden.
Math. vi.vii.
For he forbids not to continue long, nor often, nor with much affection in
prayers, but that we should not trust that we may wring any thing out of God,
by dulling his ears with much babbling talk, as if he were to be persuaded
after the manner of men. For we know that Hypocrites, because they do not
consider that they have to do with God, do no less make a pompous show in
their prayers than in a triumph. For, the Pharisee which thanked God that he
was not like to other men, without dout reioysed at himself in the eyes of
men, as if he would by prayer seek to get a fame of holiness. Hereupon came
that much babbling* which at this day upon a like cause is used in the papacy,
while some do vainly spend the time in repeting the same prayers, and other
some do set out themselves among the people with a long heap of words. Since
this babbling childishly mocketh God, it is no marvel that it is forbidden out
of the Church, to the end that nothing should there be used but earnest and
proceeding from the bottom of the heart. Of a nere kind and like to this
corruption is there an other, which Christ co^de^neth with this: namely ye
Hypocrites for bosting sake do seek to have many witnesses, and do rather
occupy ye market place to pray in, than their prayers should want ye praise of
ye world. But whereas we have already showed that this is the mark that prayer
shoots at, that our minds may be carried upward to God, both to confession
of praise and to craving of help: thereby we may understand yt the chief duties
thereof do stand in ye mind and the heart, or rather ye prayer it self is
properly an affection of ye inward heart, which is poured fourth and laid open
before God ye searcher of hearts. Wherefore (as it is already said) the heavenly
scholemaister, when he minded to set out the best rule of prayeng, mat. vi.v*
commanded us to go into our chamber, and there the door being shutt to pray
to our Father which is in secret, that our Father which is in secret may
hear us. For when he has drawn them away from the example of hipocrites,
which with ambicious bosting show of prayers sought the favor of me^, he
therwithall adds what is better, namely to enter into our chamber, and there
to pray the door being shut. In which words (as I expound them) he willed us
to seek solitary being. which may help us to descend and to enter
throughely with our whole thought into our heart, promising to the affections
of our heart that God shall be nere us whoes temples our bodies ought to be. For
he meant not to deny but that it is expediente also to pray in other places:
but he shows that prayer is a certain secret thing, which both is chefely
placed in the soul, and requires the quiet thereof far from all trobles of
cares. Not without cause therefore ye lord himself also, when he was disposed to
apply himself more earnestly to prayer co^ueied himself into some solitary
place far from ye troblesome company of me^: but to teach us by his example yt
these helps are not to be despised, by which our mind being to slippry of it
self is more bent to earnest applyeng of prayer. But in the mean time eue^ as
he in the midst of the multitude of men, absteined not from praying, if
occasion at any time so served: so should we in all places where need shall be, ^.
tim. ^.^.
lift up pure hands. Finally thus it is to be holden, that whosoever refuses
to pray in the holy assembly of the godly, he knows not what it is to pray
apart, or in solitariness, or at home. Again, that he that neglects to pray
alone or privately how diligently soever he hau^t public assemblies, does there
make but vain prayers: because he gives more to the opinion of men tha^ to
the secret judgment of God. In the mean time, that the common prayers of the
Chirch should not grow into contempt, God in old time garnished them with
glorious titles, Esa. ^^.7.
specially where he called the temple the house of prayer. For, by this saying
he both taught that the chief part of the worshipping of him is the duty of
prayer: and that to the end that the faithful should with one consent exercise
themselves in it, the temple was set up as a standard for them. Psa. (...)
There was also added a notable promise: There abides for thee, O God, praise
in Sion: and to thee the vow shall be paid. By which words the Prophet tells
us, that the prayers of the Chirch are never void: because the Lord always
ministers to his people matter to sing upon with joy. But although the shadows
of the law are cessed: yet because ye Lords will was by this ceremony to
nourish among us also the unity of faith, it is no doubt that the same promise
belongs to us, which both Christ has stablished with his own mouth, and
Paul teaches that it is of force for ever.

Mat. 18.^^.
For he that promises that he will do whatsoever two or three shall ask being
gathered together in his name, testifies that he despises not prayers openly
made: so yt bosting and seking of glory of me^ be absent, so that unfeigned and
true affection be present which dwells in the secret of the heart. If this be
the right use of temples (as truly it is) we must again beware that neither
(as they have begone in certain ages past to be accounted) we take them for the
propre dwelling places of God from whense he may more nerely bend his ear
unto (...) ^ayne to them I wot not what secret holiness, which may (...)
prayer more holy before God. For since we our selves be the (...) temples of
God, we must pray in our selves if we will call upon God in his own holy temple.
As for that grossness, let us which have a commandment to call upon the
Lord in Spirit and truth without difference of place, leave it to the Jews or
the Gentiles. Job 4.^.
There was in deed a temple in old time by the commandment of God for
offering of prayers and sacrifices: but that was at such time as the truth lay
hid figured under such shadows, which being now lively expressed unto us
does not suffer us to stick in any material temple. Neither was the temple
given to the Jews themselves with this condition, that they should enclose the
presence of God, within the walls thereof, Esa. (...).
but whereby they might be exercised to behold the image of the true temple.
Therefore they, which in any wise thought that God dwells in temples made
with hands, Acts. (...).
were sharply rebuked of Esaias and Stephen.

Here moreover it is more than evident, that neither voice nor song, if they be
used in prayer, have any force, or do any whit profit before God, unless they
proceed from the deep affection of the heart. But rather they provoke his wrath
against us, if they come only from the lips and out of the throat: forasmuch
as that is to abuse his holy name, and to make a mockery of his majesty: as
we gather out of the words of Esaias, which although they extend further, yet
perteine also to reprove this fault. Esa. 9.^^. Mat. ^5.^.
This people (says he) comes nere to with their mouth and honoreth me with
their lips but their heart is far from me: and they have feared me with the
commandment and doctrine of men. Therefore behold I will make in this people
a miracle great and to be wondered at: For, wisdom shall perish from their
wise men, and the prudence of the Elders shall vanishe away. Neither yet do we
here condemn voice or singyng, but rather do hyely commend them, so that
they accompany the affection of the mind. For so they exercise the mind and
hold it intentive in thynkyng upon God: which as it is slippery and rollyng,
easily slacketh and is diversely drawn, unless it be stayed with diverse
helps. Moreover whereas the glory of God ought after a certain manner to shine
in all the parts of our body, it specially behooves that the tongue be applied
and auowed to this service both in singing and in speaking, which is properly
created to show fourth and display the praise of God. But the chief use of the
tongue is in public prayers, which are made in the assembly of the Godly: which
tend to this end, that we may all with one common voice, and as it were with one
mouth together glorify God, who^ we worship with one Spirit and one Faith:
and that openly, that all men mutually, every one of his brother, may receive
the confession of Faith, to the example whereof they may be both allured and
stirred.

Is for the use singyng in Chirches (that I may touch this also by the way)
it is certain that it is not only most ancient: but that it was also in use
among the Apostles, 1. Cor. ^^. 12.
we may gather by these words of Paul. I will sing in Spirit, I will sing
also in mind. Again to the Colossians, Teaching and admonishing you, mutually
in hymns, psalms, and spiritual songs, singyng with grace in your hearts to
the Lord. For in the first place he teaches that we should sing with voice
and heart: in the other he commends spiritual songs, wherewith the godly
do mutually edify themselves. confess. lib. 9. cap. 7.
Yet that it was not universal, Augustine testifies, which reports that in
the time of Ambrose the Chirch of Millain first began to sing, when while
Iustina the mother of Valentin^an cruelly raged against the true Faith, the
people more used watchinges than they were wont: and that afterward the other
western Chirches followed. For he had a little before said that this manner came
from the Eastern Chirches. He tells also in his second book of
Retractations that it was in his time received in Africa. One Hilarie (says
he) a ruler did in every place wheresoever he could, with malicious blaming
rail at the manner which then began to be at Carthage, that the hymns at the
altar should be pronounced out of the book of Psalms, either before the
oblation, or when that which had been offered was distributed to the people. Him
I answered at the commandment of my brethren. And truly if song be tempered
to that gravity which becomes the presence of God and Angels, it both
procures dignity and grace to the holy actions, and much avails to stir
up the minds to true affection, and feruentnesse of prayeng. But we must
diligently beware that our ears be not more hedefully bente to the note,
Confess. lib x. ca. xxxiii.
than our minds to the spiritual sense of the words. With which peril
Augustine in a certain place says that he was so moved, that he sometime
wished yt ye manner which Athanasius kept should be stablished, which commanded
that the reder should sound his words with so small a boowing of his voice,
that it should be liker to one that reads than to one that sings. But when
he remembered how much profit he himself had received by syngyng, he
inclined to ye other side. Therefore vsyng this moderation, there is no dout
that it is a most holy and profitable ordinance. As on the other side what
songs so ever are framed only to sweetness and delight of the ears, they both
become not the majesty of the Chirch, and can not but hyely displease God.

i. Cor. xiiii.xvi.
whoes words are nothing doutfull. If thou bless (says he) in Spirit, how
shall he that fills the place of an unlearned man answer Amen to thy blessing,
since he knows not what thou say? For thou in deed geuest thanks, but the
other is not edified. Who therefore can sufficiently wonder at the unbridled
licentiousness of the Papists, which, the Apostle so openly crying out
against it, fear not to roar out in a strange tongue most babblyng prayers,
in which they themselves sometime understand not one syllable, nor would have
other folks to understand it? But Paul teaches that we ought to do
otherwise. How then? I will pray (says he) with spirit, I will pray also with
mind: I will sing with spirit, I will sing also with mind: signifieng by the
name of Spirit, the singular gift of tongues, which many being endued with
abused it, when they severed it from the mind, that is, from understanding.
But this we must altogether think, that it is by no mean possible, neither in
public nor in private prayer, but that the tongue without the heart must hyely
displease God. Moreover we must think that the mind ought to be kyndled with
feruentnesse of thought, that it may far surmounte all that the tongue may
express with utterance. Finally that the tongue is not necessary at all for
private prayer, but so far as the inward felyng either is not able to
suffice to enkindle it self, or the vehemence of enkindlyng violently carries
the work of the tongue with it. For though very good prayers sometime be
without voice, yet it oftentimes betydeth, that when the affection of the mind
is fervent, both the tongue breaks forth into voice, and the other members
into gesturyng without excessive show. Hereupon came the mutteryng of Hanna, i.
Sam. i.xiii.
and such a like thing all the holy ones always feel in themselves, when they
burst out into broken and imperfect voices. As for the gestures of the body
which are wont to be used in prayer (as knelyng and vncoueryng of the head) they
are exercises by which we endeavor to rise up to a greater reuerencing of God.

Now we must learn not only a more certain rule, but also the very Math.
vi.ix.
wherein we may acknowe his unmeasurable goodness and kyndenesse. For beside
this he warns and exhorts us to seek him in all our necessity, (as children
are wont to flee to their fathers defense, Luc. xii ii.
so often as they be troubled with any distress) because he saw yt we did not
sufficiently perceive this, how sclender our poverty was, what were mete to be
asked, and what were for our profit: he provided also for this our ignorance,
and what our capacity wa^ted, he supplied and furnished of his own. For he
has prescribed to us a form wherein he has as in a Table set our whatsoever we
may desire of him, what soever avails for our profit, and whatsoever is
necessary to ask. Of which his gentleness we receive a great fruit of comfort
yt we understand yt we ask no inconvenient thing, no vnsemyng or unfit thing,
finally nothing that is not acceptable to him, since we ask in a manner after
his own mouth. When Plato saw the folly of men in making requests to God,
Alcil, ii. vel de. vo^.
which being granted, it many times befell much to their own hurt: he
pronounced that this is the best manner of prayeng taken out of the old Poet,
King Jupiter give unto us the best things both when we ask them, and when
we do not ask them, but command evil things to be away from us even when
we ask them. And verily the heathen man is wise in this, that he judges how
perilous it is to ask of the Lord that which our own desire moves us: and
therwithal he bewrays our unhappy case, Romans viii vi.
that we can not ones open our mouths before God without danger, unless the
Spirit do instruct us to a right rule of praying. And in so much greater
estimation this privilege is worthy to be had of us, sith the only begotten
Son of God ministers words into our mouth which may deliver our mind from
all doutyng.

This whether you call it form or rule of praying is made of six petitions.
For, the cause why I agree not to them that divide it into seven parts, is
this that by puttyng in this aduersatiue word (But) it seems that the
Evangelist men to join these two pieces together, as if he had said: August. in
Enchirid ad Laurent. cap. 116. Chrysos. au^. o^ per imperf.
Suffer us not to be oppressed with tentation but rather help our weakness,
and deliver us, that we faint not. The old writers also think on our side, so
that now that which is in Matthew added in the seventh place, is by way of
declaration to be joined to the sixth petition. But although the whole prayer is
such that in every part of it regard is specially to be had of the glory of
God, yet the three first petitions are peculiarly appointed to Gods glory,
which alone we ought in them to look unto without any respect (as they say) of
our own profit. The other three have care of us, and are proprely assigned to
ask those things that are for our profit. As when we pray that the name of
God be hallowed: because God will prove whether he be loved and honored of us
freely or for hope of reward, we must the^ think nothing of our own commodity:
but his glory must be set before us, which alone we must behold with fixed
eyes: and no otherwise ought we to be minded in the other prayers of this sort.
And even this tourneth to our great profit, that when it is sanctified as we
pray, it is also likewise made our sanctification. But our eyes (as it is
said) must wink and after a certain manner be blind at such profit, so as
they may not ones look at it: that if all hope of our private benefit were cut
of, yet we should not cease to wish and pray for this sanctification and
other things which perteine to the glory of God. Exo. xxxii xxxii. Romans
ix.iii.
As it is seen in the examples of Moses and Paul, to whom it was not grievous
to turn away their minds and eyes from themselves, and with vehement and
enflamed zele to wish their own destruction that though it were with their
own loss they might auaunce the glory and kingdom of God. On ye other side
when we pray that our daily bread be given us: although we wyshe that which is
for our own commodity, yet here also we ought chefely to seek the glory of
God, so that we would not ask it unless it might turn to his glory. Now let
us come to the declaryng of the prayer it self.

Our Father which art in heaven. John. i.xii. i. John. iii.i. Psalm. xxvii.x.
Ps. xxvii.x. Esa. lxiii.xvi. ii. Tim. ii xiii.
may by the benefit of adoption be made ours, if we do with sure faith embrace
so great bountifulness. As John says, yt power is given to the^ which believe
in ye name of the only begotten Son of God, yt they also may be made the
children of God. Therfore^ he both calls himself our Father, and will be so
called of us, by this sweetness of name delyuering us from all distrust, sith
there can no where be found any greater affection of love than in a Father.
Therefore he could by no surer example testify his unmeasurable dear love
toward us than by this that we are named the sons of God. But his love is so
much greater and more excellent toward us than all love of our parents, as he
passes all men in goodness and mercy: that if all the fathers that are in the
earth, having shaken of all feling of fatherly naturalnesse, would forsake their
children, yet he will never fail us, Mat. vii.xi. Esa. xlix.xv.
because he can not deny himself. For we have his promise, If you being evil
can give good gifts to your children, how much more can your Father which is
in heaven? Again in the Prophet, Can a mother forget her children? Though she
forget them, yet I will not forgett thee. If we be his children: then as a
child can not give himself into the tuition of a stranger and foreign man,
unless he complain either of the cruelty or poverty of his father: so we can
not seek succors from else where than from him alone, unless we reproach him
with poverty and want of ability, or with cruelty or to extreme
rigorousnesse.

Neither let us allege that we are worthily made fearful with conscience of
sins, which may make a Father be he never so merciful ii. Cor. i.iii.
and the God of all comfort? shall not he rather hear the tears and gronynges
of his children intreatyng for themselves (specially since he does call and
exhort us to do so) than any other intercessions whatsoever they be: to the
succor whereof they do so fearfully flee, not without some show of despeire,
because they distrust of the kyndnesse and mercifulness of their father? This
ouerflowyng plenty of fatherly kyndnesse he depainteth and sets out unto us
in the parable, Luc. xv.xx.
where the Father louyngly embraces the son that had estranged himself from
him, that had riotously wasted his substance, that had every way grievously
offended against him: and he tarieth not till he do with words crave pardon,
but he himself preuenteth him, knows him afar of returnyng, of his own
will goes to mete him, comfort him, and receives him into favor. For,
setting out in a man this example of so great gentleness, he minded to teach
us how much more plentiful kindness we ought to look for at his hand, who
is not only a Father, but also the best and most merciful of all Fathers,
howsoever we be unkind, rebellious, and noughty children: so that yet we cast
our selves upon his mercy. And that he might make it to be more assuredly
believed, that he is such a Father to us, if we be Christians: he willed not
only to be called Father, but also by express name Our father: as if we might
thus talk with him, O Father which have so great natural kyndnesse toward
thy children, so great easynesse to pardon, we thy children call to thee and
pray to thee, being assured and fully persuaded, that thou bear no other
affection to us than fatherly, howsoever we be unworthy of such a Father. But
because the small capacities of our heart conceive not so great
unmeasurableness of favor, not only Christ is to us a pledge and earneste of
our adoption, but also he gives us the Spirit for witness of the same
adoption, Gal. iii, vi.
through whom we may with a free and loud voice cry. Abba, Father. So often
therefore as any delay shall with^arde us, let us remember to ask of him, that
correctyng our fearfulness, he will set before us that Spirit of
coragiousnesse to be our guide to pray boldly.

Mat. xxiii ix.
there ought to be nothing several among us, which we are not ready with
great cherefulnesse of mind to communicate one to an other, so much as need
requires. Now if we be so desirous, as we ought to be, to reach our hand
and help one to an other, there is nothing wherein we may more profit our
brethren, than to commend them to the care and providence of the most good
Father, who being well pleased and favoring, nothing at al can be wa^ted. And
verily even this same we owe to our Father. For as he that truly and heartily
loves any Father of household, does also embrace his whole household, with
love and good will: likewise what love and affection we bear to this heavenly
Father, Ephesians. i.xxiiii.
we must show toward his people, his householde and his inheritance, which he
has so honored, that he has called it the fulness of his only begotten
Son. Let a christian man therefore frame his prayers by this rule, that they
be common, and may comprehend all them that be brethren in Christ with him:
and not only those whom he presently sees and knows to be such, but al men
that live upon earth: of whom, what God has determined, it is out of our
knowledge: saving that it is no less godly then natural to wish the best to
them, and hope the best of them. Howbeit we ought with a certain singular
affection to bear a special inclination to them of the household of faith,
Gal. vi.x.
whom the Apostle has in every thing peculiarly commended unto us. In a su^me,
Al our prayers ought to be so made, that they have respect to that community
which our Lord has stablished in his kingdom and his house.

prayers we may help even them that are most strange and most unknown to us,
by how great a space of ground soever they be distant from us. This is done
by that general form of prayer, wherein all the children of God are contained,
among whom they also are. Hereto we may apply that which Paul exhorts the
faithful of his time, i. Tim. ii.viii.
that they lift up every where pure hands without strife: because when he
warns them y^ strife shuts the gate against prayers, he wills them with
one mind to lay their petitions in common together.

It is added, that he is in heaven. Whereupon it is not by and by to be i. Kin.
viii xxxvii. Esa. lxvi.i. Act. vii.xlix. et xvii.xxiiii
And he himself faith by the Prophet that heaven is his seat, and the earth
his footestoole. Whereby verily he signifies that he is not limited in any
certain coaste, but is spread abroad throughout all things. But because our
mind (such is the grossness of it) could not otherwise conceive his
unspeakable glory, it is signified to us by the heaven, than which there can
nothing come under our sight more ample or fuller of majesty. Since therefore
wheresoever our senses comprehend any thing, there they use to fasten it: God
is set out of all place, that when we will seek him we should be raised up
above all sense both of body and soul. Again by this manner of speaking he is
lifted up above all chance of corruption and change: finally it is signified
that he comprehends and co^temeth the whole world and governs it with his
power. Wherefore this is al one as if he had been called of infinite greatness
or height, of incomprehensible substance, of unmeasurable power, of everlasting
immortality. But while we have this, we must lift up our mind hier when God
is spoken of, that we dream not any earthly or fleshly thing of him. that we
measure him not by our small proportions, nor draw his will to the rule of our
affections. And therwithall is to be raised up our affiance in him, by whose
providence and power we understand heaven and earth to be governed. Let this
be the sum, that under the name of Father is set before us that God which
has in his own image appeared to us, that he may be called upon with assured
faith: and that the familiar name of Father is not only applied to stablishe
affiance, but also avails to hold fast our minds that they be not drawn to
doutfull or fained Gods, but should from the only begotten son clymbe up to
the only father of Angels and of the Church: then, that because his seat is
placed in heaven, we are by the governance of the world put in mind that not
without cause we come to him which with present care comes of his own will to
mete us. Who so come to God (says the Apostle) they must first believe that
there is a God: Hebr. xi.vi.
then, that he is a rewarder to all them that seek him. Both these things
Christ affirms to be propre to his Father, that our Faith may be stayed in
him: then, that we may be certainly persuaded that he is not careless of our
safety: because he vouchesaueth even to us to extend his providence. With
which introductions Paul prepares us to pray rightely. For before that he
hiddeth our petitions to be opened before God he says thus, Be ye careful for
nothing, Philip. iiii.vi.
the Lord is at hand. Whereby appears that they doutefully and with
perplexity toss their prayers in their mind, which have not this well
settled in them, Psalm. xxxiii.xviii.
that the eye of God is upon the righteous.

The first Petition is, That the name of God be hallowed, the need Psalm.
xlviii.xi.
For wheresoever the name of God is known, it can not be but that his
strengthes, power, goodness, wisdom, righteousness, mercy, and truth must
show forth themselves, which may draw us into admiration of him, and stir
us up to publyshe his praise. Sith therefore the holiness of God is to
shamefully taken from him in earth, if we be not able to reskue it, we be at
the least commanded to take care of it in our prayers. The sum is, that we
wish the honor to be given to God which he is worthy to have, that men never
speak or think of him without most hye reverence: whereunto is contrary the
unholy abusyng, which has always been to common in the world, as at this day
also it rangeth abroad. And hereuppon comes the necessity of this petition,
which if there lived in us any godliness, though it were but little, ought
to have been superfluous. But if ye name of God have his holiness safe, when
being severed from all other, it breaths out nothing but glory, here we are
commanded not only to pray that God will deliver that holy name from al
contempt and dishonor, but also that he will subdue al mankind to the reverence
of it. Now whereas God discloseth himself to us partly by doctrine, partly by
works, he is no otherwise sanctified of us, than if we give to him in both
behalfes yt which is his, and so embrace whatsoever shall come from him: and
that his severity have no less praise among us than his mercifulness,
forasmuch as he has in the manifold diversity of his works emprinted
marks of his glory which may worthily draw out of all tongues a confession of
his praise. So shall it comme to pass that the Scripture shall have full
authority with us, and that no success shall hinder the blessyng which God
deserves in the whole course of the gouernyng of the world. Again the
petition also tends to this purpose, that all ungodliness which defyleth
this holy name, may be destroyed and taken away: that whatsoever things do
darken and diminishe this sanctifieng, as well sclaunders as mockynges, may be
driven away: and when God subdueth al sacrileges, his glory may thereby more
and more shine abroad.

The Kingdom of God may come: which although it conteyne no new thing, is yet
not without cause severed from the first: because if we consider our own
drewsynesse in a thing greatest of all other, it is profitable that the thing
which ought of it self to have been most well known, be with many words
often beaten into us. Therefore after that we have been commanded to pray to God
to bring into subjection, and at length utterly to destroy whatsoever spotteth
his holy name: now is added a like and in a manner the same request, that his
kingdom come. But although we have already set fourth the definition of this
kingdom, yet I now brefely rehearse, that God reigns when men as well with
forsaking of themselves as with despising of the world and of the earthly life,
do so yield themselves to his righteousness, that they aspire to the heavenly
life. Therefore there are two parts of this kingdom: the one, that God
correct with the power of his Spirit all corrupt desires of the flesh, which
do by multitudes make war against him: the other, that he frame all our
senses to the obedience of his government. Therefore none do keep right order
in this prayer, but they which begin at themselves, that is to say, that they
be cleansed from all corruptions which troble the quiet state of the kingdom
of God, and infect the pureness thereof. Now because the word of God is like a
kyngly scepter, we are here commanded to pray that he will subdue the minds
and hearts of al men to willing obedience of it. Which is done, when with the
secret instinct of his Spirit he utters the effectual force of his word,
that it may be auaunced in such degree as it is worthi. Afterward we must come
down to the wicked which do obstinatly and with desperate rage resist his
authority. God therefore sets up his kingdom by humbling the whole world:
but that in diverse manners: because he tameth the wantonnesses of some, and of
other some he breaks the untamed pride. This is daily to be wished that it be
done, that it may please God to gather to himself Chirches out of all the
coasts of the world, to enlarge and encreasce them in number, to enriche them
with his gifts, to stablishe right order in them: on the other side to
overthrow all the enemies of pure doctrine and religion, to scatter abroad
their counsels, to cast down their enterprises. Whereby appears that the
endeavor of daili proceeding is not in vain commanded us: because the matters of
men are never in so good case, that filthiness bring shaken away and cleansed,
full pureness florisheth and is in lively force. i. Cor. xv.xxviii.
But the fullness of it is differred unto the last coming of Christ, when
Paul teaches that God shall be al in all. And so this prayer ought to withdraw
us from all the corruptions of the world, which do sever us from God that his
kingdom should not florishe in us, and also to kindle our endeavor to mortify
the flesh, finally to instruct us to the bearing of the cross: forasmuch as
God will in this wise have his kingdom spread abroad. Neither ought we to take
it miscontentedly that the outward man be destroyed, so that the inward man be
renewed. For this is the nature of ye kingdom of God, when we submitt our
selves to the righteousness thereof, to make us partakers of his glory. This
is done when brightly setting fourth his light and truth with always new
encreasces, whereby ye darkness and lies of Satan and his kingdom, may vanish
away, be destroyed, and perish, he defends them that be his, with the help
of his Spirit directs them to uprightness and strengthens them to
continuance: but overthrows the wicked co^spiracies of his enemies, shakes
abroad their treasons and deceites, preuenteth their malice, and beats down
their stubbornness, til at length he kill Antichrist with the Spirit of his
mouth and destroy all ungodliness with the brightness of his coming.

That the will of God be done in earth as it is in heaven. Which although it
hangs upon his kingdom, and can not be severed from it, is not in vain
added severally, for our grossnesse, which does not easily or by and by
conceive what it is that God reign in the world. It shall therefore be no
absurdity if this be taken by way of plainer exposition: that God shall then
be king in the world when al things shall submitt themselves to his will. Now
here is not meant of his secret will, whereby he governs al things and
directs them to their end. For though Satan and men are troblesomly carried
against him yet he can by his incomprehensible counsel not only turn aside
their violent motions, but also drive them into order that he may do by them
that which he has purposed. But here is spoken of an other will of God, namely
that whereunto answers willing obedience: and therefore the heaven is by name
compared with the earth: because the Angels, as it is said in the Psalm,
Psalm. ciii.xx.
do willingly obey God, and are diligently bent to do his commandments. We
are therefore commanded to wish that as in heaven nothing is done but by the
beck of God, and the Angels are quietly framed to al uprightness: so the
earth, al stubbornness and perverseness being quenched, may be subject to
such government. And when we require this, we renounce the desires of our own
flesh: because whosoever does not resign and yield his affections to God, he
does as much as in him lies set himself against him, forasmuch as nothing
comes out of us but faulty. And we are again by this prayer framed to the
forsaking of our selves, that God may govern us after his will: and not that
only, but that he may also create in us new minds and new hearts, our old
being brought to naught: that we may feel in our selves none other motion of
desire than a mere consent with his will: summarily that we may will nothing of
our selves, but that his Spirit may govern our hearts, by who^ inwardly
teaching us we may learn to love those things that please him, and to hate
those things that displease him. Whereupon this also follows, that whatsoever
affections fight against his will, he may make them vain and void. Lo here be
the first three chief points of this prayer, in asking whereof we ought to
have the only glory of God before our eyes, leaving the respect of our
selves, and having no regard to any of our own profit, which although it
come hereof largely unto us, yet we ought not here to seek it. But albeit al
these things, though we neither think of them, nor wish them, nor ask them,
must nevertheless come to pass in their due time, yet we must wish them and
require them. And this to do is no small profit for our trauaill, that we may
so testify and profess our selves to be the servants and children of God, as
much as in us lies endeavoring and being truly and thoroughly given to set
fourth his honor, which is due to him being both a Lord and a Father. Whosoever
therefore do not with affection and zele of auauncing the glory of God, pray
that the name of God be hallowed, that his kingdom come, that his will be
done: they are not to be accounted among the children and servants of God: and
as all these things shall be done against their wills, so they shall turn to
their confusion and destruction.

to our own commodities: not that bidding farewell to the glory of God (which
as Paul witnesses, i. Cor. x, xxxi,
is to be regarded even in meat and drink) we should seek only what is
profitable for our selves: but we have already given warning that there is this
difference, that God peculiarly claiming three petitions to himself does draw
us to himself wholly, that he may in this wise prove our godliness. Then he
grants us also to have an eye to our own commodities, but with this
condition that we ask nothing for our selves but to this end that whatsoever
benefits he bestows upon us, they may set fourth his glory: forasmuch as
nothing is more rightful than that we live and dye to him. But in this
petition we ask of God generally al things which the use of the body needs
under the elements of this world, not only wherewith we may be fed and clothed,
but also whatsoever he foreseeth to be profitable for us, that we may eat our
bred in peace. By which prayer brefely we yield our selves into his care, and
commit us to his providence, that he may feed, cherishe, and preserve us. For
the most good Father disdayneth not to receive also our body into his faithful
sauegarde and keeping, to exercise our Faith in these small things, when we look
for all things at his hands even to a crumme of bred and a drop of water.
For whereas it is come to pass I wot not how by our iniquity, that we be
moved and vexed with greater care of the flesh than of the soul: many which
dare trust to God for their soul, are yet careful for their flesh, are yet
in doubt what they shall eat, and wherewith they shall be clothed: and if they
have not plenty of wine, wheat, and oil aforehande, they tremble for fear.
So much more do we esteem the shadow of this life which lasts but a moment,
than that everlasting immortality. But whosoever trusting to God have ones cast
away y^ carfulness for the provision of the flesh, do also by and by look
for salvation and everlasting life at his hand, which are greater things. It is
therefore no small exercise of Faith, to hope for those things of God, which
otherwise do so much hold us in care: and we have not smally profited, when we
have put of this vnbeleuingnesse which s^^cketh fall within the bones almost
of all men. As for that which some do here teach of transubstantiall bred,
it seems but smally to agree with the meaning of Christ: yea but if we did not
even in this frail life give to God the office of a nourishing Father, our
prayer should be imperfect. The reason which they bring is to much profane:
that it is not mete that the children of God, which ought to be spiritual,
should not only cast their mind to earthly cares, but also wrappe God therein
with them. As though his blessing and fatherly favor does not also appear in y^
sustena^ce of our life, or as though it were written in vain yt godliness
has promyses not only of the life to come, but also of this present life. But
although the forgiveness of sins is of much greater value than the
sustenances of the body yet Christ has set the inferior thing in the first
place, i. Timo. iiii.viij.
to the intent to lift us up by degrees to y^ other two petitions which do
properly belong to the heavenly life, wherein he had regard to our grossness.
We are commanded to ask Our bred, that we should be content with the
quantity which our heavenly Father vouchesaueth to give to us, and should not
seek for gain by unlawful crafty means. In the mean time we must learn
that it is made Ours by title of gift, Leu. xxvi ix.
because neither our diligence, nor our trauaill, nor our hands (as it is
said in Moses) do by themselves get us any thing, unless the blessing of
God be present: yea the plenty of bred should nothing at al profit us,
unless it were by God turned into nourishmente. And therefore this liberality
of God is no less necessary for the rich than for the poor: because having
their cellers and their barnes full, they should yet fainte for dryness and
emptiness, unless they did by his grace enjoy their bred. The word This day,
or Every day as it is in the other Evangelist, and also the adjective Daily,
do bridle the to much gredines of frail things, wherewith we are wont to
burn out of measure, and whereunto are joined other euells: sith if we have
ple^tifull abundance, we do gloriously pour it out upon pleasure, delites,
boasting, and other kinds of riotous excess. Therefore we are commanded to
ask only so much as is enough for our necessity, and as it were from day to
day, with this affiance that when our heavenly Father has fed us this day, he
will also not fail us to morrow. Therefore how great plenty of things so ever
do flow unto us, yea when our barnes be stuffed and our cellers full: yet we
ought always to ask our daily bred: because we must certainly believe that al
substance is nothing, but in somuche as the Lord does by pouring out of his
blessing with continual encreasce make it fruitful: and that the very same
substance that is in our hand, is not our own, but insomuch as he does every
hour give us a portion and grant us the use of it. Deu. viii.iii. Math. iiii
iiii.
This whereas the pride of men does most hardly suffer it self to be
persuaded: the Lord testifies that he has showed a singular example thereof
for all ages, when he fed his people with Manna in the wilderness, to teach
us that man lives not in bred only, but rather in the word that comes out
of his mouth. Whereby is declared, that it is his power alone by which our life
and strengthes are sustained, although he do minister it unto us under bodily
instruments. As he is wont also to teach us by the contrary example, when he
so often as he will, Leu. xxvi xxvi.
breaks the strength and (as he calls it) the staff of bred, that men
eating may pine with hunger, and drynkyng may be dried up with thirst. But
whosoever not being co^te^ted with daily bred, but with unbridled gredinesse are
gaping for endless store, or whosoever being full with their abundance, and
careless by reason of the heap of their richesse, do nevertheless sue to
God with this prayer, they do nothing else but mock him. For, the first sort
of such men ask that which they would not obtain, yea that which they
most of all abhor, that is, to have only daily bred, and so much as in them
lies they dissemblingly hide from God the affection of their covetousness:
whereas true prayer ought to pour out before him the very whole mind it
self, and whatsoever inwardly lies hydden. But the other sort do ask that
which they look not for at his hand, namely that which they think that they
have with themselves. In this that it is called Ours the bountifulness of God
(as we have said) so much more appears, which makes that ours that is by
no right due to us. Yet that exposition is not to be rejected which I have
also touched, that by our bred is meante that which is earned with rightful
and harmless trauail, and not gotten with deceites and extorcious: because
that is always Other men's which we get to our selves with any ill doing. Whereas
we pray that it be given us, thereby is signified that it is the only and fre
gift of God, from whense soever it come to us, yea when it shall most of all
seem to be begotten by our own policy and trauail, and earned with our own
hands: forasmuch as it comes to pass by his only blessing, that our labors
prosper well.

Now follows, Forgive us our dettes: in which petition and the Ier.
xxxi.xxxiii. and. xxxiii.viii.
as in these two parts above stands the spiritual covenant which GOD has
made for the salvation of his Church, I will write my laws in their hearts,
and I will be merciful to their iniquity. Here Christ begins the
forgiveness in sins: after this, he will by and by adioyne the second
grace, that God defend us with the power of his, Spirit, and sustain us with
his help, that we may stand vnouercome against all tentations. And sins
he calls dettes, because we are dett bound to pay the penalty of them, and
were by no means able to satisfy it, unless we were acquitted by this
forgiveness. Which pardon is of his free mercy, when he himself liberally
wypeth out these dettes, taking no payment of us, but with his own mercy
satisfieng himself in Christ, Romans iii.xxix.
which has ones given himself for recompense. Therefore whosoever trust that God
shall be satisfied by their own or other men's merits, and that with such
satisfactio^s the forgiveness of sins is recompensed and redeemed, they have
no part of communicating of this free forgiveness: and when they call upon
GOD in this manner, they do nothing but subscribe to their own accusation,
yea and seal their own condemnation with their own witness. For they
confess themselves detters, unless they be acquitted by the benefit of
forgiveness, which yet they do not receive, but rather refuse, when they
thrust unto God their own merits and satisfactions. For, so they do not
beseech his mercy, but do appeal to his judgment. As for them that dream of
a perfection in themselves, which takes away need to crave pardon, let them
have such disciples whom the itching of their ears drives to errors: so
that it be certain that so many disciples as they get, are taken away from
Christ: forasmuch as he instructing all to confess their giltinesse,
receives none but sinners: not for that he cherishes sins with
flatteringes, but because he knew that the faithful are never thoroughly
unclothed of the vices of their flesh, but that they always remain subject to
the judgment of God. It is in deed to be wished, yea and to be earnestly
endeavored, that we having performed all the parts of our duty may truly
rejoice before God that we are clean from all spott: but forasmuch as it
pleases God by little and little to make again his image in us, that there
always remains some infection in our flesh, the remedy ought not to have
been despised. If Christ by the authority given to him of his Father,
commands us throughout the whole course of our life, to fle to craving of
pardon of our giltinesse who shall be able to suffer these new masters, which
go about with this imagined ghost of perfect innoce^cie to dasel ye eyes of ye
simple, i. Ioh. i.^.
to make them to trust yt they may be made free from all fault^ Which, as Ihon
witnesses, is nothing else but to make God a lier. And withal one work these
lewd men by cancilling one article do fear in sonder and by that mean do
weaken from the very fundation ye whole covenant of God, wherein we have showed
yt our salvation is contained: so as they be not only robbers of God, because
they sever those things so co^ioyned, but also wicked and cruel because they
ouerwhelme poor souls with despeire: and traitors to themselves and other, yt
be like them, because they bring themselves into a slothfulness directly
contrary to ye mercy of God. But whereas some object, that in wishing the coming
of ye kingdom of God, we do also ask the putting away of sin: that is to
childishe, because in the first table of this prayer is set forth unto us most
hye perfection, but in this part is set fourth our weakness. So these two
things do fittly agree together, that in a spring toward the mark we despise
not the remedies which our necessity requires. Finally we pray that we may be
forgeuen as we our selves do forgive our dettors, that is, as we do forgive
and pardon al of whomsoever we have been in any thing offended, either unjustly
handled in deed, or reprochefully used in word. Not that it lies in us to
pardon the giltinesse of the fault and offense, which pertains to God alone:
but this is our forgeuing, of our own willingness to lay away out of our
mind wrath, Esa. xliii.xxix.
hatred, and desire of reuengement, and with voluntary forgetfulness to
tread under foot the remembrance of i^iuries. Wherefore we may not ask
forgiveness of sins at the hand of God, if we do not also forgive their
offenses toward us which either do or have done us wrong. But if we keep any
hatreds in our hearts, and purpose any reuengementes and imagine by what
occasion we may hurt, yea and if we do not endeavor to come into favor again
with our enemies, and to deserve well of them with all kind of friendly
doings, and to win them unto us: we do by this prayer beseech God that he do
not forgive us. For we require that he grant to us the same forgiveness
which we grant to other. But this is to pray that he grant it not to us,
unless we grant it to them. Whosoever therefore be such, what do they obtein by
their prayer but a more grievous judgment? Last of al it is to be noted, that
this condition that he forgive us as we forgive our dettors, is not herefore
added for that we deserve his forgiveness by ye forgiveness which we grant
to other, as if yt cause of forgiveness to us were there expressed: but by
this word partly the Lords will was to comfort the weakness of our Faith,
for he added this as a sign whereby we may be assured that he has as surely
granted to us forgiveness of our sins, as we surely know in our conscience
that we have granted the same to other, if our mind be void and cleansed of
al hatred, envy and reuengement and partly by this as it were by a mark, he
wipeth them out of the number of his children that they may not be bold to
call upon him as their Father, which being hedlong hasty to revenge, and
hardily entreated to pardon, do use stiffly continuing enmites, and do
cherishe in themselves the same displeasure toward other which they pray to be
turned from themselves. Which is also in Luke expressly spoken in the words of
Christ.

continual warrfare and hard and great striuinges obey to God, we do here pray
to be furnished with such wepons and defended with such succor, that we may be
able to get the victory: whereby we are warned that we stand in need not only
of the grace of the Spirit, which may soften, how, and direct our hearts to
the obedience of God, but also of his help, whereby he may make us vnuicible
against both all the traiterous entrappinges and violent conflictes of Satan.
But now of tentations there are many and diverse sorts. For, both the perverse
thoughts of mind provoking us to trespassing against the law, Iam. i.ii. and.
xiiii. Mat. iiii.i and. ii^
which either our own lust does minister unto us, or the deuell stirs up,
are tentations: and also those things which of their own nature are not
evil, yet by the craft of the deuel are made tentations, when they are so set
before our eyes, that by the occasion of them we be drawn away or do swerve
from God. And these tentations are either on the right hand or on the left.
On the right hand, as richesse, power, honors, which commonly do with their
glistering and show of good so dasel the sight of men, ii. Thesa. iii.v.
and catch them with the bayted hoke of their flatterings, that being
entrapped with such deceites, or drunk with such sweetness, they may forget
their God. On the left hand, as poverty, reproaches, despisinges, trobles, and
such other: that they being grieved with the bitterness and hardness thereof
may be utterly discouraged, cast away Faith and hope, and finally be
altogether estranged from God. To these tentations of both sorts, which fight
with us either being kindled in us by our own lust, or being set against us
by the craft of Satan, we pray to our heavenly Father that he suffer us not to
yield. But rather that he uphold us and raise us up with his hand, that being
strong by his strength, we may stand fast against all the assaults of the
malicious enemy, whatsoever thoughts he put into our mind: then, that
whatsoever is set before us on either side, we may turn it to good, that we
neither be puffed up with prosperity, nor thrown down with adversity.
Neither yet do we here require that we may feel no tentations at al, with
which we have great need to be stirred up, pricked, and pinched, least by to
much rest we grow dull. For not in vain did David wish to be tempted: Psa.
xxvi.ii. Ge. xxii.i. Deu. viii.ii. and. xii^.iii
and not without cause the Lord daily tempts his elect, chastising them by
shame, poverty, troble, and other kinds of cross. But God tempts after one
manner and Satan after an other: Satan, to destroy, damn, confound and throw
down hedlong: but God, that by proving them that be his he may have a trial
of their vnfainednesse, and by exercising them may confirm their strength, to
mortify, purge by fire, and sear their flesh, which unless it were in this
wise restrained, would wax wanton and would wildly outrage above measure. i.
Cor. x.xiii.
Moreover Satan assaileth men unarmed and unready, that he may oppress them
unware: God even with tempting works the effect, that they which be his
may patiently bear whatsoever he sends upon them. By the name of the Evil,
whether we understand the Deuell or sin, it makes little matter. ii. Pet.
ii.ix. i Pet. v.viii.
Satan in deed himself is the enemy that lies in wait for our life: but
with sin he is armed to destroy us. This therefore is our request, that we
may not be overcome or overwhelmed with any tentations, but may by the power of
the Lord stand strong against all contrary powers wherewith we are assailed:
which is, not to yield us vanquished to tentations, that being received into
his keeping and charge, and being safe by his protection we may endure
vnouercome over sin, death, the gates of hell, and the whole kingdom of the
devil: which is to be delivered from euel. Where it is also to be diligently
marked, that it is above our strength to match with the devil so great a
warrier, and to bear his force and violence. Otherwise we should but vainly
or as it were in mockage ask that which we had already in our selves. Surely,
they which prepare them to such a battle with trust of themselves, do not
sufficiently understand with how ferce and well armed an enemy they have to do.
Now we pray to be delivered from his power, as out of ye mouth of a mad and
raging Lion, whereas we should be torn in pieces with his teeth and paws, and
swallowed with his throat, unless the Lord do deliver us out of ye midst of
death: Psalm. lx.xiiii.
yet therewithal knowing this that if the Lord shall stand by us, and fight
for us when we are overthrown, we shall in his strength show strength. Let
other trust as they list to their own abilities and strengthes of free will,
which they think that they have of themselves: but let it suffice ve ye we
stand and are strong by the only strength of God. But this prayer co^teineth
more tha^ at the first sight it bears in show. For if ye Spirit of God be
our strength to fight out our co^bate with Satan, we shall not be able to get ye
victory until we being filled with that Spirit shall have put of all the
weakness of our flesh. When therefore we pray to be delivered from Satan and
the Deuel, we pray to be from time to time enriched with new increases of the
grace of God* til being fully stuffed with them we may triu^ph over all euel.
It seems hard and rough to some, yt we crave of God that he lead us not into
tetatio^, forasmuch as it is contrary to his nature to tempt, as James
witnesses. But this question is already partly assoiled, where we said that our
own lust is properly the cause of all the tentations wherewith we are overcome,
James. i.xiii.
and therefore worthily bears the blame thereof. Nether does James mean any
thing else, but that the faults are without cause and wrongfully laid upon
God, which we are driven to impute to our selves, because we know our selves
in our conscience qyltye of them. But this withstandeth not but that God may
when it pleases him make us bond to Satan, cast us away into a reprobate
sense, and to filthy lusts, and so lead us into tentation by his judgment
which is righteous in deed but yet oftentimes secret: forasmuch as the cause
of it is often hid from men, which is yet certainly known with him. Whereupon
is gathered that this is no unfit manner of speaking, if we be persuaded that
he does not without cause so often threaten, yt when the reprobate shall be stricken
with blindness and hardening of heart, these shall be sure tokens of his
vengeance.

adjoined a cause why we have both so great boldness to ask, and so great
trust to obtain: which although it be not in ye latin copies, yet it agrees
more fittly in this place tha^ yt it should seem worthy to be omitted, namely yt
his is ye kingdom, and the power and the glory for ever. This is ye perfect
and quiet rest of our soul. For if our prayers were to be commended to God by
their own worthiness, who should be so bold, as ones to open his mouth before
him? Now howsoever we be most miserable, howsoever most unworthy of al men,
howsoever void of al co^mendacio^ yet we shall never want cause to pray, and
never be destitute of co^fide^ce: forasmuch as our father ca^ not have his
kingdom, power, and glory taken away from him. At ye end is added Amen* whereby
is expressed our ferue^tnesse of desire to obtain those things yt we have
asked of God, and our hope is confirmed yt al such things are already obtained
and shall surely be given us because they are promised of God, which ca^ not
deceive. And this agrees with that manner of prayer which we have here before
rehearsed. Do it Lord for thy names sake, not for our sakes or our
righteousness: whereby the holy ones do not only express ye end of their
prayers, but also confess yt they are unworthy to obtain unless God fetch ye
cause from himself* and that their trust to speed comes of the only nature
of God.

Thus have we whatsoever we ought yea or in any wise may ask Mat. xvii.v.
set fourth in this form and as it were a rule of prayeng taught by the best
scholemaister Christ, whom the Lord has set over us to be our teacher, Esa.
xi.ii.
and whom alone he has willed to be harkened unto. For he both always has been
his eternal wisdom, and being made man is given to men the Angel of great
counsel. And this prayer is in all points so fully perfect, that whatsoever
foreyn or strange thing is added which can not be referred to it, it is ungodly
and unworthy to be allowed of God. For in this sum he has set forth, what
is mete for him, See Augustine. Of prayer to Proba.
what is pleasyng to him, what is necessary for us, finally what he will
grant. Wherefore who so dare go further, and to ask any thing of God beside
these, first they will add of their own to the wisdom of God (which can not
be done without mad blasphemy) then they hold not themselves under the will of
God, but despising it do with gredynesse wander further: finally they shall
never obtain any thing, forasmuch as they pray without faith. And there is no
doubt that all such prayers are made without faith, because here wants the
word of God, De fuga in perse^ cut.
upon which unless faith be grounded, it can in no wise stand. But they which
forsaking the masters rule, do follow their own desires, are not only
without the word of God, but also so much as they be able with their whole
endeavor, are against it. Therefore Tertullian no less fitly tha^ truly has
called this a lawful prayer, secretly signifyeng that all other are lawless
and unlawful.

We would not have these things so taken as though we were so thing at all
than that which is summarily comprehended in this prayer, and which though it
most differ in words yet differs not in sense. Like as it is certain that
all the prayers which are found in the Scriptures, and which do come out of
godly hearts, are applied to this, so verily none can any where be found,
which may match, much less pass, the perfectness of this prayer. Here is
nothing left out, that might be thought upon to the praises of God, nothing
that ought to come into the mind of man for his own profits: and the same so
fully that all hope is worthily taken away from all men to attempt to make any
better. In a sum, let us remember that this is the doctrine of the wisdom
of God, which has taught what he willed, and willed what was needful.



their sodeyne heat, do so call upon God, that if he come not to them at their
first bruntes and bring them present help, they by and by imagine him to be
angry and hatefully bent against them, and castyng away all hope of obteynyng
do cesse to call upon him. But rather differ^yng our hope with a well tempered
evenness of mind, let us go forward in that perseverance which is so much
commended to us in Scriptures. For in the Psalms we may oftentimes see how
David and other faithful men, when they seem in a manner weried with prayeng,
did beat the air, because they threw away their words to God that heard them
not, and yet they cesse not from prayeng: because the word of God has not his
full authority manteined, unless the credit thereof be set above all
successes of things. Moreover let us not tempte God and provoke him against us
being weried with our importunacie, which many use to do, which do nothing
but indent with God upon a certain condition, and bind him to the laws of
their couenantyng as though he were servant to their desires: which if he do
not presently obey, they disdain, they chafe, they carpe against him, they
murmr, they turmoile. Therefore to such oftentimes in his furor he being angry
grau^teth that, which to other in his mercy he being favorable denies. An
example hereof are the children of Israel, Number. xi.xviii.
for whom it had been better not to have been heard of the Lord, than with flesh
to eat up his wrath.

But if yet at length after long lokyng for it our sense do not perceive i.
John v.iv.
This is meant by the words of John, If we know yt he hears us when we ask
any thing of him, we know that we have the petitions which we ask of him. This
is meant by the words of John. If we know, that he hears us, when we ask any
thing of him. This seems a weak superfluousnesse of words: but it is a
singularly profitable declaration, namely that God even when he does not
follow our desires, is yet gentle and favorable to our prayers, that the hope
which rests upon his word may never disappoynt us. But with this patience
the faithful do so far need to be sustained, that they should not long
stand unless they did stay upon it. For the Lord does by not light trailles
prove them that be his, and not tenderly does exercise them: but oftentimes
drives them into the greatest extremities, and when they are driven thither he
suffers them long to stick fast in the mire, ere he give them any taste of
his sweetness: and, i. Sam. ii vi.
as Hanna says, he slays, and quickneth: he leads down to the helles, and
brings back again. What could they here dou but be discouraged, and fall
hedlong into despair: unless when they are in distress and desolate and
already half dead, this thought did raise them up, that God does look upon
them, and that there shall be at hand an end of their euels? But howsoever
they stand fast upon the assuredness of that hope, they cease not in the
mean time to pray: because if there be not in prayer a steadfastness of
continuance, we nothing prevail with prayeng.

The. xxi. Chapter. Of the eternal Election, whereby God has predestinate
some to salvation, and other some to destruction.
BUt now whereas the covenant of life is not egally preached to al men, and
with them to whom it is preched it does not either egally or continually find
like place: in this diversity the wondrous deapth of the judgment of God
appears. For neither is it any dout but that this diversity also serves the
free choice of Gods eternal election. If it be evident that it is wrought by
the will of God that salvation is freely offered to some, and other some are
debarred from coming to it: here by and by arise great and hard questions
which can not otherwise be discussed, tha^ if the godly minds have that
certainly stablished which they ought to hold concerning election and
Predestination. This is (as many think) a combersome question: because they
think nothing to be less reasonable than of the common multitude of men some
to be fore ordained to salvation, other some to destruction. But how they
wrongfully encombre themselves, shall afterward be evident by the framyng of
the matter together. Beside that in the very same darkness which makes men
afraid, not only the profytablenesse of this doctrine but also the most
sweet fruit shows forth it self. We shall never be clearly persuaded as we
ought to be, that our salvation flows out of the fountain of the free mercy
of God, till his eternal election be known to us, which by this comparison
bryghtly sets forth the grace of God, that he does not without difference
adopt all into the hope of salvation, but gives to some that which he denies
to other. Now much the ignorance of this principle diminishes of the glory
of God, how much it withdraws from true humility, it is plain to see. But
Paul denies that that which is so necessary to be known, is possible to be
known, unless God leauyng altogether the respect of works do chose them
whom he has determined with himself. In this time (says he) the remnantes
were saved according to free election. If by Grace, then not of works:
forasmuch as Grace should then not be grace. Romans xi.v.
If of works, then not of Grace: forasmuch as work should now not be
work. If we must be brought back to the beginning of election, that it may
be certain that salvation comes to us from no otherwhere than from the mere
liberality of God: they which will have this principle quenched, do niggardly
so much as in them lies darken yt which ought gloriously and with full mouth
to have been publyshed, and they pluck up the very root of humility. Paul,
where the salvation of the remnant of the people is ascribed to free election,
clearly testifies that only then it is known that God does by his mere good
pleasure save whom he will, and not render reward which can not be done. They
which shutt the gates, that none may be bold to come to the tasting of this
doctrine, do no less wrong to me^ than to God: because neither shall any other
thing suffice to humble us as we ought to be, neither shall we otherwise feel
from our heart how much we are bound to God. Neither yet is there any
otherwhere the vpholdyng stay of sound affiance, as Christ himself teaches,
which to deliver us from all fear, and to make us unvanquishable among so many
dangers, ambushes, and deadly battles, promises that whatsoever he has
received of his Father to keep, John. ^.xxv.
shall be safe. Whereof we gather that they shall with continual tremblyng be
miserable, whosoever they be that know not themselves to be the propre
possession of God: and therefore that they do very ill provide both for
themselves and for all the faithful, which in being blind at these three
profits which we have touched, would wish the whole fundation of our
salvation to be quite taken from among us. Moreover hereby the Chirch appears
unto us, Sermon. in cant. 76.
which otherwise (as Bernard rightly teaches) were not possible to be found,
nor to be known among creatures: because both ways in marvelous wise it
lies hidden within the bosom of blessed Predestination, and within the Mass
of miserable damnation. But ere I enter into the matter it self, I must before
hand in two sorts speak to two sorts of men. That the entrentyng of
predestination, whereas of it self it is somewhat combersome, is made very
doutfull yea and dangerous, the curiousness of men is the cause: which ran by
no stoppes be restrained from wandering into forbidden compasses, and climbyng
up an hye: which, if it may, will leave to God no secret which it will not
search and turn over. Into this boldness and importunacie forasmuch as we
commonly se many to run headlong, and among those that are otherwise not
evil men: here is fit occasion to warn them what is in this behalf the due
measure of their duty. First therefore let them remember, that when they
enquire upon Predestination, they pearce into the secret closets of the
wisdom of God: wherinto if any man do carelessly and boldly break in, he
shall both not atteyne wherewith to satisfy his curiousness, and he shall
enter into a mase whereof he shall find no way to get out again. For neither is
it mete that man should freely search those things which God has willed to
be hidden in himself, and to turn over from very eternity the height of
wisdom, which he willed to be honored and not to be conceived, that by it
also he might be marvelous unto us. Those secrets of his will which he has
determined to be opened unto us, he has disclosed in his word: and he has
determined, so far as he forsawe to pertayne to us and to be profitable for
us.

We are come (says Augustine) into the way of Faith, let us steadfastly
Homili^ Ioh. ^5. I^h. viii.xxvi.
It brings into the Kings chamber, in which all the treasures of knowledge
and wisdom are hidden. For, the Lord himself Christ did not envy his
excellent and most chosen disciples, when he said, I have many things to be
said to you, but ye can not bear them now. We must walk, we must profit, we
must encreasce, that our hearts may be able to conceive those things which now
we can not conceive. If the last day find us profityng, there we shall learn
that which here we could not. If this thought be of force with us, that the
word of the Lord is the only way, that may lead us to search whatsoever is
lawful to be learned of him: that it is the only light, which may give us
light to see whatsoever we ought to see of him: it shall easily hold back and
restrain us from all rashenesse. For we shall know that so soon as we be
gone out of the bounds of the word, we run out of the way, and in
darkness, in which race we must needs oftentimes stray, slip, and stumble.
First therefore let this be before our eyes, that to covet any other knowledge of
Predestination than that which is set forth by the word of God, is a point
of no less madness than if a man have a will to go by an impassable way, or
to se in darkness. Neither let us be ashamed, to be ignorant of somewhat in
it wherein there is some learned ignorance. But rather let us willyngly
abstain from the serchyng of that Knowledge, whereof the excessyue couetyng is
both foolish and p^rillous, yea and deadly. But if the wantonness of wit
provoke us, it shall be profitable always to set this against it, whereby it may
be beaten back, that as to much of honey is not good, so the serchyng of
glory does not turn unto glory to the curious. Pro. xxv.xxvii.
For there is good cause why we should be frayed away from that boldness,
which can do nothing but throw us down headlong into ruin.

Pro. xxv.ii.
but also when he makes an end of teaching, we cease to will to learn.
Neither is the danger which they fear of so great importance, that we ought
therefore to turn away our minds from the oracles of God. Notable is the
saying of Solomon, that the glory of God is to concele a word. But sith both
godliness and common reason teaches that this is not generally meant of every
thing, we must seek a difference, least brutishe ignorance should please us
under color of modesty and sobriety. Deu. xxix*xxix.
That difference is in few words plainly set out by Moses: To the Lord our
God (says he) belong his secrets: b^t to us and to our children he has
disclosed these things. For we see how he commends to the people the study
of the doctrine of the law, only by reason of the decree of God, because it
pleased God to publish it* and how he withholdeth the people within those
bounds, by this only reason because it is not lawful for mortal men to
thrust themselves into the secrets of God.

Profane men (I grant) do in the matter of Predestination suddenly Cap. ^^.
v^que ad 10.
as Augustine strongly maynteineth in his work of the good of Perseverance.
For we see that the false Apostles could not by defamyng and sclanderyng the
true Doctrine of Paul, make him to be ashamed of it. But whereas they say
that this whole disputation is perilous also for godly minds, De bono
persevere. cap. 14.
because it makes against exhortatio^s, because it shakes faith because it
troubles the heart it self: this is vain Augustine sticks not to confess
that for these causes he was wont to be blamed, for that he did to freely
preach Predestination: but, as he had in readiness wherwithall, he largely
confuteth them. But we, because many and diverse absurdities are thrust into
this place, had rather to reserve every one to be wyped away in place fit for
it. Only this I desire generally to obtain of them, that those things which
the Lord has laid up in secret, we may not search: those things which he
has brought openly abroad, me may not neglect: least either on the one part
we be condemned of vain curiosity, or on the other part, of unthankfulness.
For, Lib. ^ de Genesis ad. lite^.
this also is very well said of Augustine, that we may safely follow the
Scripture, which as with a motherly pace goes stoupyngly, least it should
forsake our weakness. But who so are so ware and so fearful that they would
have Predestination to be buried, least it should trouble weak souls: with
what color, I beseech you, will they cover their arrogance, when they
indirectlye accuse God of foolish unadvisedness, as though he foresaw not the
danger, which they think themselves to have wisely met with? Who soever
therefore trauaileth to bring the doctrine of Predestination into mislikyng, he
openly says evil of God: as though somewhat had unadvisedly slipped from him
which is hurtful to the Church.

Deuter. xxxii.viii.
his part was the people of Israel, the cord of his inheritance. The
separation is before the eyes of all men: in the person of Abraham as in a
dry stock one people is peculiarly chosen, all other being refused: but the
cause appears not, saving that Moses, to cut of all occasion of gloryeng
from posterity, teaches that they excel only by the free love of God. For
he assigns this to be the cause of their deliverance, Deu. iiii.xxxvii.
for that God loved the Fathers, and chose their seed after them. More
plainly in an other chapter: He was pleased in you to choose you, not because
you passed other nations in number, Deu. vii.viii.
but because he loved you. The same admonition is often repeted with him,
Behold, to the Lord thy God belongs the heaven, Deu. x.xiiii.
the earth, and whatsoever things are in it: and he has pleased himself only
in your Fathers, and has loved them, and has chosen you their sede. Again in
an other place sanctification is commanded them, Deu xxiii v.
because they are chosen to be a peculiar people. And again in an other place,
Love is affirmed to be ye cause of protection. Which also the faithful do
declare with one voice, saying: He has chosen for us our inheritance, Psa.
xlvii v.
the glory of Jacob, whom he has loved. For they do all impute to free love
all the gifts wherewith they were garnished of God: not only because they
knew that they themselves had obtained them by no deservings, but also that
even the holy Patriarch was not endued with such virtue, that he could
purchase to himself and his posterity so great a prerogative of honor. And,
the more stronglye to tread down all pride, he vpbrayded them that they have
deserved no And, the more strongly to tread down all pride, he vpbrayded them
yt they have deserved no such thing, forasmuch as they are a stubborn and hard
necked people. Deu. ix.v^
And oftentimes the Prophets do hatefully and as by way of reproach cast the
Jews in the teethe with this election, because they had fowly departed from
it. Whatsoever it be, now let them come fourth which will bind the election
of God either to ye worthiness of men, or to the merits of works. When they
see one nation to be preferred before al other, and when they hear that God
was led with no respect to be more favorably bent to a few and unnoble, yea
and ^rowarde and disobedient men: will they quarrel with him, because his will
was to show such an example of mercy? But they shall neither with their
prattling voices hinder his work, nor with throwing stones of tauntes into
heaven shall hitt or hurt his righteounesse, but rather they shall fall back
upon their own heds. Moreover the Israelites are called back to this
principle of the free covenant, when either thanks are to be given to God, or
their hope to be raised up against the time to come. He made us, and not we our
selves (says the Prophet) his people and the sheep of his pastures. The
negative is not superfluous, which is added to exclude us, that they may know
that of all the good things wherewith they excel, God is not only the author,
but fetched the cause thereof from himself, because there was nothing in them
worthy of so great honor. Also he bids them to be contented with the mere
good pleasure of God, in these words, Ps. cv.vi
The sede of Abraham are his servants: the children of Jacob, his elect. And
after that he has rehearsed the continual benefits of God as fruits of the
election, at length he concludes, that he dealt so liberally because he
remembered his covenant. With which doctrine agrees the song of the whole
Church, Ps. xliiii.iiii.
Thy right hand and the light of thy countenance gave the land to our
Fathers, because thou wast pleased in them. But it is to be noted, that where
mention is made of the land, it is a visible sign of the secret seuering
wherein the adoption is contained. To the same thankfulness David in an other
place exhorts the people, Ps. xxxiii xii.
saying. Blessed is the nation whoes God the Lord is, the people which he
has chosen for an inheritance to himself. And Samuel encourages them to
good hope, saying, The Lord will not forsake you, i. Samu. xx.xxii.
for his own great names sake, because it pleased him to create you for a
people to himself. Likewise David when his faith is assailed, armeth himself
to fight, saying, Blessed is he whom thou haste chosen, Ps. lxv.v.
he shall dwell in thy courts. But forasmuch as the election hidden in GOD was
stablished as well by the first deliverance as by the second, Esa. xiiii i.
and other mean benefits: in Esaie the word of Electing is transferred to
this. God shall have mercy on Jacob, and he shall yet choose out of Israel:
because he signifieng the time to come, says that the gathering together of
the remnante of the people which he seemed to have forsaken, shall be a sign of
the stable and steadfast election, which ones seemed to have been fallen away.
When also it is said in an other place, I have chosen thee and have not cast
thee away: Esa. xii.ix.
he sets out the continual course of the notable liberality of his
fatherly good will. And yet more plainly the Angel says in zachary, zach.
ii. xii
GOD shall yet choose Jerusalem: as though in hardly chasting it, he had
rejected it: or a^ though the exile were an interrupting of the election: which
yet remains inviolable, although the signs thereof do not always appear.

There is to be added a second degree more narowly restrained, or in which was
seen a more special grace of God: when of the same kindred of Abraham God
refused some, and other some by nourishing them in the Church he showed that
he retained among his children. Ismael had at the beginning obtained egall
degree with his brother Isaac, because the spiritual couenante had been no
less sealed in him by the sign of Circumcision. He is cut of: and then,
Esaias: at the last an innumerable multitude and almost Israel. In Isaac was the
sede called: the same calling endured in Jacob. A like example God showed in
rejecting Saul: which thing is also gloriously set fourth in ye Psalm, He
has putt back the tribe of Joseph, Psalm. lxxviii.lxix.
and the tribe of Ephraim he has not chosen, but he has chosen the tribe of
Judah. Which the holy history diverse times repeteth, that the wonderful
secret of the grace may the better appear in this change. Ismaell, Esau, and
such other, (I grant) fell from the adoption by their own fault and
gyltynesse: because there was a condition adjoined, that they should faithfully
keep the covenant of God, which they falsely brake. But this was yet a singular
benefit of God, that he vouchesaued to prefer them above the other Gentiles:
Psa. xlvii xx.
as it is said in the Psalm, He has not so done to other nations, nor has
opened his iugementes to them. But here I have not without cause said that
there be two degrees to be noted: because now in the choosing of the whole
nation GOD showed that he is in his own mere liberality bound to no laws:
but he is free, so that egall portion of grace is not to be required at his
hand: the inequality whereof shows that it is truly of free gift.
Therefore Malachie amplifieth the unthankfulness of Israel, because they
being not only chosen out of all mankind, but also severed out of a holy
house to be a peculiar people, do unfaithfully and wickedly despise GOD so
beneficial a Father. Mal. i.ii.
Was not Esau the brother of Jacob? (says he) and yet Jacob I loved, but Esau
I hated. For, GOD takes it for confessed, that when either of them was borne
of a holy Father, and successor of the covenant, finally a branch of the holy
root: now the children of Jacob were more than commonly bond, which were
taken into that dignity. But when, Esau the first begotten being refused,
their Father which was by nature inferior was made ye heir, he proves them
doblely unthankful, and complayneth that they were not holden with that doble
bond.

Although it be allredy sufficiently euidente, that GOD does by his secret
counsel freely chose whom he will, rejecting other, yet his free election is
hitherto but half showed, till we come to all particular persons, to whom
GOD not only offers salvation, but so assigns it, that the certainty of
the effect thereof is not in suspense or doutefull. For, these are accounted in
that only sede, whereof Paul makes mention. For although the adoption was
left in the hand of Abraham, yet because many of his posterity were cut of
as rotten members: that the election may be effectual and truly steadfast, we
must needs ascend to the head, in who^ the heavenly Father has bound together
his elect one with one other, and has knit them to himself with a knott
impossible to be loosed. So in the adoption of y^ kindred of Abraham, shined the
liberal favor of God, which he denied to other men: yet in the members of
Christ, appears a much more excellent strength of grace, because they
being graffed into their head do never fall away from salvation. Therefore
Paul does fittly reason out of the place of Malachie which I even now
alleged: that where God with making a covenant of eternal life calls any
people to himself, there is in part a special manner of election, that he
does not choose all effectually with common grace. Whereas it is said, I have
loved Jacob, this pertains to the whole issue of the Patriarch, which the
Prophet there sets in comparion against the posterity of Esau. Yet this
withstandeth not but that in the person of one man was sete fourth to us an
example of the election which can not slip away but must come to the mark
that it tends to. These Paul does not vainly note to be called remnantes:
because experience teaches that of a great multitude many slide and vanishe
away, so that oftentimes there remains but a small portion. But why the
general election of a people is not always fyrme and steadfast, there is a
reason offering it self in readiness: because with whom GOD couenanteth, he
does not by and by give to them the Spirit of regeneration, by the power
whereof they may continue in the couenante to the end: but the outward
changing without the inward effectualnesse of grace, which might be of force
to hold them in, is a certain mean thing between the forsaking of whole
mankind, and the election of a small number of the godly. The whole people of
Israel was called the inheritance of GOD, of whom yet there were many
strangers. But because GOD had not for nothing made covenant with them that he
would be their Father and redemer, he rather has respect to his own free
favor than to the unfaithful falling away of many: by whom also his truth was
not abolished: because where he reserved any remnante, it appeared that his
calling was without repentance. For whereas GOD did from time to time choose
unto himself a Church rather out of the children of Abraham, than out of the
profane nations, he had regard to his couenante, which being broken of the
whole multitude he restrained to a few, that it should not utterly fall
away. Finally the common adoption of the sede of Abraham was a certain
visible image of a greater benefit, which God has vouchesaued to grant to
few out of many. This is the reason why Paul so diligently puts difference
between the children of Abraham according to the flesh, and his spiritual
children which were called after the example of Isaac. Not that it was a vain
and unfruitful thing simply to be the child of Abraham (which might not be
said without dishonor of the couenante) but because the unchangeable counsel
of GOD, whereby he has predestinate whom he would, is by it self effectual
only to this later sort unto salvation. But I warn the reders y^ they bring
not a foreconceiued judgment on either side, til it appear by the places of
Scripture brought fourth what is to be thought. That therefore which the
Scripture clearly shows, we say that God by eternal and unchangeable
counsel has ones appointed whom in time to come he would take to salvation,
and on the other side who^ he would condemn to destruction. This counsel as
touching the elect, we say to be grounded upon his free mercy without any
respect of the worthiness of man: but whom he appoints to damnation, to them
by his judgment which is in deed just and irreprehensible but also
inco^prehensible, y^ entry of life is forclosed. Now in the elect we set
vocation, to be the testimony of Election: and then justification to be an
other sign of the manifest showing of it, til they come to glory wherein is
the fulfilling of it. But as by vocation and election God makes his elect: so
by shutting out y^ reprobate either from the knowledge of his name or from the
sanctification of his Spirit, he does as it were by these marks open what
judgment abides for them. I will here pass over many feigned inventions, which
foolish me^ have forged to overthrow predestination. For they need no
confutation, which so sone as they are brought fourth do largely bewraye their
own falsnesse. I will tarry only upon those, which either are in controversy
among the learned, or which may bring any hardiness to the simple, or which
ungodliness with fair seming show pretends, to scoff at the
righteousness of God.

The.xxii. Chapter. A confirmation of this doctrine by testimonies of the
Scripture.
AL these things which we have set are not without controversy among many,
specially the free election of the faithful: which yet can not be weakened.
For the common sort do think that God, as he foreseeth that every man's
deseruinges shall be, so makes difference between men: that therefore who^ he
foreknoweth that they shall be not unworthy of his grace, them he adopteth into
place of children: and whoes natures he espyeth that they will be bent to
wickedness and ungodliness, them he appoints to the damnation of death. So
by cloking it with the veil of foreknowlege they do not only darken election,
but feign that it has beginning from else where. And this opinion received of
the common sort is not the opinion of the common sort alone: for in all ages it
has had great mainteiners. Which I do plainly confess, to the intent that
no man should trust that it shall much hurt our cause if their names be
objected against us. For, the truth of God herein is more certain, than that
it may be shaken: more clear, than that it may be darkened with y^ authority
of men. But some other neither exercised in the Scripture, nor worthy of any
voice, do rail at this doctrine with greater maliciousness, than that their
froward pride ought to be suffered. Because God choosing some after his own
will, leaves other some, they pick a quarrel against him. But if the thing it
self be known for true, what shall they prevail with brawling against God? We
teach nothing but that which is approved by experience, that it was always at
liberty for God to bestow his grace to whom he will. I will not enquire
whereby the posterity of Abraham excelled other, but by that vouchesauing,
whereof there is found no cause ellswhere than in God. Let them answer why
they be men rather than oxen or asses. When it was in the hand of God to make
them dogs, he fashioned them after his own image. Will they give leave to
brute beasts to quarrel with God for their estate, as though the difference
were unrighteous? Truly it is no more righteous, that they should enjoy the
prerogative which they have obtained by no deseruinges, tha^ for God diversely
to deal abroad his benefits according to the measure of his own judgment. If
they skippe over to persons, where the inequality is more hateful to them, at
the least at the example of Christ they ought to be afraid to prate so
boldly of so hye a mystery. He is conceived of the sede of David, a mortal
man: by what virtues will they say that he deserved to be in the very womb
made the head of Angels, the only begotten son of GOD, the image and glory
of the Father, the light, righteousness, and salvation of the world? De
corrept. and. great. ad. valent. cap. 15. De bono perseue. cap. vt. De. ver.
apost. sermo. viii. Ephe. i.iiii.
This thing Augustine wisely noted, that in the very head of the Church is a
most clear mirror of free election, lest it should troble us in the members:
and that he was not by ryghteously living made the son of God, but that he
had so great honor freely given him, that he might afterward make other
partakers of his gifts. Here if any man ask why other were not the same that
he was, or why all we are so far distante from him, why all we be corrupt and
he pureness: such a man shall bewraye not only his madness but therewithal
also his shamelessnesse. But if they go forward to labor to take from GOD the
free power to choose and refuse, let them also take away that which is given
to Christ. Now it is worth the travail to consider what the Scripture
pronounces of every one. Paul verily, when he teaches that we were chosen in
Christ, takes away all respect of our own worthiness. For it is al one as
if he had said: because in the whole sede of Adam ye heavenly father found
nothing worthy of his election, he turned his eyes unto his Christ, to thoose
as it were members out of his body them whom he would take into the fellowship
of life. Let this reason then be of force among the faithful, that we were
therefore adopted in Christ into the heavenly inheritance, because in our
selves we were not able to receive so great excellence. Which also he
touches in an other place, when he exhorts the Colossians to giving of
thanks, Col. l.xii
for this that they were by God made fytt to be partakers of the estate of the
holy. If election go before this grace of God, that we be made fit to obtain
the glory of the life to come: what shall God himself now find in us,
whereby he may be moved to elect us? Ephe i.iiii.
My meaning shall yet be more openly expressed by an other saying of his. He
has chosen us (says he) ere the fundacio^s of the world were laid,
according to the good pleasure of his will, that we might be holy, and
unspotted, and unreprovable in his sight: where he sets the good pleasure of
God against al our deseruinges whatsoever they be.

That the proof may be more strong, it is worth the labor to note al ye

ii. Timo. i.ix.
He has called us (says he) with a holy calling, not according to our works,
but according to his purpose and the grace which is given us of Christ before
the times of the world. And we have already showed that al dout is taken away in
this which follows, that we might be holy and unspotted. For if thou say,
because he foresawe that we should be holy, therefore he chose us, thou shall
pervert the order of Paul. Thus therefore thou may safely gather. If he
chose us that we might be holy: then he chose us, not because he foresawe that
we would be such. For these two things are contrary the one to the other:
that the godly have it of election that they be holy, and that they come to it
by mean of works. Neither is their cauillation here any thing worth to which
they commonly flee, that the Lord does not render the grace of election to any
works going before, but yet grants it to works to come. For when it is
said that the faithful were chosen, that they might be holy: therewithal is
signified that the holiness which was to come in them took beginning at
election. And how shall this saying agree together, that those things which
are derived from election gave cause to election? The same thing which he said
he seems afterward to confirm more strongly, where he says, According to
the purpose of his will which he had purposed in himself. Ephesians. i.v.
For, to say that God purposed in himself, is as much in effect as if it had been said, that without himself he considered nothing whereof he had any regard
in decreing. Therefore he by and by adds, that ye whole sum of our election
tends to this end, that we should be to the praise of the grace of God.
Truly the grace of God deserves not to be praised alone in our election,
unless our election be free. But free it shall not be, if God in electing his,
do consider what shall be the works of every one. Therefore we find that ye
which Christ said to his disciples, has place universally among all the
faithful, Ye have not chosen me, John xv.xvi.
but I have chosen you. Where he not only excludes deseruinges past, but also
signifies that they had nothing in themselves why they should be chosen, if he
had not prevented them then with his mercy. Like as this saying of Paul is also
to be understood: Who first gave to him, Romans xi.xxxv.
and shall receive recompense? For he means to show that the goodness of God
so preuenteth men, that it fyndeth nothing in them neither past nor to come,
whereby he may be won to be favorable to them.

Now to ye Romans, where he fetches this question further of, and To. ix.vi.
he denies yt al they are Israelites, which are issued of Israel: because
although by right of inheritance they were all blessed, yet the succession did
not egally pass to them al. The beginning of this disputation proceeded of the
pride and deceitful glorieng of the Iewishe people. For when they claimed to
themselves the name of the Chirch, they would have the credit of the Gospel to
hang upon their will: as the Papists at this day would gladly with this fained
color thrust themselves into ye place of God. Paul, although he grant that the
ofspryng of Abraham is holy by reason of the covenant, yet affirms yt the
most part of them are strangers in it: and that not only because they ^warue
out of kind, so that of lawful children they become bastardes, but because the
special election of God stands above and reigns in the highest top, which
alone makes ye adoption thereof sure. If their own godliness stablished some
in the hope of salvation, and their own falling away alone disherited other
some: Paul verily should both fondly and vnconueniently lift up the reders even
to the secret election. Now if the will of of God (the cause whereof neither
appears nor is to be sought without himself) makes the one sort differing
from the other, so that not all the children of Israel be true Israelites, it is
vainly feigned that every man's estate has beginning in himself. Then he
further follows the matter under the example of Jacob and E^au. For when they
both were the sons of Abraham, both together enclosed in one mothers womb,
it was a monsterlyke change that the honor of first birth was removed to
Jacob, by which change Paul affirms that there was testified the election of
the one and the reprobation of the other. The original and cause of it is
enquired, which the Teachers of foreknowlege will have to be set out in the
virtues, and vices of men. For this is an easy short way with them, that God
showed in the person of Jacob, that he chooses the worthy of his grace: and
in the person of Esau, he refuses them whom he foreseeth to be unworthy. Thus
they say boldly. But what says Paul? when they were not yet borne, and had
not done any good or evil, that according to election the purpose of GOD
might abide: To. ix.x^
not of works, but of him that calls it is said, The elder shall serve the
younger: as it is written, Jacob I have loved, but Esau I have hated. If
foreknowlege were of any force in this difference of the brethren, then verily
mention were vnfittly made of the time. Let us grant yt Jacob was chosen,
because he had worthiness gotten by works to come: to what purpose should
Paul say that he was not yet borne? And this now should be unadvisedly added,
that he had yet done no good: because this shall be a ready answer, that nothing
is hidden from God, and that so the godliness of Jacob was present before
him. If works do win grace, they should then worthily have had their price
before that Jacob was borne as if he had been grown to full age. But the
Apostle goes forward in undoing this knot, and teaches yt the adoption of
Jacob was not made of works, but of the calling of God. In works he
enterlaceth not the time to come or time past: and then he directly sets
them against ye calling of God, meaning by stablishi^g of the one expressly to
overthrow the other: as if he had said that it is to be considered what has
pleased God, not what men have brought of themselves. Last of al it is certain
that by the words of Election and Purpose, al causes whatsoever men are wont
to feign ellswhere than in the secret counsel of God, are quite removed from
this matter.



unto the world to come, it should be a vain and fond form of blessyng
whereby he obtained nothing but manyfolde miseries, discommoties, grefefull
banishement, and many bitterness of sorrow and cares. Therefore when Paul saw
without douting, that God by outward blessyng testified the blessing which he
had in his kingdom prepared spiritual and never decayeng for his servant: he
douted not for proof of this spiritual blessyng, to fetch an argument from
that outward blessyng. This also we must remember that to the land of Canaan
was adjoined the pledge of the heavenly dwelling: so that it ought not at al to
be douted yt Jacob was graffed with the Angels into the body of Christ that he
might be partaker of the same life. Jacob therefore is chosen, when Esau is
rejected: Romans ix.xv.
and by the Predestination of God is made different from him from whom he
differed not in any deseruyngs. If you ask a cause, the Apostle renders this,
because it is said to Moses, I will have mercy upon whom I will have mercy:
and I will vouchsaue to grant mercy to whom soever I will vouchsaue to grant
mercy. And what, I beseech you, means this? Uerily, the Lord himself most
plainly pronou^ceth that men have in themselves no cause why he should do good
to them, but he fetches the cause from his own mercy only: and therefore
that the salvation of his is his own work. When God sets thy salvation in
himself alone, why will thou descend to thy self? When he appoints to thee
his mercy alone, why will thou run to thine own deseruinges? When he
holds thy thought wholly in his merciefulnesse alone, why will thou turn
part to ye beholding of thine own works? Therefore we must needs come to that
lesser people, which Paul in an other place says to have been foreknowen to
God: Romans xi.ii.
not in such sort as these men imagine, to foreknow out of an idle watchtoure
the things that he works not: Act. ii.xxiii.
but in such sense as it is often red. For truly when Peter says in Luke, ye
Christ was by the determined counsel and foreknowlege of God appointed to
death, he does not bring God as a loker on but the author of our salvation. i.
Pet. i.ii
So the same Peter also, where he says that the faithful to whom he wrote
were chosen according to the foreknowlege of God, proprely expresses that
secret Predestination whereby God has marked for his children whom he would.
And the word Purpose, which he joins for a diverse word, expressyng all
one thing, forasmuch as it does every where signify a steadfast determination
as they commonly call it, undoubtedly teaches that God when he is author of
our salvation goes not out of himself. In which sense he says in the same
Chapter, that Christ was the lamb foreknowen before the creation of the
world. For what is more fond or triflyng, than to say that God from on hye
did stand lokyng whense salvation should come to mankind? Therefore in Paul
the foreknowen people is as much as a small portion mingled with the multitude
which falsely pretends the name of God. ii. Tim. i^ xij.
In an other place also Paul to beat down their bostyng which being but
covered with a visor, do take upon themselves the thief preeminence among the
godly before the world, says that God knows who be his. Finally by that
saying Paul poynteth unto us two sorts of people: the one, of the whole
kynrede of Abraham: the other, severally chosen out of it, and which being
laid up under the eyes of God is hidden from the sight of men. And it is no
dout that he took this out of Moses, which affirms that God will be merciful
to whom he will (although he there spoke of the elect people, whoes estate
in outward seemyng was egall) as if he should have said, that in the common
adoption is included with him a special grace toward some, as it were a more
holy treasure: and yt the common covenant withstandeth not but that the same
small number may be exempte in degree: and he wyllyng to make himself the
free disposer and ruler of this thing, precisely denies that he will be
merciefull to one rather than to an other, for any other reason, but for that
it so pleases him: because when mercy comes to him that seeks it, though
he in deed suffer not a denial, yet he either preuenteth or partly gets
to himself the favor whereof God claymeth to himself the praise.

John. vi.xxxvii.
I shall not lose any thing of it. Note that the beginning is taken at the
Fathers gift, that we may be delivered into the faithful keeping and defense
of Christ. Here some man peradventure will turn a circle about, and will
take exception, saying that they only are accounted in the propre possession
of the Father, whoes yeldyng has been voluntary by Faith. But Christ stands
only upon that point, that although the fallynges away of great multitudes
do shake the whole world, yet the counsel of God shallbe steadfast and stand
faster than the heavens themselves, that his election may never fail. They are
said to have been the elect of the Father, before that he gave to them his
only begotten Son. They ask whether it were by nature: yea rather, them
which were strangers he made his own by drawyng them to him. There is a
greatee clearenesse in the words of Christ, than can by shiftyng be covered
with any darkness. John. vi.^l^iii.
No man (says he) can come to me, unless my Father draw him. But who so
has heard and learned of my Father, he comes to me. If all generally
without difference should bow their knee before Christ, then the election were
common: but now in the fewness of the beleuers appears a manifest
diversity. Therefore after that Christ had affirmed that the disciples which
were given him, were the peculiar possession of God the Father, within a little
after he added, Ioh xvii.
I pray not for the world, but for those whom thou have given me, because
they are thine. Whereby is proved that the whole world belongs not to the
Creator of it, saving that grace delyuereth a few from the wrath of God, and
from eternal death, which otherwise should have perished: but the world it
self is left in his own destruction to which it was appointed. In the mean
time although Christ putt himself mean between, yet he claymeth to himself
the power of choosyng in common with the Father. Ioh. xiii.^viii. John. xv.xix.
I speak not (says he) of all: I know whom I have chosen. If any man ask
from whense he has chosen them, he answers in an other place, Out of the
world, which he excludes out of his prayers when he commends his disciples
to his Father. This is to be holden, that when he affirms that he knows
whom he has chosen, there is signified some special sort in the general
kind of men: then, that the same special sort is made to differ not by the
quality of their own virtues, but by the heavenly decree. Whereupon follows
that many excel by their own force or diligence, when Christ makes himself
the author of election. For when in an other place he reckeneth Judas among the
elect, whereas he was a deuell, this is referred only to the office of
Apostleshyp: which although it be a clear myrror of the favor of God (as
Paul so oftentimes acknowlegeth in his own person,) yet it conteyneth not in
it self the hope of eternal salvation. Judas therefore, when he did
unfaithfully bear the office of an Apostle, might be worse than the deuell:
but of those whom Christ has ones graffed into his body, he will suffer none
to perish: because in preseruyng their salvation he will perform that which
he has promised, that is, he will stretche forth the power of God which is
greater than all. For whereas he says in all other place, Father, of those
whom thou haste given me, I have lost none but the son of perdition: John
x.xxviii.
although it be an abusiue speech by figure, yet it has no doutefull meaning.
The sum is, that God makes them his children by free adoption whom he will
have to be his children: and that the inward cause thereof is in himself:
because he is content with his own secret good pleasure.

But Ambrose, Origene, and Hierome thought that God distributeth Retract. lib.
1. cap. 2. Epist. ad Si^. ^^
as he forseeth that every man will use it well: Yea and Augustine was ones in
the same opinion. But when he had better profited in Knowledge of the Scripture,
he not only revoked it as evidently false, but also strongly confuted it: yea
and after his reuokyng of it, in reprouyng the Pelagians for that they
continued in the same error, says: Who can not meruayl that the Apostle knew
not this most subtle sense? For when he had set out a thing to be wondered
at of these brethren, while they were not yet borne, and afterward objected a
question against himself, saying; what then? Is there injustice with God?
Here was fytte place for him to answer, that God foresawe the merits of them
both: yet he says not this, but flees to the judgments and mercy of God.
Homil. in Ioh. ^
And in an other place, when he had taken away all merits before election,
Here (says he) is confuted their vain reasonyng which defend the
foreknowlege of God against the grace of GOD, and therefore say that we are
chosen before the making of the world, because God foreknewe that we would
be good, Job. xv.xvi.
not that he himself would make us good. He says not this, which says,
Ye have not chosen me, but I have chosen you. For if he had therefore chosen
us, because he forknewe that we would be good: he should therwithall also
have forknowen that we we would choose him: and so forth as follows to that
effect. Let the testimony of Augustine be of force among them that wyllyngly
rest in the authority of the Fathers. How be it Augustine suffers not
himself to be severed from the rest: but by clear testimonies shows that
this disagreemente is false with the maylyce whereof the Pelagians burdened
him. De praed. sanct. ca.
For in the.xix. chapter of his book of the Predestination of Saints, he
allegeth out of Ambrose, Christ calls whom he has mercy on. Again, If
he had willed, of the undevout he might have made devoute. But God calls
whom he vouchesaueth: and whom he will he makes religious. If I lysted to
knytte together a whole volume out of Augustine, I could readily show to the
readers that I need no other words but his: but I will not load them with
tediousness. But go to, let us imagine that they speak not at all: but let
us give head to the matter it self. A hard question was moved, whether God
did ryghteously in this that he vouchesaued to grant his grace but to some:
Of which question Paul might have vncombred himself with one word if he
had alleged the respect of works. Why therefore does he it not, but rather
continues on a discourse which abides in the same hardenesse? Why, but
because he ought not? For the Holy ghost which spoke by his mouth, had not
the disease of forgetfullnesse. Therefore without any circumstances he
answers, that God therefore favors his elect, because he will: therefore
has mercy, because he will. For this Oracle of God, I will have mercy upon
whom I will have mercy, Ex. xxxiii xv.
and I will show mercy to whom I will show mercy, is as much in effect as
if it had been said, that God is moved to mercy by no other reason but because
he will have mercy. Therefore this saying of Augustine remains true, that
the grace of God does not find, men fit to be chosen, but makes them.

Thomas, that the foreknowyng of deseruyngs, is not in deed the cause of
predestination on the behalf of the act of him that does predestinate, In^.
Deu. Tract. 25. quest. 23.
but on our behalf it may after a certain manner be so called, that is,
according to the particular weyeng of Predestination: as when it is said that
God predestinateth glory to man by deservings, because he has decreed to
give to him grace by which he may deserve glory. For sithe the Lord will in
election have us to look unto nothing but his mere goodness, if any man shall
couete here to see any more, it shall be a wrongful gredinesse. If we lusted to
strive in sutteltie, we want not wherewith to beat back this silly suttletie of
Thomas. He affirms that to the elect glory is after a certain manner
predestinate to them the grace, by whithe they may deserve glory. What if I
answer on the contrary side and say that predestination unto grace, serves
election unto life, and is as it were a waityng maid after it? that grace is
predestinate to them, to whom the possession of glory has been long ago
appointed: because it pleases the Lord to bring his children from election into
justification? For thereupon it shall follow that the predestination of glory
was rather the cause of the Predestination of grace, than contrariwise. But
away with these striuynges, as things superfluous for such as shall think
that there is wisdom enough for them in the word of God. Ambro. de vocat
gent. li. 1. cap. 1.
For this was in old time truly written of an Ecclesiastical writer, that
they which assign the election of God to merits are more wise than they
ought to be.

of the promise takes away the difference of special grace. And thus
certain sobre men speak, not so much to oppress the truth, as to debar
exabhed questions, and to bridle the curiosity of many. Their will is praise
woorthye, but their counsel is not to be allowed: because dallyeng by shifts
is never excusable. But their obiectyng of it which do more raylyngly inuep
against it, is verily to fond a cauillation, or to shameful an error. How
the Scripture makes these two to agree together, that by outward preaching al
men are called to Repentance and Faith, and yet not to al men is given the
Spirit of Repentance and Faith, I have in an other place already declared, and
by and by somewhat of it must be repeted again. Now that which they
require I deny to them, sithe it is two ways false. For, he that thretneth
that while it rayneth upon one city, Amos. iiii vii.^^ viii.xi. Acc. xxi.vi.
there shall be droughte upon an other: He that pronounces that there shall in
an other place be famine of doctrine, byndeth not himself with a certain law
to call all men egally. And he which forbyddyng Paul to speak in Asia, and
turnyng him from Bythinia draws him into Macedonia, shows that it is in his
own power to distribute this treasure to whomesoeuer it shall please him. Yet
more plainly he shows by Esaie, Esa. viii.xvi.
how he peculiarly directs to the elect the promyses of salvation: for he
says of them only, and not of all mankind indifferently, that they shall be
his disciples. Whereby it is certain that the doctrine of salvation is
wrongfully set open in common to all men to profit effectually, which is
said to be severally laid up only for the children of the Church. Let
this suffice at this present, that although the voice of the Gospel speak
generally to all, yet the gift of Faith is rare. Esa. liii.i.
Esaie assigns a cause, for that the arm of the Lord is not open to all
men. If he had said that the Gospel is maliciously and frowardlye despised,
because many do stubbornly refuse to hear: peradventure this color touching
universal calling should prevail. Neither is it the purpose of the Prophet to
dymynyshe the fault of men, when he teaches that the fountain of blyndnesse
is that God vouchsaueth not to open his arm to them: only he gives warnyng,
that because faith is a singular gift, the ears are beaten in vain with
outward doctrine. But I would feign know of these doctors, whether only
preaching, or faith, make the children of God. Certainly when it is said in
the first chapter of John, John. ^.xii.
Whosoever believe in the only begotten Son of God, are themselves also made
the children of God, there is not in that place a co^fused heap iumbled up
together: but a special order is given to the faithful, which are borne not
of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God. But
(say they) there is a mutual consent of faith with the word. Namely whersoeuer
is faith. But it is no new thing that seed fall among thorns or in stony
places: not only because the greater part appears in deed obstinate against
God, but also because not al men have eyes and ears. How then shall it agree
that God calls to him them who he knows will not come? Dever^. apost se^
n.o.^.
Let Augustine answer for me. Will thou dispute with me? Marvel with me, and
cry out, O depthe. Let us both agree in fear, least we perish in error?
Moreover if election (as Paul witnesses) be the mother of faith, I turn back
the argument upon their own head, Ehhes. i.iii.
that Faith is therefore not general, because election is special. For by the
orderly hangyng together of causes and effects, it is easily gathered that
where Paul says, that we are full of al spiritual blessing, as God had chosen
us before the creation of the world: therefore these richesse are not common
to all, because God has chosen only whom he would. Tit. i.i.
This is the reason why in an other place he commends the faith of the
elect, least it should be thought that any man does by his own motion get
faith to himself: but that this glory may remain with God, that they are
freely enlightened of him, whom he had chosen before. For Bernarde says
rightly, Friends do severally hear, to whom he also says, Ad Tho. prepos.
Beuer^. epist. (...).
Fear not thou small flock: for to you it is given to know the mystery of
the kingdom of heaven. Who be these^ even they whom he has foreknowen and
predestinate to be fashioned like to the image of his Son. A great and
secret counsel is made known. The Lord knew who be his: but that which was
known to God, is made many^est to men: neither does he vouchsafe to make any
other partakers of so great a mystery, but those self same men whom he has
forknowen and predestinate to be his. A little after he concludes. The mercy
of God is from eternity even to eternity upon them that fear him* from
eternity, by reason of predestination: to eternity, by reason of blessed
making: the one without beginning, the other without endyng. But what need I to
cite Bernarde for witness, when we hear of the masters own mouth, John.
vi.xlvi.
that none do see but they which are of God? By which words he signifies,
that all they which are not begotten again of God, do dasell at the brightness
of his countenance. And to election faith in deed is fittly joined, so that it
keep the second degree. Which order the words of Christ do clearly express
in an other place, This is the will of my Father, that I lose not that which he
has given. For this is his will, that whosoever believes in the Son shall
not perish. If he would have all saved, he would appoint over them his Son
to be their keeper, and would graffe them all into his body with the holy bond
of Faith. Now it is certain that faith is a singular pledge of his fatherly
love, la^ed up for his children whom he has adopted. Therefore Christ in an
other place faith that ye sheep follow the shepherd, because they know his
voice: Ioh. x.iiii
but they follow not a stranger, because they know not the voice of strangers.
Whense comes his difference, but because their ears are boared by God? For
no man makes himself a sheep: but he is made one by ye heavenly grace. For
which cause also the Lord teaches yt our safety shall always be certain and
free from danger, because it is kept by the invincible power of God. Wherefore
he concludes that the unbelievers are not of his sheep: namely because they are
not of the number of them, whom God has promised by Esaie that they shall be his
disciples. Now because in the testimonies which I have alleged is expressed
perseverance, they do therwithal testify the immovable steadfastness of
election*

Romans ix.xiii.
having yet with good works deserved nothing, is taken into grace: so Esau,
being yet defiled with no wicked dooyng, is hated. If we turn our eyes to
works, we do wrong to the Apostle, as though he saw not the same thing which
we clearly see. It is proved that he saw it not* forasmuch as he expressly
enforces this point, that when they had not yet done any good or evil, the
one was chosen, and the other refused, to prove that the fundation of the
predestination of God is not in works. Again when he moved the objection,
whether God be unrighteous, he allegeth not that which had been the most
certain and plain defense of his righteousness, namely that God reduced to
Esau according to his euellnesse: but he was content with an other solution,
that the reprobate are stirred up to this end, that the glory of God may be
set forth by them. Last of all he adioyneth a concluding sentence, that God
has mercy upon whom he will, and hardens whom he will. See you not how he
imputes both to the only will of God? Therefore if we can not declare a
reason why he vouchsaueth to grant mercy to them that be his, but because it
so pleseth him: neither also shall we have any other cause in reiectyng of
other, than his own will. For when it is said that God hardens, or shows
mercy to whom he will, men are thereby warned to seek no cause else where than
in his will.

The.xxiii. Chapter. A Confutation of the sclaunders wherewith this doctrine
has always been wrongfully burdened.
BUt when the wit of man hears these things, the frowardness thereof can not
be restrained, but that by and by as at the bloody blast of a trumpet, soundyng
to battle, it diversely and excessiuely turmoyleth. And many in deed, as
though they would drive away the malice from God, do so grant election,
that they deny that any man is reprobate: but they do to ignorantly and
childishely: forasmuch as election it self could not stand unless it were
set contrary to reprobation: God is said to sever them whom he adopteth unto
salvation: it should be more than foolishly said that other do either by
chance or by their own endeavor obtain that which only election gives to a
few. Therefore whom God passes over, he rejects: and for none other cause,
but for that he will exclude them from the inheritance which he does
predestinate to his children. Neither is the waiwardnesse of the men tolerable,
if it suffer not it self to be bridled with the word of God, where the
incomprehensible counsel of God is entreated of, which the Angels themselves
do worship. But we have already heard that hardening is no less in the hand
and will of God than mercy. Neither does Paul (as these men do that I have
spoken of) busily labor to excuse God with a lyeng defense: Romans ix.xx.
but only he teaches that it is not lawful for the thing formed to quarrel
with him that formed it. Now who so do not admit that any are rejected of
God, how will they vncombre themselves from that saying of Christ, Every tree
which my father has not planted, Mat. xv.xiii.
shall be plucked up by the root? They plainly hear that all they are adjudged
and auowed to destruction, whom the heavenly Father has not vouchsaued to
plant as holy trees in his ground. If they deny this to be a sign of
reprobatio^, then is there nothing so clear ye it may be proved to the^. But if
they cesse not to wra^gle, let the sobriety of Faith be contented with this
admonition of Paul, that there is no cause to quarrel with God, Romans ^^^ xxi.
if he willing on the one side to show his wrath and to make his power known
do with dumme sufferance, and lenity bear with the vessels of wrath
prepared to destruction: and on the other side he make known the richesse of
his glory toward the vessels of mercy which he has prepared to glory. Let
the Reders mark, how Paul to cut of occasion from whisperinges and
backbitinges, gives the chief rule to the wrath and power of God: because it
is unjust that those deep judgments which; swallow up all our senses, should
be made subject to our determination. Our adversaries answer is very triflyng,
that God does not utterly reject them whom he suffers in lenity, but abides
with a mind hanging in suspense toward them, if peradventure they may
repent. As though Paul gives to God a patience, to look for their turning,
whom he says to be made to destruction. For, Augustine says rightly where
he expounds this place, Lib. v. co^tra Iul. cap. 6.
where power is joined to suffera^ce, God does not suffer, but govern with his
power. They further say also that it is not for nothing said that the vessels
of wrath are prepared to destruction: but, that God has prepared the vessels
of mercy: because by this mean he ascribes and chalengeth the praise of
salvation to God, but the blame of destruction he casts upon them which by
their own will do bring it upon themselves. But although I grant to them
that Paul by the diverse manner of speaking did soften the rowghnesse of the
first part of the sentence, yet it is not mete to assign the preparing unto
destruction to any other thing than to the secret counsel of God: which also is
affirmed a little before in the rest of the text. That God stirred up Pharao:
Then, that he hardneth whom he will. Whereupon follows that the hidden counsel
of god is ye cause of hardening. This at ye lest I get which Augustine says,
Lib ^. de predest. sanct. ca. 2.
yt when God of wolves makes sheep, he does with a mightier grace reform
the^, that their hardness may be tamed:and therefore god for this cause does not
convert ye obstinate, because he does not show forth in the the^ the mightier
grace, which he wa^teth not if he would show it forth.

This is ^^ke out (...) Augustine* lib. 1 de Genesis ^ont. n^ani^^* ca. ^.
since of all things yt are, it is ye cause, and worthily so ought to be. For
if it have any cause, then somewhat must go before it, whereto it must be as it
were bound: which it is unlawful ones to imagine. For, ye will of God is so ye
highest rule of righteousness, yt whatsoever he wills, eue^ for this yt he
wills it, it ought to be taken for righteous. When therefore it is asked, why
the Lord did it: it is to be answered, because he willed it, But if thou go
further in asking why he willed it, thou ask some greater and hier thing
than the will of God: which cannot be found. Let therefore the rashness of man
restrain it self, and not seek which is not, least paraduenture it may not
find that which is. With this bridle (I say) he shall be well withholden
whosoever he be that will dispute of the secrets of God with reverence. As for
the boldness of ye wicked, which dread not openly to speak euel of God:
against it the lord with his own righteousness, without any our defense shall
sufficiently defend himself, when he shall take al shiftyng from their
consciences, and hold them fast convinced, and condemn them. Neither do we yet
thrust in the fained devise of absolute power, which as it is profane, so
worthily ought to be abhorted of us. We feign not God lawless, who is a law to
himself: because (as Plato says) men stand in need of laws, who are
troubled with unlawful lusts: but ye will of God is not only pure from al fault
but also is the hiest rule of perfection, yea and the law of all laws. But we
deny that he is subject to yield account. We deny also that we are mete
judges, which would pronounce of this cause after our own sense. Wherefore if we
attempt further than we lawfully may, Psa. li.^.
let that threatenyng of the Psalm bring us in fear, that God shall overcome
so often as he is judged of any mortal man.

So can God in keeping silence, put his enemies to silence. But, that

Again they except and say: were they not before predestinate by for the
cause of damnation? When therefore they perish in their corruption, they do
nothing but suffer the punishment of that misery into which by his
predestination Adam sell and drew his posterity hedlo^g with him. Is not he
therefore unjust, which does so cruelly mock his creatures. I grant in deed
yt all the children of Ada^ fell by the will of God into that misery of state
wherein they be now bound: and this is it yt I said at ye beginning, that at
length we must always return to the determination of the will of God, the cause
whereof is hidden in himself. But it follows not by and by that God is subject
to this sclau^der. For we will with Paul answer the^ in this manner, To. ix.xx.
O man, what art thou that co^tendest with God? does the thing formed say to
him that formed it, Why have thou formed me so? Has not the potter power to
make of the same lu^pe one vessel to honor, and an other to dishonor? They will
say that the righteousness of God is so not truly defended, but that we seek
a shift, such as they are wont to have that want a just e^euse. For what else
seems here to be said, tha^ that God has a power which can not be hindered
from doing any thing whatsoever it be as he will himself? But it is far
otherwise. For, what stronger reason can be brought than when we are commanded
to think what a one God is? For how should be commit any injustice, which is
judge of the world? If it properly perteine to the nature of God to do
judgment, then he naturally loves righteousness, and abhors
unrighteousness. Wherefore the Apostle did not, as though he were ouertake^,
look about for holes to hide him: but showed that the reason of the
righteousness of God is hier than that it either is to be measured by the
measure of man, or may be comprehended by the sclender capacity of the wit of
man. The Apostle in deed confesses that there is such depth in the
judgments of God, wherewith the minds of men should be swalowed, if there
endeavored to pearce into it. But he teaches also how heinous wrong it is, to
bind the works of God to such a law, that so sone as we understand not the
reason of them, we may be bold to disalow them. It is a known saying of
Salonio^ (which yet fem do rightly understand) The great creator of al re^dreth
reward to the fool, Pro. xxvi.x.
and reward to transgressors. For he cries out concerning the greatness of
God: in whose will it is to punish fools and transgressors, although he do not
vouchesaue to let them have his Spirit. And mo^struous is the madness of men,
when they so covet to make that which is unmeasurable, subject to ye small
measure of their reason. i. Tim. v.xx^.
The Angels which stood still in their uprightness, Paul calls elect. If
their steadfastness was grounded upon the good pleasure of God, the falling
away of the other proves that they were forsaken: Of which thing there can no
other cause be alleged than reprobatio^, which is hidden in the secret counsel
of God.

because he so willed: but why he willed, it is not our p^rt to ask a reason of
it, who can not comprehend i^: neither is it mete that the and of God should
come down into controversy among us, of which so of^ a^ mention is made,
under the name of it is named ye hiest rule of righteousness. Why therefore is
any question moved of unrighteousness where righteousness clearly appears?
Neither let us be ashamed, after the example of Paul, so to stop the mouths
of the wicked, and ^ro^ time to time so often as they shall be bold to bark
against it, to repete this, Who be ye miserable men, yt lay an accusation to
Gods charge* and do therefore lay it to his charge because he does not te^per
the greatness of his works to your dullness? As though they were therefore
wro^gful, because they are hidden from flesh. The unmeasurableness of ye
judgments of God is by clear experiences known unto you. Ye know that they
are called the deep bottomless depth. Ps. xxxv^*
Now ask of the narrow capacities of your wit, whether they comprehend that
which God has decreed with himself. What good does it you therefore with mad
searchyng to plunge your selves into the botto^lesse depth, which reason it
self teaches you that it shall be to your destruction? Why are ye not at the
least restrained with some fear of that which both the history of Job and
the books of the Prophets do report of the i^comprehensible wisdom, and
terrible power of God. If thy mind be unquieted, let it not grieve thee to
embrace the counsel of Augustine. August. de uerb. apost^punc; sermon. 20.
Thou being a man lokest for an answer at my hand: and I also am a man.
Therefore let us both hear him that says: O man, what art thou* Better is a
faithful ignorance than rash knowledge. Seek merits: thou shall find nothing
but peine. O depth. Peter denies: ye the^e believes: O depth. Sekest thou a
reason? I will tremble at the depth. Reason thou, I will wonder: dispute thou, I
will believe: I see depth, but I reach not the bottom. Paul rested, because
he found wondering. He calls the judgments of God unsearchable: and art
thou come to search them? He says that his ways are impossible to be traced
ou^: and do thou trace them? with procedyng further we shall nothing profit:
For neither we shall satisfy their way wanton curiousness, neither does the
Lord need any other defense, than which he has used by his Spirit, which
spoke by the mouth of Paul: and we forget to speak well, when we cesse to
speak with God.

Their other objection also arises out of ungodliness, which yet ^o^deth and
that sith he has not so done, he has of determined purpose created men to
that end that he should so behave himself in earth: and if by the providence of
God, man was created to this condition, yt he should do al those things that
he does: the^ he is not to be blamed for that which he can not avoid, and
which he enterprised by ye will of God. Therefore let us see how this knot ought
to be well loosed. First of all this ought to be holde^ certain among al men
which Salomo^ says, y^ God has created all things for himself, Prou.
xvi.^ii.
and the wicked man to an euel day. Behold, when the dispising of al things is
in ye hand of God, when in his power remains the rule of safety and death:
he so orders the^ by his counsel and beck, that among men there are borne
some adjudged eue^ from their mothers womb to death, which with their
destruction may glorify his name. If any man answer, yt there is no necessity
laid upon them by the providence of God, but rather yt he created them in
such estate, because he foresaw their perverseness to come: he neither says
nothing at al, nor altogether. The old writers are wont in deed sometimes to
use this solutio^: but as it were doubtingly. But the Scholemen rest upon it,
as though nothing could be objected against it. In deed I will willingly
grant, yt foreknowlege alone brings no necessity to creatures, although al
men do not so agree: for there be some that will have it also to be the cause of
things. But it seems to me that Ualla, a man otherwise not much practiced in
holy writings, saw both more depely and more wisely, which showed that this
contention is superfluous: because both life and death are rather the doings
of Gods will that of his foreknowlege. If God did but foresee the successes of
me^, and did not also dispose and order them by his will, the^ this question
should not without cause be moved, whether his foreseyng any thing auailed to the
necessity of them. But since he does none otherwise fortee ye things yt shall
come to pass, than because he has decreed yt they should so come to pass: it
is vain to move controversy about foreknowlege, where it is certain that al
things do happen rather by ordinance and coma^deme^t.

nations with their children being infantes, without remedy, but because it so
pleased God? Here their tongues which are otherwise so pratlyng, must of
necessity be du^me. It is a terrible decree, I grant: yet no man shall be able
to deny, but that God foreknew what end man should have, ere he created him,
and therefore foreknew it because he had so ordained by his decree. If any man
here inuey against the foreknowledge of God, he rashly and indiscreetly
stu^bleth. For what matter is there, I beseech you, why the heavenly judge
should be accused for that he was not ignorant of that which was to come?
Therefore if there be any either just or colorable complaynt, it touches
predestination. Neither ought it to serve an absurdity which I say, that God
foresaw not only the fall of the first man, and in him the ruin of his
posterity, but also disposed it after his own will. For as it belongs to
his wisdom, to foreknow all things that shall be: so it belongs to his
power, to rule and govern all things with his hand, And this question
Augustine very well discusseth, as he does other, saying: We most holsomly
confess that which we most rightly believe, Euchir. ad Laur.
that the God and Lord of all things, which created all things very good, and
foreknew that evil things should spring out of good, and knew that it more
perteyned to his almighty goodness even of evil things do well, than not to
suffer them to be evil: that he so ordered the life of Angels and men, that in
it he might first show what free will could do, and then what the benefit of
his grace and judgment of justice could do.

Here they run to the distinction of will and permission, by which De Genesis
ad. leter. lib. 6. cap. ^*.
that ye will of God is a necessity of things and that what he wills, it
must of necessity come to pass: as those things shall truly come to pass
which he has foreseen. Now if for excuse of themselves and of the ungodly,
either the Pelagians, or Manichees, or Anabaptists, or Epicureans (for with
these ^ower se^tes we have to do in this question) shall object against us
necessity wherewith they be bound by the predestination of God: they bring
nothing fit to the purpose. For if predestination be nothing else but a
dispensation of righteousness of God, which is hidden in deed, but yet
without fault: For as much as it is certain y^ they were not unworthy to be
predestinate to that estate, it is also as certain that ye destruction is
most righteous which they enter into by predestination. Moreover their
destruction so hangs upon the predestination of God, that both cause and
matter thereof is found in themselves. For the first man fell, because the
Lord so judged it to be expedient: why he so judged, is unknown to us: yet it
is certain that he so judged for no other reason but because he saw that
thereby the glory of his name should be worthily set forth. When thou hear
mention of ye glory of God, there think of his righteousness: For it must be
righteous that deserves praise. Man therefore falls, the providence of God
so ordeyning it: but he falls by his own fault. The Lord had a little before
pronounced, that all the things which he had made were very good. Whense
therefore comes that perverseness to man, (...). i.xxxi
to fall away from his God? Least it should be thought to be of creation, the
Lord with his commendation allowed that which came from himself. Therefore by
his own euelnesse he corrupted the nature which he had received pure of the
Lord, and by his fall he drew his whole posterity with him into destruction.
Wherefore let us rather behold an evident cause of damnation in the corrupted
nature of mankind, which is nerer to us, than search for a hidden and
utterly inco^prehe^sible cause thereof in the predestination of God. Neither
let it grieve us so far to submit our wit to the unmeasurable wisdom of God,
that it may yield in many secrets of his. For, of those things which it is
neither granted nor lawful to know, the ignorance is well learned: the
couetyng of knowledge, is a kind of madness.



such other. Act x.xxxiiii* To. ii.^ Gal. vi.xxviii. I^am. ii.v. Col. iii.xxv
Ephesians. vi*^^
So Peter and Paul do teach that the Lord is not an accepter of persons,
because he puts not difference between the Jew and the Grecian, to refuse
the one and embrace ye other for only respect of nation. So James uses the
same words when he minds to affirm, that God in his judgment nothing
regards richesse. But Paul in an other place speaks thus of God, that in
iudgyng he has no consideration of freedom or bondage. Wherefore there shall
be no co^trarietie if we shall say yt God according to the will of his good
pleasure without any deseruyng choseth to his sons whom he will, rejecting and
refusing other. But the matter may thus be opened, that men may be more fully
satisfied. They ask how it comes to pass, that of two between whom no
deserving puts any difference, God in his electing passes over the one and
takes the other. I on ye other side do ask them, whether they think that in
him that is taken there is any thing yt may make the mind of God to incline
toward him. If they confess (as they needs must) yt there is nothing, it shall
follow yt god looks not upon man, but from his own goodness fetches a cause
why to do good to him. Aug ^^ B^ny. lib. ^ cap. 7.
Whereas therefore God chooses one man, refusing an other, this comes not of
respect of man, but of his mercy alone, which ought to have liberty to show
forth and utter it self where and when it pleases him. For we have in an other
place also showed, that there were not from the beginning many called noble, 1.
Co^^. ^.xxvi.
or wise, or honorable, that God might humble the pride of flesh: so far is it
of, that his favor was bound to persons.

Wherefore many do falsely and wickedly accuse God of partial unrighteousness,
Epist. (...) and g^a^
Wherefore these sayengs of Augustine do very well agree together. Sith in the
first man the whole mass of mankind fell into condemnation, these vessels
that are made of it to honor, are not ye vessels of their own righteousness,
but of ye mercy of God: and whereas other are made to dishonor, the same is not
to be imputed to vnrightfulnesse but to judgment etc: De bono perse^. (...)
That to those whom he re^useth, God re^dreth due pain: to those whom he
calls, he gives undeserved grace: that they are delivered from al
accusation, after the manner of a creditor, in whose power it is, to forgive to
the one, and ask of ye other. Therefore ye Lord also may give grace to who^ he
will, because he is merciful: and give it not to all, because he is a just
judge. He may by giving to some* yt which they do not deserve, show his free
grace: and by not giving to all, declare what all deserve. For whereas Paul
writes that God enclosed all under sin, Romans ^i.xxxi.
that he might have mercy upon all, it is therewithal to be added that he is
dettor to no man: because no man first gave to him, that he may require like of
him.

^ph. i.iii^.
that we should lead a holy and faultlesse life. If the mark of that election
is directed unto be holiness of life, it ought more to awake and stir us up
cherefully to practice that holiness, than to serve for a clokyng of
slothfulness. For how greatly do these things differ the one from the
other: to cesse from well doing, because election suffices to salvation: and
that the appointed end of election is that we should apply our selves to the
endeavor of good doings. Away therefore with such sacrileges, which do
wrongfully misturne the whole order of election. Where they stretch their
blaspemies further, when they say that he which is reprobrate of God, shall
lose his labor if he go about to make himself allowable to him with
innocence and honesty of life: therein they are taken with a most shameless
lie. For, whense could such endeavor come but of election* For whosoever be of
the number of the reprobate, as they are vessels made to dishonor, so they
cesse not with continual wicked doings to provoke the wrath of God against
themselves, and by evident tokens to confirm the judgment of God which is
already pronounced upon them: so far be they from striuyng with him in vain.

which he wiped away with his book of Correption and Grace written to
Ualentine, the redyng whereof will appease al godly and trac^able men: yet I
will touch a few things, which (as I trust) shall satisfy them that be honest
and not contentious. We have already seen how open and loud a preacher of the
free election Paul was: was he therefore cold in admonishyng and exhortyng?
Let these good zealous men compare their earnestness with his, and it shall be
found in them ^se in comparison of his incredible heat. And truly this
principle takes away all doutes, that we are not called to uncleanness, but
that every man should possess his vessel in honor, i. These. i^i^ vii. Ephesians.
ii.^^
etc. Again, that we are the handy work of God created to good works which
he has prepared that we should walk in them. Summarily, they that are even
but meanly exercised in Paul, shall without long declaration easily perceive
how fitly he makes these things to agree, which they feign to disagree.
Christ commands that men believe in him* yet is his definitive sentence
neither false nor contrary to this commandment, where he says, John.
v^^.lx^^.
No man can come to me, but he to whom it is given of my father. Let preaching
therefore have his course, which may bring men to faith, and with continual
profityng hold them fast in perseverance. Neither yet let the knowledge of
predestination be hindered, that they which obey may not be proud as of their
own, but may glory in the Lord. Mat. ^^^^.ix.
Christ not for nothing says, Who so has ears of hearing, let him hear.
Therefore when we exhort and preach, they that have ears do willingly obey:
but who so lack ears, in them is fulfilled that which is written, Esa. vi.ix*
That hearing they hear not. But why (says Augustine) should some have, Lib.
de ^a^no person, cap. 15.
and other not have? Who has known the mind of the Lord? Must that therefore
be denied which is open, because that can not be comprehended which is hidden?
These sayenges I have faithfully reported out of Augustine: but because
paraduenture his words shall have more authority than mine, go to, let us
bring forth the very words that are red in himself. If when this is heard,
many are turned into dullness and sluggishnesse, and being inclined from labor
to lust do go after their desires: ought that therefore to be accounted false
which is spoken of the foreknowlege of God? If God have foreknowen that they
shall be good, shall they not be good, in how great euelnesse soever they now
live? and if he have foreknowen that they will be evil, shall they not be euel,
in how great goodness soever they be now seen? Shall therefore those things
which are truly spoken of the foreknowlege of God, be for such causes either
to be denied or to be left unspoken of? namely then when if they be not spoken
of, men go into errors? Cap. 16.
The rule (says he) to keep truth unspoken, is one thing, and the necessity
to speak truth is an other. As for the causes of leauyng truth unspoken, it
were long to search them out al: of which yet this is one, that they be not
made worse which understand it not, while we mean to make them more learned
that understand it, who when we speak any such thing are in deed not made
more learned, nor yet are made worse. But when a true thing is in such case,
that when we speak it, he is made worse that can not conceive it: and when we
speak it not, he is made worse that can conceive it: what think we now to be
done? is not the truth rather to be spoken, that he may conceive it, that can
conceive it: that keep it unspoken, that not only neither of them may conceive
it, but also he that more understands may be the worse? whereas if he did
hear and conceive it, by him also many should learn? And we will not say that
which, as the Scripture witnesses, we lawfully might have spoken. For we fear
for so the least when we speak, he be offended that can not conceive it: but
we fear not least while we hold our peace, he that can conceive truth be
deceived with falshed. Which sentence he at the last shortly knittyng up, Cap.
20.
more plainly also confirms. Wherefore if the Apostles and they which
followed them, the doctors of the Church, did both, namely both godlyly preach
of the eternal election of God, and hold the faithful in awe under the
discipline of godly life: why do these our adversaries being confuted with
invincible violence of truth, think that they say well in saying that that
which is spoken of predestination is not to be preached to the people although
it be true. Yea it must in any wise be preached, that he which has ears to
hear may hear. But who has ears if he have not received them from him that
promises that he will give them? Truly let him y^ receives not, refuse it:
so that yet he which receives it, do take and drink, do drink and live. For
as godliness is to be preached, yt God may be rightly worshipped: so is also
predestination, that he which has ears to hear of the grace of God, may
glory in God and not in himself.

himself has made in the^. But, that which he by and by adds ought in no
wise to be omitted: that because we know not who belongs or not belongs to
the number of the predestinate, we ought so to be affectioned that we would al
men to be saved. So shall it come to pass, that whom soever we find, we shall
travail to make him partaker of peace. But our peace shall rest upon the
children of peace. Therefore for our part, we must apply wholesome and sharp
rebukyng to all men like a medicine, that they perish not, nor destroy other,
but it shall be the work of God to make it profitable to them whom he has
foreknowen and predestinate.

The.xxiiii. Chapter. That Election is stablished by the calling of God; but
that the reprobrate do bring upon themselves the just destruction whereunto they
are appointed.
BUt, that the matter may more plainly appear, we must entreat both of the
calling of the elect, and of the blinding and hardening of the wicked. Of the
first of these I have already spoken somewhat* when I confuted their error,
which thing that the generalnesse of the promises extends egally to all
mankind. But this election which otherwise God has hidden with himself he
does not without choice at length disclose by his calling, which a man may
therefore call the testifieng of it. Romans v^^^^ xxix.
For, whom he has foreknowen, them he has also fore appointed to be fashioned
like the image of his son: whom he has fore appointed, them he has also
called: whom he has called, them he has also justified, that in time to come
he may glorify them. When the Lord has by electing already adopted his into
the number of his children: yet we see how they enter not into possession of so
great a benefit, but when they be called: on the other side, how being called
they do now enjoy a certain communicatyng of his election. For which reason
Paul calls the Spirit which they receive, To. v^i^.xv Ephesians. i.x^^^
both the Spirit of adoption, and the seal, and earnest of the inheritance to
come: namely because it does with the testimony thereof stablish and seal to
their hearts the assuredness of the adoption to come. For though ye preaching
of the Gospel spryng out of the fountain of election: yet because it is also
common to the reprobate, therefore it could not by it it self be a sure proof
thereof. But God effectually teaches his elect, that he may bring them to
faith: as we have before alleged out of the words of Christ. Ih. xi.xlvi A^.
xv^^.v^ Ioha ^^.xliiii. Lib. de Great. Chris^t. ^^^tra Pelag. and Caelest. ca.
^4. and ^1.
Who so is of God, he and none other sees the Father* Again, I have showed
thy name to the men whom thou haste given me: Whereas he says in an other
place, No man can come to me, unless my Father draw him. Which place
Augustine wisely weyeth, whose words are these. If (as Truth says) every one
that has learned, co^met: whosoever comes not, certainly neither has he
learned. It does not therefore follow that he which can come, also comes,
unless he have both willed and done it. But every one that has learned of
the father, not only can come, but also comes, when now there is present
both the profit of coming, and the affection of willing, and the ^eled with
this light, that they should refuse to look upon election? Yet in the mean
time I deny not, that to the end we may be certain of our salvation, we
must begin at the word, and that our affiance ought therewith to be
contented, that we may call upon God by the name of Father. For some quite
contrary to right order, that they may be certified of the counsel of God
(which is nere unto us, in our mouth and in our heart) do covet to fly above
the clouds. Deuteronomy. x^x.xiiii.
Therefore that rashness is to be restrained with sobriety of faith, that it
may suffice us that God in his outward word is a witness of his hidden
grace: to that the conduit pipe out of which there flows water largely for
us to drink, do not hinder but that the springhed may have his due honor.

be our way to search it, that we begin at the calling of God, and end in
the same. Howebeit this withstandeth not, but that the faithful may think
that the benefits which they daily receive at the hand of God, Esa. xx^^*
do descend from that secret adoption: as they say in Esaye, Thou haste done
maruels, thy thoughts are old, true, and faithful: for as much as by that
adoption as by a token, the Lords will is to confirm so much as is lawful to
be known of his counsel. But least any man should think this a weak
testimony, let us consider how much both clearenesse and certainty it
brings us. Of which thing Bernard speaks fitly. For after that he had
spoken of the reprobate, he says: The purpose of God stands, the sentence of
peace stands upon them that fear him, both coueryng their euels, and
rewarding their good things: so as to them after a marvelous manner not only
good things, but also evil do work together unto good. Who shall accuse
the elect of God? It suffices me to all righteousness, to have him alone
merciful, to whom alone I have sinned. All that he has decreed not to impute
to me, is so as if it never had been. And a little after: O place of true rest,
and to which not unworthily I may give the name of a bedchamber, in which
God is seen not as troubled with wrath, not as withholden with care, but his
will is proved in him good, and well pleasyng, and perfect. This sight does not
make afraid, but calmeth: does not stir up unquiet curiousness, but
appeaseth it: does not weary the senses, but quietet them. Here is quiet truly
taken. God being appeased, appeaseth all things: and to behold him quiet, is
to be quiet.

First if we seek a fatherly kindness and favorable mind of God, Matt. iii,
xvii^
in whom alone the soul of the father rests. If we seek salvation, life,
and the immortality of the heavenly kingdom, we must then also flee to no
other: for as much as he alone is both the fountain of life, and author of
salvation, and heir of the kingdom of Heaven. Now whereto serves election,
but that being adopted of the heavenly Father into the degree of children, we
may by his favor obtain salvation and immortality? How so ever in sekyng
thou toss it and shake it, yet thou shall find that the vttermoste mark of
it extends no further. Therefore whom God has taken to his children, it is
not said that he has chosen them in themselves, Ephesians. i.ii^^
but in his Christ: because he could not love them but in him, nor give them
the honor of the inheritance of his kingdom, unless they had first ben made
partakers of him. If we be chosen in him* we shall not find in our selves the
certainty of our election: no, nor yet in God the Father, if we imagine him
naked without the Son. Christ therefore is the mirror, in whom we both
must, and without deceit may behold our election. For sith it is he into
whose body the Father has appointed to graffe all them whom from eternity he
has willed to be his, that he may take for his children so many as he
reknowlegeth among his members: we have a witness plain and sure enough* yt
we are written in the book of life, if we communicate with Christ. And yt sure
communion of himself he gave us, when by the preaching of the Gospel he
testified that he was given to us of the father, that he with all his good
things should be ours. Romans viij.xxxi. Ih. iii.xv. Ih. v.xxviiii John.
vi.xxxv.
We are said to put on him, and to grow together into him, that we may live:
because he lives. So often is this doctrine repeted, The Father spared not his
only begotten son, that whosoever believes in him, may not perish. But he
that believes in him, is said to have passed from death into life. In which
sense he calls himself the bred of life, which who so eats, he shall not die
for ever. He (I say) has be^ a witness to us, that they shall be received of
the heavenly Father in place of his children, of whom he has been received by
faith. If we covet any more than to be accounted among the children and heirs
of God, then we may climb above Christ. If this be our vttermoste mark: how
much be we mad in sekyng without him that which we have already obtained in
him, and which may be found in him alone* Moreover sith he is the eternal
wisdom, the unchangeable truth, and fast settled counsel of the Father: it
is not to be ^eared least that which he declares to us in his word, should
vary any thing be it never so little from that will of the father which we
seek: but rather he faithfully opens it unto us, such as it was from the
beginning, and ever shall be. The practice of this doctrine ought also to be in
ure in prayers. For though the faith of election does encourage us to call upon
God: yet when we make our prayers, it were unorderly done to thrust it into the
presence of God, or to covenant with this condition* Lord, if I be elected,
hear me: for as much as he wills us to be content with his promises, and no
where else to seek whether he will be entreatable to us or no. This wisdom
shall deliver us from many snares, if we can skill to apply that to a right
use which has been rightly written: but let us not indiscreetly draw hither
and thither that which ought to have been restrained.

John. vi.xxxvii. and x^^i.v^.
And whom so ever he receives, they are said to be committed to him of the
father, and delivered to his trust, that they may be kept into eternal life.
What mean we? Christ cries out with a loud voice, that so many as the Father
wills to be saved, he has delivered them into his protection. Therefore if
we list to know whether God have care of our safety, let us seek whether he
has committed us to Christ, whom he has made the only savior of all his.
Now if we dout whether we be received of Christ into his faith and keeping, he
preuenteth our doutyng, when he voluntarily effreth himself to be our
shepeheard, and pronounces that we shall be in the number of his sheep if we
hear his voice. Ioh. x.iii.
Let us therefore embrace Christ, being liberally set open for us, and coming
to mete us: he shall number us in his flock, and shall keep us enclosed with in
his fold. But there enters into us a carfulness of our state to come. Romans
viii.^xx. Mat. xxii.xiiii. i. Cor. x.xii.
For as Paul teaches that they are called, which were before chosen: so Christ
shows that many are called, but few are chosen* yea and also Paul himself
in an other place dishorteth us from carfulness: Let him that stands (says
he) look that he fall not. Again, Art thou grafted into the people of God? Be
not proud, but fear: for God is able to cut the of again that he may graffe
other. Finally we are sufficiently taught by experience it self, that calling
and faith are of small value, unless there be adjoined continuance which
happens not to al me^. But Christ has delivered us from this care: for
verily these promyses have respect to the time to come. Ihon. vi.xxxvii^^ xi
All that my Father gives me, shall come to me: and him that shall come to
me, I will not cast him out of doers. Again, This is the will of him that
sent me, the Father, that I lose nothing of al things that he has given me,
but may raise them up again in the last day. Io. x.xvii.
Again* My sheep hear my voice and they follow me: I know them, and I give
them eternal life, and they shall not perish for ever, neither shall any man
take them out of my hand. The Father which gave them to me, is greater then
all: and no man can take them out of the hand of my Father. Matt. xv.xiii.
Now when he pronou^ceth, Every tree which my Father has not planted, shall
be plucked up by the root: he signifies on the contrary side, that they can
never be plucked from salvation, which have root in God. Wherewith agrees
that saying of Ihon, i. Ihon. ii.xix. Romans viii.xxxviii.
If they had been of us, they had not at all gone out from us. Hereupon also
comes that noble glorieng of Paul against Life and Death, present things and
things to come: which glorieng must needs be grounded upon the gift of
continuance. Neither is it any doubt that he directs this saying to all the
faithful. In an other place the same Paul says. Philip. i.xvi.
He that has begone in you a good work, shall end it even until the day of
Christ. As also David, when his faith fainted, leaned upon this stay: Thou
shall not forsake the work of thy hands. Psalm. ^.xxxviii.viii
And now neither is this doubtful, that Christ when he prays for all the
faithful, asks the same thing for them which he asks for Peter, Luc.
xxi^.xxxi^
that their faith may never faint. Whereby we gather, that they are out of
danger of falling away, because the son of God, askinge steadfast
continuance for their godliness, suffered no denial. What would Christ have
us to learn hereby, but that we should trust that we shall perpetually be
safe, because we are ones made his?

But it daily happens, that they which seemed to be Christ's, do Ihon.
xvi.xii.
yet he excepteth the son of perdition. That is true in deed: but this is
also as certain, that such did never clea^e to Christ with that a^fiance of
heart with which I sat yt the assuredness of our election is stablished. They
went out from us (says Ihon) but they were not of us. For if they had been of
us, i. Ih. ^^.xix*
they had still tarried with us. Neither do I deny that they have like signs of
calling as the elect have: but I do not grant that they have that sure
stablishment of election which I bid the faithful to fetch out of the word
of the Gospel. Wherefore let not such examples move us but that we quietly
rest upon the promise of the Lord, where he pronounces, Ih. iii.xvi. and.
vi.xxxix
yt al they are given to him of the Father, which receive him with true faith,
of whom since he is their keeper and Pastor, none shall perish. Of Judas we shall
speak hereafter. Paul does not counsel Christians from assuredness
altogether, butte from careless and loose assuredness of the flesh, which
draws with it, pride, presumption, and disdain of other, and quenches
humility and the reverence of God, and brings forgetfulness of grace
received. For he speaks to ye Gentiles, whom he teaches, yt they ought not
proudly and ungently to reproach yt Jews for this, that the Jews being
disherited, they were set in their stead. Fear also he requires, not wherewt
they should be dismayed and stagger, but which framing us to ye humbler
receiving of the grace of God, should abate nothing of ye affiance thereof, as we
have said in an other place. Beside yt, he does not there speak to every man
particularly, but to ye sects themselves generally. For when ye Church was
divided into two parts, and envy bred dissensio^, Paul puts ye Gentiles in
mind yt their being supplied into ye place of ye peculiar and holy people,
ought to be to the^ a cause of fear and modesty. And among the^ there were many
puffed up with glory, whose vain bosti^g it was profitable to beat down. But we
have in an other place showed, yt our hope is extended to ye time to come even
beyond death, and yt nothing is more contrary to the nature of it, than to
doubt what shall become of us.

Mat. xxii.
which preparinge a solemn feast sends his messingers round about to bid
a great multitude to be his gestes, and yet can get but a few, because every
one allegeth lettes for his excuse, so that at length he is compelled upon
their refusal, to call out of the hie ways every one that he meteth. Hitherto
every man sees that the parable must be understand of the outward calling. He
adds afterward that God does like a good maker of a feast, which goes about
the tables, to chere his gestes. If he find any not clothed with a weddinge
garment, he will not suffer him with his vncleanlines to dishonor the
solemnity of the feast. This part of the parable, I grant, is to be understand
of them which enter into the Church by the profession of faith, but are not
clothed with the sanctification of Christ. Such dishonors and as it were
botches of his Church, the Lord will not suffer for ever: but, as their
fylthinesse deserves he will cast them out. Therefore few ar chosen out of a
great number of them yt are called, but yet not with ye calling by which we say
yt the faithful ought to judge their election. For, that general calling is
also common to the wicked: but this special Calling brings with it ye spirit of
regeneration, which is ye earnest and seal of ye inheritance to come, wherwt
our hearts are sealed up against ye day of ye lord. Ephesians. i.xiii
In a su^me since hypocrites boast of godliness as well as ye true worshipers of
god, Christ pronou^ceth yt at length they shall be cast out of the place which
they wrongfully possess: Psa. xv.i.
as it is said in ye psalm, Lord, who shall dwell in thy tabernacle? The
innocent in hands, and the man of a pure heart. Psa. xxiiij
Again in an other place. This is the generation of the^ that seek God, of
them that seek the face of the God of Jacob. And so does ye Spirit exhort
the faithful to sufferance, that they take it not grievously yt the Israelites
be mingled with the^ in ye Church: for at length their visor shall be plucked from
them and they shall be cast out with shame.

The same reason is of the exception even now alleged, where Christ Iho^.
xvii.xii.
It is in deed an vnpropre speech, but yet not dark. For he was not accounted
among the sheep of Christ, for yt he was one in deed, but because he kept ye
place of one. Ihon. vi.lxx. Ihon. xiii
And where in an other place ye Lord affirms yt he was chosen with the
Apostles, yt is spoken only in respect of ye ministry. Twelve (says he) have
I chosen, and one of them is a Deuel: yt is, he had chosen him to ye office of
an Apostle. But when he speaks of choosing to salvation, he denies him far
away from the number of ye choosen saying: I speak not of al: Ihon. xiii ^^iii.
I know whom I have choosen. If a man do in both places confound ye word of
Choosing, he shall miserably entangle himself: if he make difference, Homil. 38.
nothing is more plain. Therefore Gregory teaches very ill and pestilently
when he says yt we know only our calling, but are uncertain of our election:
whereby he moves al men to fear and trembling: using also this reason, but
because we know what we be to day, but what we shall be we know not. But in ye
place he sufficiently declares, how he stumbled at this block. For, because
he hanged election upon ye merits of works, he had matter enough and more to
discourage ye minds of men: but he cold not strengthen the^, which did not
remove the^ from themselves to ye affiance of ye goodness of God. Hereof ye
faithful have some taste of yt which we have determined at ye begi^ning: ye
predestination, if it be rightly thought upon, brings not a shaking of faith,
but rather the best strengthening of it. And yet I deny not, yt the holy
ghost frames his talk to ye small measure of our sense. Eze. xiii.ix.
As when he says. In ye secret of my people they shall not be, and in ye roll
of my servants they shall not be written. As though God did begin to write in
ye book of life, them whom he reckeneth in ye number of his: whereas yet we
know, even by ye witness of Christ, Phil. iiii.iii.
yt the names of the children of God are from the beginning written in ye book
of life. But in these words is only expressed the casting away of them which
seemed the chief among the elect: as it is said in the Psalm. Psa. lxix.xxix.
Let them be blotted out of the book of life, and let them not be written with
the righteous.

But the elect are neither immediately from the womb, nor al at one his hand
is stretched out to their salvation. For they ye dream that from their very
nativity there is planted in their hearts I wot not what sede of election,
by ye virtue whereof they are alwaie inclined to godlynes and to ye fear of
God, they both are not helped to prove it by ye authority of Scripture, and
also are confuted by experience it self. They do in deed bring forth a few
examples to prove yt the elect even before their enlightening, were not utterly
strangers from religion: that Paul in his being a Pharisee lived unreprovable,
Phil. iii.v Act. x.ii.
that Cornelius was by alms and prayers accepted of God: and such other. Of
Paul, we grant to them: of Cornelius, we say that they are deceived. For it
appears yt he was then already enlightened and regenerate, so that he wanted
nothing but the clear reueling of the Gospel. But what will they wring out by
these few examples? that all the elect are always endued with the spirit of
godliness? No more than if a man by showing ye uprightness of Aristides,
Socrates, Zenocrates, Scipio, Curious, Camillus, and other, should thereof gather
that al they that are left in blindness of idolatry, were desirous folowers of
holiness and honesty. Yea and the Scripture in more places than one, openly
cries out against them. For, ye state which Paul describes of ye Ephesia^s
before their regeneracio^, Ephesians. ii.ii.
shows not one grain of this sede. Ye were (says he) dead with defaultes and
sins, in which ye walked according to ye time of this world, according to ye
prince of the ^yre, which now works in ye obstinate children: among whom we
all also were sometime conversant in ye lusts of our flesh, doing those things
yt liked our flesh and mind. And we were by nature the children of wrath,
Ep. v.viii Ephesians. iiii.xxiii.
as other also were. Again, Remember yt ye were sometime without hope, and lacked
God in the world. Again. Ye were sometime darkness: but now ye are light in
the lord: walk as ye children of light. But paraduenture they will have these
things to be referred to ye ignorance of ye true God, wherewt they deny not
yt the elect are holden before yt they be called. Albeit this were a shameless
cauilling, since he thereof concludes, that they ought now noe more either to
lie or to steal: yet what will they answer to other places? i. Cor. vi.ix.
as is that place to the Corynthians, where when he had pronounced that neither
whoremongers, nor idolatrers, nor adulterers, nor weakelinges, nor buggerers,
nor thieves, nor covetous men, shall be heirs of ye kingedome of God: he by and
by adds that they were wrapped in the same heinous offenses before that they
knew Christ: but now that they are both washed by his blood and made free by
his Spirit. Romans ^^^.xix.
Again an other place to the Romans. As ye have given your members bond to
uncleanness, and to iniquity unto iniquity, now yield them in bondage to
righteousness. For what fruit had you of those things, in which ye are now
worthily ashamed. etc.

i. Pet. iiij.iii.
But he contrary wise puts them in mind that ye time past sufficed to make
an end of the lusts of the Gentiles. What end of the lusts of the Gentiles.
Ios. ii.i.ii. kin. xii.xvii. Luke xxii.xvi.
What if we come to examples? What budde of righteousness was there in Rahab
the harlot, before faith? in Manasse, when Jerusalem was dipped and in a
manner drowned in the blood of the Prophets? in the Thief, which among his
last gaspinges began to think of repentance? Away therefore with these
arguments, which silly curious men do rashely devise to themselves without
the Scripture. But let that abide certain with us, which the Scripture has,
that all have straied like lost sheep, every one has swarued into his own
way, Esa* liii.vi.
that is, perdition. Out of this goulfe of perdition, whom the Lord has
determined ones to pluck forth, them he differreth till his fyt time: only he
preserves them, that they fall not unto unpardonable blaspheme.

As the Lord by the effectualnesse of his calling toward the Mala. iiii i.
Malachie is a substantial witness, which reprouinge infidelity mingled with
gross blasphemies, yet declares that there shall come a redeemer. Why
therefore is he rather given to these than to those? He shall trouble himself
in vain, yt shall here search for a cause hyer than the secret and unsearchable
counsel of God. Neither is it to be feared least any scholar of Porphirie,
should freely gnaw at the righteousness of God while we answer nothing in
defense of it. For when we say that none perish undeserving, and that it is of
the free bountyfulnesse of God that some be delivered, there is largely enoughe
said for the setting forth of his glory, so that it needs not our
shyftinge. The sovereign judge therefore makes away for his predestination,
when whom he has ones rejected, them being deprived of the communicatinge of
his light he leaves in blindness. Of the other manner there are both
daily examples, and also many contained in the Scripture. One self same
preachinge is commonly made to a hundred, twenty receive it with ready
obedience of faith: the rest do either set naught by it, or scorn it, or hiss
it out, or abhor it. If any man answer that this diversity proceeds of
their malice and perverseness, he shall not yet satisfy us: because the others
wit also should be possessed with the same malice, unless God did amend it
with his goodness. Therefore we shall still be encombred, unless we call to
mind that which Paul says, i. Cor. iiii, vii.
Who makes thee to differ? Whereby he signifies that some excel other some,
not by their own virtue, but by the only grace of God.

Act. xiij.xlviij.
Because they are ordained to life. Of these, what shall we think, but because
they are the vessels of wrath unto dishonor? Wherefore let it not grieve us to
say with Augustine. God (says he) might turn the will of the evil into
good, De Genesis ad liter. lib. 2 cap. 10.
because he is almighty. He might in deed. Why therefore does he it not?
because he would not. Why he would not, is in himself. For we ought to be no more
wise than we ought to be. And that is much better, than to shift with
Chrysostom, Homil. de co^uers. Pauli.
and say that he draws him that is willing and reaches his hand, that the
difference may not seem to stand in the judgment of God, but in the only will
of men. Truly it so stands not in the propre motion of man, that even the
godly and they that fear God have need of a singular instruction of yt
Spirit. Act. xvi.xiiij.
Lydia ye purple seller feared God, and yet it behooved that her heart should be
opened, that she might harken to the doctrine of Paul, and profit in it. This
is not spoken of one woman alone, but that we should know that the profiting of
every man in godliness is the secret work of the Spirit. This verily can not
be brought in question, that ye lord sends his word to many, whose blindness
he will have to be more enforced. For, to what purpose does he hid so many
co^mau^dements to be carried to Pharao? was it because he hoped yt with often
repeted messages he would be appeased? No, but before he began, he foreknew
and foretold ye end. Go (said he to Moses) and declare to him my will: God.
xxi. Ezech. ij.iij. and xij.ii.
but I will harden his heart, that he obey not. So when he stirs up Ezechiel,
he warns him aforehand that he sends him to a rebellious and stubborn
people: to the end that he should not be afraid if he perceive himself to
singe to defmen. So he foretells to Jeremy, Ier. i.x.
yt his doctrine should become a fire, to destroy and wast the people like
stuble. Esa. vi.ix.
But the prophecy of Esaye yet more enforces it. For he is thus sent of the
Lord: Go and say to the children of Israel: With hearing hear ye, and
understand not: With seeing see ye, and know not. Make obstinate the heart of
this people, and make heavy their ears, and over plaster their eyes: least
paraduenture they may see with their eyes, and hear with their ears, and
understand with their heart, that being turned they may be healed. Behold he
directs his voice to them, but that they may wax more deff, he lights a
light, but that they may be made more blind: he shows forth doctrine, but
that they may be made more dull: he lays to the^ a remedy, Ioh. xij.xxxix.
but not that they may be healed. And John alleging this prophecy, affirms
yt the Jews could not believe the doctrine of Christ, because this curse of God
lay upon them. Neither can this also be in controversy, that whom God will not
have ^o be enlightened, to them he delivered his doctrine wrapped up in dark
speches, that they may nothing profit thereby but to be thrust into greater
dullness. Christ also testifies, Mat. xiii.xi.
that he does therefore expound only to the Apostles the parables in which he
had spoken to the multitude, because to them it was given to know the mysteries
of the kingdom of God, but to the common people not so. What means the Lord
(will thou say) in teaching them, of whom he provides that he may not be
understood? Consider whense is the fault, and thou will cesse to ask. For
in the word how great darkness soever there be, yet there is alwaie light
enough to convince the conscience of the wicked.

Now remains for us to see, why ye lord does ye which it is plain yt Romans
i^*xvii.
in searching it we must needs go to yt which Paul has noted out of Moses,
namely that God has raised them up from the beginning, yt he might show his
name in ye whole earth. Whereas therefore ye reprobate do not obey the word of
God opened unto them, that shall be well imputed to the malice and perverseness
of their heart, so that this be therwithal added yt they are therefore given
into this perverseness, because by the righteous but yet unsearchable judgment
of God they are raised up to set forth his glory with their damnation. Likewise
when it is said of ye sons of Heli, i. Sam. ii.xxv.
yt they harkened not to wholesome warninges, because ye lord willed to kill them:
it is not denied yt the stubbornness proceeded of their own naughtiness: but it
is therwtal touched why they were left in stubbornness, when ye Lord might
have softened their hearts, namly because his unchangeable decree had ones
appointed them to destruction. Ihon. xii.xxxviii.
To the same purpose serves yt saying of Ihon, When he had done so great
signs, no man believed in him: that ye word of Esaie might be fulfilled, Lord,
who has believed our hearing? For though he do not excuse ye stifnecked from
blame, yet he is content with that reason, yt the grace of God is unsavory to
men, till the holy ghost bring taste. And Christ alleging ye prophecy of
Esaie, Ihon. vi.xlv.
They shall al be taught of God, lends to no other end but to prove yt the
Jews ar reprobate and strangers from ye Church, because they are unapt to
learn: and he brings no other cause thereof but for yt the promise of God
does not perteine to the^. i. Cor. i.xxiii.
Which thing this saying of Paul confirms, y^ Christ which to ye Jews is an
offense, and to ye gentiles foolishnes, is to ye called ye strength and
wisdom of God. For when he has told what commonly happens so often as the
Gospel is preached, namly y^ some it makes more obstinate, and of some it is
despised, he says yt it is had in price of the only which at called. He had in
deed a little before named the^ beleuers, but he meant not to take away ye due
degree from ye grace of God which goes before faith, but rather he added this
second saying by way of Correction, yt they which had embraced ye Gospel
should give ye praise of their faith to the calling of God. As also a little
after he teaches yt they are chosen of God. When ye ungodly hear these
things, they cry out that god with inordinate power abuses his poor
creatures for a sport to his cruelty. But we which know y^ al men are so many
ways enda^gered to the judgment seat of God, yt being asked of a thousand
things they can not satisfy in one, do confess yt the reprobate suffer
nothing which agrees not with ye most just judgment of God. Whereas we do not
clearly atteine ye reason thereof, let us not be disco^te^t to be ignorant of
somewhat, where ye wisedo^ of god lifts up it self into so great height.

But forasmuch as there ar a few places of scripture wont to be objected, death
upon themselves: let us by brefely declaring these places, show that they make
nothing again the sentence above set. There is brought forth a place of
Ezechiel, that God will not the death of a sinner, but rather that he may be
touc^ed and live. ^
If they will extend this to all mankind: why does he not move many to
repentance, whose minds are more pliable to obedience, than theirs which at
his daily allurements ware harder and harder? Mat. xjii.xxiii.
With the Sodomites (as Christ witnesses) the preaching of ye Gospel and
miracles would have brought forth more fruit than in Jury. How comes it to
pass therefore, if God will al to be saved, that he opens not the gate of
repentance to those miserable me^ that would have been more ready to receive
grace? Hereby we see yt the place is violently wrested, if the will of God,
whereof the Prophet makes mention, be set against his eternal counsel,
whereby he has severed the elect from the reprobate. Now if we seek for the
true natural meaning of the Propet: his purpose is to bring hope of pardon to
the penitent. And this is ye sum, yt it is to be douted but yt God is ready
to forgive so sone as the sinner turns. Therefore he wills not his death,
in so much as he wills his repentance. But experience teaches that he so
wylleth them to repent whom he generally calls to him, yt yet he touches
not al their hearts. Yet is it therefore to be said that he deals
deceitfully, because although yt outward voice do but make them inexcusable
which hear and do not obey it, yet it is truly accounted the testimony of ye
grace of God, by which testimony he reconcileth me^ to himself. Therefore let
us hold this for ye meaning of the Prophet, yt the death of a sinner pleases
not god: yt the godly may have affia^ce, yt so soue as they shall be touched with
repentance, there is pardon ready for the^ with God: and the wicked may feel yt
their fault is doubled, because they answer not to so great merciful
kindness and gentleness of God. The mercy of God therefore will alwaie mete
repentance, but to whom repentance is given, both all the Prophets, and
Apostles, and Ezechiel himsefe do plainly teach. Secondly there is alleged a
place of Paul, where he says yt God wills al me^ to be saved, i. Tim. ii.iiii.
which although it have a diverse meaning from ye other, yet in something they
agree together. I answer, first yt by ye rest of the text it is made plain
how he wills. For Paul coupleth together, yt he wills the^ to be saved,
and to come to ye acknowledginge of the truth. If they will have this to be
determined by ye eternal counsel of God, Deuteronomy. iiii.vii.
yt they receive ye doctrine of salvation: what means that saying of Moses,
What nation is so noble, that God comes near to it as he does to thee?
How came it to pass that God restrained from many peoples the light of the
Gospel, which order enjoyed? How came it to pass that the pure knowledge of
godliness never came to some, and some scarscely tasted so much as any dark
prynciples of it? Hereof yt shall now be easy to gather, whereto Paul
tends. He had commanded Timothee to make solemn prayers in the Church
for kings and princes. But when it seemed somewhat an absurdity that prayers
should be made to God for a kind of men in a manner despeired (because
they were not only strangers from the body of Christ, but also endeavored with all their forces to express his kingdom) he added, yt the same is acceptable to
God which wills al me^ to be saved. Wherbi verily he signifies nothig else
but that he has stopped up yt way unto salvation to no degree of me^: but
rather that he has so powered out his mercy yt he wills no man to be void
of it. The other sentences do not declare what God has by his secret judgment
determined of al men: but do show that there is pardon ready for all sinners
which do only turn themselves to require it. For if they more stiffly stand
upon this that it is said that he will have mercy upon all, I will on the
contrary side answer them with that which is written in an other place, Ps.
cxv.ii^
That our God is in heaven where he does whatsoever he will. This word therefore
must so be expounded yt it may agree with the other, Exo. xxxiij xix.
I will have mercy upon whom I will have mercy, and I will show mercy to whom I
will show mercy. He that chooses out them who^ he will have mercy on, does
not give it to all. But sith it clearly appears that in that place is spoken
not of all particular men, but of degrees of men, we will make no longer
disputing about it. Howbeit it is also to be noted, that Paul does not affirm
what God does always and every where and in all men: but leaves it to him at
his liberty at length to make Kings and magistrates partakers of the heavenly
doctrine, although by reason of their blindness they do now rage against it.
They seem to press us more strongly with obiecting the place of Peter, that
God wills none to perish, but receives al to repentance. But the undoing of
this knot does by and by offer self in the second word, because the will to
receive can not be understood to be any other than that which is every where
taught. Truly the turning is in the hand of God: Eze. xxxvi xxvi.
whether he will turn all or no, let himself be asked, when he promises that
he will give to a certain few men a fleshly heart, leauyng to other some a
stony heart. It is true in deed, that unless he were ready to receive them
which call upon his mercy, Zach. i.iii
this saying should be false, Turn to me, and I will turn to you. But I say
that none of all mortal men does come to God but he that is prevented of God.
And if repentance were in the will of man, ii. Tim. ii xxv.
Paul would not say, If paraduenture he give them repentance. Yea unless the
same God which with word exhorts al me^ to repentance, did with secret mouyng
of his spirit bring the chosen to it: Ier. xxxi.xviii.
Jeremy would not say, Turn me, Lord, and I shall be turned: for when thou
have turned me, I have repented.

But (thou will say) if it be so, there shall be small truth in the promises has
enlightened. And them he enlightueth, whom he has predestinat to salvation.
They (I say) have ye truth of ye promises sure and unshaken, so as it can not
be said yt there is any disagreement between ye eternal election of God, and
the testimony of his grace which he offers to the (...). But why names he
Al? verily yt the consciences of ye godly may ye more sa^ely rest, when they
understand yt there is no dyfference of synuers, so (...) be present: and that
ye wicked may not cauil for their excuse, yt they (...) sa^ctuary whereunto they
may wtdrawe themselves from ye bondage of sin, when with their own
unthankfulness they refuse yt being offered the^. Therefore when ye mercy of
God is by ye Gospel offered to both sorts, it is faith, yt is to say ye
enlightni^g of god, which makes difference between ye godly and ungodly, so as
ye one sort feleth ye effectualnesse of ye gospel, and the other sort obtain
no frut thereof. The enlightening it self also has ye eternal election of God
for ye rule thereof. The complaint of Christ, Mat. xxiij xxxvii.
which they allege, Jerusalem, Jerusalem, how often have I willed to gather
together thy chickens, but ye would not? makes nothing for the^. I grant ye
Christ there speaks not only in ye person of man, but also reprocheth them yt
in all ages they have refused his grace. But we must define ye will of God which
is entreated of. For neither is it unknown, how diligently God endeavored to
keep still yt people, and with how great stifenesse they even from ye first to ye
last being given to their wa^dering desires refused to be gathered together:
but it follows not thereof that ye counsel of God was made void by ye malice
of me^. They answer and say that nothing less a greeth with the nature of God
than to have a doble will in him. Which I grant to the^, so that they fitly
expound it. But why do they not consider so many testimonies, where God putting
upon him the affections of man desce^deth beneath his own majesty? He says
that he has with stretched out arms called the rebellious people, Esa. ^^v.ii
that he has early and late travailed to bring them back to him. If they will
apply al these things to god, and not consider the figure, there shall arise
many superstuous co^tentions, which this one solution brings to agreement, yt
the propretie of man is figuratively applied to god. Howbeit the solution
which we have brought in an other place largely suffices, that although the
will of God be, as to our sense manifold: yet he does not in himself dyuersly
will this and that, but according to his wisdom, Ephesians. iii.x
which is diversely manifold (as Paul calls it) he amaseth our senses, till
it shall be given us to know that he marvelously wills that which now
seems to be against his will. They also mock with cauillations, that since God
is the father of al, it is unrighteous that he should disherit any that has not
before with his own fault deserved this punishment. As though the liberality of
God streacheth not even to Hogs and dogs. But if they speak only of
mankind, let them answer why God bound himself to one people, to be the
father thereof: and why also out of the same people he pricked a small number as
it were a flower. Butte their own lust of euel speaking hinders these
railers that they consider not that God so brings forth his sun to shine
upon the good and evil, that the inheritance is laid up for a few, ^
to whom it shall one day be said, Come ye blessed of my Father, possess the
kingdom. etc. They object also that God hates none of these things that he
has made. Which although I grant them, yet this remains safe which I
teach, that the reprobate are hateful to God, and that very rightfully,
because they being destitute of his Spirit can bring forth nothing but cause
of curse. They save further, that there is no difference of the Jew and the
Gen^ile, and therefore that the grace of God is without difference set before
all men: namely if they grant (as Paul determines) that God calls as well
out of the Jews as out of the Gentiles, Romans ix.xxiiij.
according to his good pleasure, so that he is bound to no man. After this
manner also is that wyped away which they object in an other place, Romans
xi.xxii.
that God has enclosed al things under sin, that he may have mercy upon
all: namely because he will that the salvation of all them that are saved be
ascribed to his mercy, although this benefit be not common to al. Now when
many things are alleged on both parts, let this be our conclusion, to
tremble with Paul at so great depth, and if wanton tongues shall be busy, To.
ix.ix. De praede. and gra^i. cap. 2.
that we be not ashamed of this his crieng out, O man, what art thou that
striuest with God? For Augustine truly a stirmeth that they do peruersly which
measure the righteousness of God by the measure of the righteousness of man.

The.xxv. Chapter. Of the last Resurrection.
ALthough Christ the son of righteousness, having overcome ii. Ti. i.x.
Ihon. v.xxiiii.
shining by the Gospel, gives us the light of life (as Paul witnesses)
whereby also it is said that by believing we have passed from death into life,
being now not foreners and strangers, but citizens with the saints, and of
the householde of God, Ephesians. ii.xix.
which has made us to sit with the only begotten son himself in heavenly
places, that nothing may be wanting to perfect felicity: yet least if should be
grievous unto us to be exercised under this hard warfare, as though we had no
fruit of the victory which Christ has gotten, we must hold fast that which
is in an other place taught of ye nature of hope. For, because we hope for
those things which appear not, and (as it is said in an other place) faith is
a demonstration of things invisible: so long as we are enclosed in ye prison of
the flesh, Romans viii xxviii, He^. xx.i.ii. Cor. v.vi Colos. iii.iii. T^^.
ii.xii.
we are wayfaring from the Lord. For which reason the same Paul says in an
other place that we are dead, and that our life is hidden with Christ in God,
and that when he which is our life, shall appear, then shall we also appear
with him in glory. This therefore is our condition, that with living soberly
and justly and godlily in this world, we look for ye blessed hope, and ye
coming of ye glory of ye great God, and of our savior Jesus Christ. Here we
need a singular patience, yt we be not wearied and either turn back our
course, or forsake our standing. Therefore whatsoever has be^ hitherto set out
concerning our salvation, requires minds lifted up to heaven, i. Peter: viii.
yt we may love Christ whom we have not seen, and beleuynge in him may rejoice
with unspeakable and glorious ioyfulnesse, till we receive the end of our
says, as Peter tells us. Colos. i.v.
After which manner, Paul says yt the faith and charity of the godly has
respect to ye hope which is laid up in heaven. When we thus with our eyes
fastened upon Christ do hang of heaven, and nothing with holds them in earth,
from carrieng us to the promised blessedness: Matt. vii.xxi.
then is that truly fulfilled, Our heart is where our treasure is. Hereupon
comes that faith is so rare in the world, because nothing is more hard to our
dullness the^ through i^numerable steps to climb up above them with
endeuoringe forward to the price of our heavenly calling. To the great heap of
miseries wherwt we be almost overwhelmed, are added the mockinges of ungodly
men, wherewt our simplicity is railed at, when volutarily forsakinge the
allurementes of present good things, we seem to follow the blessedness hidden
from us, as it were a fleeing shadow. Finally above and beneth us, before us
and behind us, violent tentations besege us, to the susteining of the fear
whereof our courages should be far to weak, unless being vncumbred of earthly
things they were fast bound to ye heavenly life, which in seming is far from
us. Wherefore only it has soundly profited in ye Gospel, which is enured to a
continual meditation of the blessed resurrection.

Phil. iij.viii.
For, Paul sets up this mark to ye faithful, toward which he says yt he
endeuoreth, and forgets al things til he co^ to it. And so much ye more
cherfulli ought we to trauail toward it, least if this world wthold us, we
suffer grievous punishment for our slothfulness. Wherefore in an other place he
marketh ye faithful with this mark, yt their conversation is in heaven, from
whe^se also they look for their savior. And yt their courages should not
faint in this race, he joins al creatures companions with them. For, because
every where ar seen deformed ruins, he says yt al things in heaven and earth
do endeavor ye renewing. For since Adam by his fall dissolved the perfect order
of nature to the creatures, To. viii.xix.
their bondage is peineful and grievous, whereunto they are subject by reason of
the sin of man, not for that they are endued with any feling, but for yt they
naturally covet ye perfect estate from which they are fallen. Therefore Paul
says yt they groan, and are as in peine of child bearing, that we to whom are
given the first fruits of the Spirit, may be ashamed to pyne away in our
corruption, and not at the least to follow the dead elements, which bear peine
of an others sin. And ye more to prick us forward, he calls the last
coming of Christ our redemption. It is true in deed that all the parts of our
redemption are already fulfilled: but because Christ has ones ben offered for
sins, he shall be seen again without sin unto salvation. Heb. x.
With what miseries soever we be pressed, let this rede^ptio^ sustain us eue^
until ye performance of it.

i. Cor. xv.iiii.
unless ye dead do rise again: because our state should be more miserable tha^
the state of al men, namly since we lieng open to ye hatredes and reproaches of
many, are every hour in danger, yea and are as sheep appointed to ye
slaughter: and therefore ye authority thereof should fall away not only in one
part, but also in ye whole su^me which both our adoption and the effect of
our salvation co^teineth. And so let us be hedefully bent to this most earnest
thing of al, yt no continuance of time may make us weary. For which purpose I
have differred to this place yt which I had breefely to entreat of it, yt the
readers may learn, when they have received Christ ye author of their
salvation, to rise up hier, and may know yt he is clothed with heavenly
immortality and glory, yt the whole body may be made like fashioned to ye
head: as also ye holy ghost oftentimes sets forth in his person an example
of ye resurrection. It is a thing hard to be believed, ye bodies when they have
been consumed with rottenness, shall at their appointed time rise up again.
Therefore where many of ye Philosophers have affirmed souls to be i^mortal: ye
resurrection of ye flesh has been allowed of few: wherein although there was no
excuse, yet we are thereby put in mind, yt it is to hard a thing to draw man's
senses to believe it. That faith may overcome so great a stop, ye scriptur
ministers two helps: ye one is in ye likeness of Christ, ye other is ye
almightines of god. Now so often as ye resurrection is thought of, let ye image
of Christ come into our minds: which in ye nature yt he took of us, so ran
out ye race of mortal life, ij. Cor. iiii x.
yt now having obtained immortality, he is to us a pledge of ye resurrection
to co^. For in ye miseries wherwt we are beseged, we carry about his mortifieng
in our flesh, yt his life may be openli showed in us. And we may not sever him
from us, neither can we possibly, but that he must be torn in sunder. i. Cor.
xv.xiii.
Whereupon comes yt argument of Paul, If the dead do not rise again, then
neither is Christ risen again: because verily he takes yt principle for
confessed, ye Christ was not made subject to death, nor obtained victory of
death by rising again, privately for him self: but, yt that was begone in ye
head which must needs be fulfilled in all ye members, according to ye degree
and order of every one. For it were not right yt they should in all points be
made egal with him. It is said in ye Psalm. Ps. xvi.x.
Thou shall not suffer thy meke one to see corruption. Although a portion of
this trust perteine to us according to the measure of gift, yet the full effect
has not appeared but in Christ, which being free from all rotting has
received again his body whole. Phili. ii^^.xxi.
Now least the fellowship of blessed resurrection with Christ should be doutful to
us, yt we may be contented with this pledge, Paul expressly affirms yt he
therefore sits in heaven, and shall come at ye last day a judge, yt he may
make our base and vile body like fashioned to his glorious body. In an other
place also he teaches, yt God raised not up his son from death to ye intent
to show a token of his power: but to stretche out the same effectual force of
the Spirit toward us which are faithful: whom he therefore calls life, while
he lives in us, because he was given to this end that he should make alive yt
which is mortal in us. I knit up in a brefe abridgement those things which
might both be more largely handled and ar worth^ to be more gorgeously set out:
and yet I trust yt the godli readers shall in few words fi^de matter enough
which may suffice to edify their faith. Christ therefore is risen again, yt he
might have us companions of ye life to come. He was raised up of ye father, in
so much as he was ye head of ye church, from which he does in no wise suffer
himself to be plucked away. He was raised up by ye power of ye Spirit, which is
common to us unto the office of quickening. Finally he was raised up, yt he
should be resurrection and li^e. But as we have said yt in this miroure, there
is to be seen of us a lively image of the resurrection, so let it be to us a
sure substance to stay our mind, so yt yet we be not lotheful or weary of long
tarieng: because it is not our part to measure ye seasons of times by our will,
but patiently to rest, til God at his own fit time repair his kingdom. To
which purpose seems ye exhortation of Paul. The first fruits is Christ: and
then they yt are Christ's, ^* Cor. xv.
every one in his order. But y^ no question should be moved of ye resurrection
of Christ, upon which ye resurrection of us all is founded, we se by how many
and how diverse means he has made it approved by witness to us. Fine nosed
men will laugh at the history which ye Evangelists rehearse, as at a childish
mockery. For of what importance shall ye message be which fearful silly women
bring, and afterward ye disciples confirm being i^ a manner astonished? Whi
did not Christ rather set up ye triumphinge ensigns of his victore in ye
midst of the temple and the market place? Why came he not forth terrible into
ye sight of Pilate? Why does he not also prove himself to ye priests and to
whole Jerusalem yt he is risen up alive again? As for ye witnesses which he
chose, profane men will scarscely grant them to be sufficient. I answer yt
although in these beginnings ye weakness thereof was conte^ptible, yet all this
was governed by ye wonderful providence of God: ye partly the love of Christ
and zele of godliness, and par^ly their own hardness of belefe should carry
them in have to ye sepulcher which had lately ben dismayed for fear, ye they
might not only be seeing witnesses of ye thing, but also should hear of the
Angels yt which they saw with their eyes. How shall we suspect their credit,
who thought it to be a fable which they had heard of the women, til they were
brought to the present sight of the thing it self? As for all ye people and the
Ruler himself, after that they had be^ largely co^uinced, it is no marvel if as
well ye sight of Christ, as other signs, was not granted the^. The sepulcher
was sealed up, ye watchemen watched it, Mat. xxvii ^^vi. and xxviii.xi.
ye third day the body was not found, The soldiers corrupted with money
scattered a rumor ye his Disciples had stole^ him away. As though they had had
power to gather a band together, or had armure, or were practiced men to
enterprise any such seat. I^ ye soldiars had not courage enough to drive the^
away, why did they not pursue them, that with ye help of the people they might
have taken some of them? Pilate therefore with his ring truly sealed the
resurrection of Christ: and the watchemen which were set at the sepulcher both
in their holding their peace and in their lieng, were made publishers of ye
same resurrection. In the mean time ye voice of Angels sounded, He is risen,
he is not here. Luke xxiiij vj.
The heavenly glisteryng plainly showed yt they were not men but Angels.
Afterward, if there remained any douting, Christ himself took it away. The
disciples saw him ofter than ones, and also felt his feet and his hands, and
their hardness of believing not a little profited to the strengthenyng of our
faith. He disputes among them of the mysteries of the kingdom of God, and at
ye last in their sightes beholding him, Act. i.iij.
he ascended into heaven. And not only this sight was showed to ye xi.
Apostles, but also he was seen at ones of more than five hundred brethren. i.
Cor. xv.vi. Ihou. xvi. Act. ix.^^ii. Act. vii.lv.
Now when he sent the holy ghost, he showed a sure proof not only of life, but
also of the sovereign power: as he had said before, It is profitable for you
yt I go: otherwise the holy ghost shall not come. But now Paul was
overthrown by the way not by the strength of a dead man, but he felt him
whom he persecuted to have most hie power. To Stephan he appeared for an other
end, namely that with assurednes of life he might overcome the fear of death.
To discredit so many authentike witnesses, is not only a part of
distrustfulnesse, but also of frawarde and furious stubbournesse.

This which we have said, yt in proving the resurrection our senses must Phi.
iii.xx
Paul brefely teaches, that he may make (says he) our vile body like
fashioned to the body of his brightness, according to the working of his power,
by which he may subdue al things to himself. Wherefore nothing is more unmeet,
than here to have respect what may naturally be done, where an inestimable
miracle is set before us, which with the greatness thereof swalloweth up our
senses. Yet Paul by setting forth an example of nature, reproves their dulnes
which deny the resurrection. Thou fool (says he) yt which thou sowest is not
quickened unless it first die. etc. He says yt in sede is sen a form of the
resurrection, because out of rottennes grows corn. Neither were it so hard
a thing to believe, if we were as heedeful as we ought to be to the miracles
which throughout all the costs of ye world do offer themselves to our eyes.
Butte let us remember that none is truly persuaded of the resurrection to
come, but he which being ravished into admiration, Esa. xxvi xix.
gives to the power of God his glory. Esaie lifted up with this affiance,
cries out, Thy dead shall live, my carcass shall rise again. Awake ye, and
praise, ye dwellers of the dust. In despeired case he lifts up himself to God
the author of life, in whose hand are the ends of death, Ps. lxviii, Job.
xix.xxv.
as it is said in the psalm. Job also being liker to a carrion tha^ to a man,
trusting upon the power of god sticks not as though he were whole and sound
to lift up himself to that day saienge, I know that my redeemer lives: and
in the last day he shall rise upon the duste (namely to show forth his
power therein) and I shall again be compassed with my skin, and in my flesh
I shall see God, I shall see him, and none other. For albeit that some do
suttlely wreste these places, as though they ought not to be understand of
the resurrection, yet they strengthen that which they covet to overthrow:
because the holy men in their euels seek comfort from no where else, than
from the likeness of the resurrection. Which better appears by the place of
Ezechiel. For when the Jews believed not the promise of their return, and
objected that it was no more lykely that a way should be made open for them,
than that dead men should come out of their grave: E^. xxxl^i.viii.
there was a vision showed to the Prophet, a fyelde full of dry bones: those
the Lord commanded to take again flesh and sinews. Although under that
figure he raises up the people to hope of return: yet the matter of hoping he
gathers of the resurrection: Ihon. v.xxvii.
as it is to us an examplar of the deliverances which the faithful do feel in
this world. So Christ, when he had taught that the voice of the Gospel gives
life: because the Jews received not this, he by and by said further. Marvel
not at this, because the hour comes in which all that are in the graves
shall hear the voice of the son of God, and shall come forth. Therefore
after this example of Paul, ^^ Tim. iiii viij.
let us already cherefully triumph in the midst of battles, because he which
has promised life to come, is mighty to keep yt which is left with him: and
so let us glory that a crown of righteousness is laid up for us, which
the just judge shall deliver us. So shall it com to pass, that whatsoever
greues we suffer, they shall be to us a showing of the life to come, because it
agrees with the nature of God to render affliction to the wicked which
afflict us: but to us which are unjustly afflicted, rest at the appearing of
Christ with the Angels of his power, in a flame of fire. But that is to be
holden which he adds by and by afterward, that he shall come that he may be
glorified in his saints, and be made wonderful in all them that have believed,
because the Gospel has been believed.

Ec. ix.iiij
when he says that a living dog is better then a dead Lion. And in an
other place. Who knows whether the soul of a man go upward, Ec. iij.xxi
and the soul of a beast go downewarde? But in all ages this brutishe
senseless errore has been common in the world, yea and has broken into ye
Church it self: for, Marc xii.xvi i. Luck. xx.xx.vi^. Ac. ii.viij.
the Sadduces have presumed to profess openly that there is no resurrection,
yea and that souls are mortal. But that this gross ignorance should not help
to excuse any man, the infideles even by very instinct of nature have always
had an image of the resurrection before their eyes. For to what purpose served
that holy and inviolable manner of burieng, but to be an earnest of new life?
Neither may it be answered that this spring of error: because the
religiousnesse of burial was always in ure among the holy Fathers, and God
willed the same manner to remain among the Gentiles, that an image of the
rusurrection set before them might awake their drowsinesse. But although that
ceremony wanted his use of profitinge, yet it is profitable for us if we
wisely mark the end of it, because it is no sclender confutation of unbelief,
yt al together professed yt which no man believed. But Satan has not only
astonished the senses of men, so that they have buried with the bodies the
remembrance of the resurrection, but also has practiced to corrupt this part
of doctrine with diverse fained inventions, that at length it might utterly
die. I pass over how in Paul's time Satan began to pinche at it: but in a
little after there followed the Millenaries, which limited the reign of
Christ to a thousand years. Their error is so childishe, that it needs
not or is not worthy of any confutatio^. Reave. xx.iiij.
Neither does the Revelation make on their side, by which it is certain that
they colored their error: forasmuch as in the place where he mentions the
number of a thousand, he entreats not of the eternal blessedness of the
Church, but only of the diverse trobles which were to come upon the Church,
while it yet travailed in earth. But the whole Scripture cries out that there
shall be no end of the blessedness of the elect, nor of the punishment of the
reprobate. Now of all things which both are hidden from our sight and do far
pass the capacity of our mind, either we must fetch the credit out of the
certain oracles of God, or we must utterly cast it away. They which assign
to the children of God a thousand years to enjoy the inheritance of the life
to come, do not mark how great a dishonor they do both to Christ and his
kingdom. For if they shall not be clothed with immortality: then neither is
Christ himself, to whose glory they shall be newly fashioned, received into the
immortal glory. If their blessedness shall have any end: then the kingdom of
Christ* upon the steadfastness whereof it stands, endures but for a time.
Finally either they are most unskillful of all matters concerning God, or they
go about with crooked maliciousness to overthrow the whole grace of God and
power of Christ, the fulfillyng whereof is no otherwise perfect, but when sin
being blotted out and death swallowed up, eternal life is fully restored. But
very blind men may see how fondly they play the fools, which fear that they
should ascribe to God to great cruelty if the reprobate be condemned to
everlasting peynes. The Lord forsothe shall do wrong, if he deny his kingdom
to them which have by their unthankfulness made themselves unworthy of it.
But (say they) their sins endure but for a time. I grant: but the majesty,
yea and the righteousness of God, which they have offended by sinnyng, is
eternal. Worthily therefore the remembrance of iniquity dies not: But so the
pain excedeth the measure of the fault. This is a blasphemy not to be
suffered, when the majesty of God is so little set by, when the despising thereof
is esteemed at no greater value than the destruction of one soul. But let us
leave these trifles least contrary to that which we have before said, we may
seem to judge their dotages worthy of confutation.

Byside these, there have been two other doting errors brought in by ii. Pet.
^.xiiii. i^. Cor. v.^.
So Peter being me to death, says that the time is come, when he must say
away his tent. And Paul speaking of the faithful, after that he has said:
That when our earthly house shall be dissolved, there is a bildyng for us in
heaven, adioyneth that we are wayferyng from the Lord so long as we abide in
the body, but do desire the presence of God in the absence of the body. If the
souls do not ouerliue the bodies, what is it that has God present when it is
severed from the body? But the Apostle takes away all doutyng, Hebr. xii.xxxi.
when he teaches that we are joined in fellowship to the spirits of the
righteous. By which words he shows, that we are joined in fellowship to the
holy fathers, which even being dead do keep the same godliness with us, so
that we can not be the members of Christ unless we grow together with them.
Unless also the souls being unclothed of the bodies, did keep still their
substance and were able to receive blessed glory, Christ would not have said to
the thief, Luc. xxiii.xliii.
This day thou shall be with me in paradise. Having so clear testimonies, let
us not dout after the example of Christ when we are dyeng, to commend our
souls to God, or after the example of Stephen to commit them to Christ to
keep, Act. vii.^ix. i. Pet. ii.xxv.
which not unworthily is called a faithful shepeherd and bishop of them. To
enquire of their mean state, is neither lawful nor expedient. Many do much
combe^ themselves with disputing what place they keep, and whether they do now
enjoy the heavenly glory or no. But it is folly and rashness, to search
depelier of unknown things, than God does give us leave to know. Matthew.
v.viii. and xxvi. Ioh. xii.^xxii.
When the Scripture, has said that Christ is present with them, and receives
them into paradise that they may enjoy comfort, on the other side that the
souls of ye reprobate do suffer such peines as they have deserved: it goes
no further. What teacher or master shall now open to us that which God has
hidden? Of the place, the question is no less fond and vain: for as much as we
know that there is not the same dimension of the soul which is of the body.
Whereas the blessed gatheryng together of holy spirits is called the bosom of
Abraham, it is enough for us after this wayfaryng to be received of the common
father of the faithful, that he may communicate with us the fruit of his
faith. In the mean time ^i^he the Scripture every where bids us to hang
upon the expectation of Christ's coming, and differreth the crown of glory
till then: let us be content with these bonds appointed us of God: namely, that
the souls of the godly having ended the labor of their warfare do go into a
blessed rest, where with happy ioyfulnesse they look for the enioyeng of the
promised glory: and that so all things are holden in suspense till Christ the
redemer appear. As for the Reprobate, it is no dout that they have the same
estate which Jude assigns to the Deuels, Iud. i.vi.
to be holden bound with cheynes, till they be drawn to the punishment
whereunto they are condemned.

of heaven, it hinders not the resurrection. And first, whereas Paul bids
the faithful to cleanse themselves from all de^ilyng of the flesh and of the
Spirit, ii. Cor. v^ i.
thereupon follows the judgment which he in an other place pronounces, ii.
Cor. v.^
that every man shall receive by his body either good or euel. Wherewith agrees
that which he writes to the Corinthia^s, ii. Cor. iiii x. i. These. v.xxiii.
That ye life of Jesus Christ may be openly showed in our mortal flesh. For
which reason in an other place he does no less pray that God preserve the
bodies whole unto the day of Christ, than the souls and spirits. And no
marvel, because it were a most great absurdity that the bodies which God has
dedicate to be temples to himself, should fall away into rottenness without
hope of risyng again. What say we to this, i. Cor. vi.xv.
that they are also the members of Christ? that God commands all the parts
of them to be sanctified to himself? that he wills his name to be praised
with tongues, i. Tim. ii.viii.
pure hands to be lifted up to him, sacrifices to be offered? What madness is
it therefore that that part to which the heavenly judge has vouchesaued to
grant so great honor, should be brought from a mortal man into dust without
any hope of restoring? i. Cor. v^.xx.
Likewise when Paul exhorts us to suffer the Lord as well in body as in
soul, because both belong to God, verily he suffers not that which he
chalengeth to God as holy, to be adjudged to eternal rottenness. Neither is
there a plainer determination of the Scripture for any thing, tha^ for the
risyng again of this flesh which we bear. i. Cor. x^i.liii.
This corruptible (says Paul) must put on uncorruption, and this mortal must
put on immortality. If God did make new bodies, where is this changyng of
quality? If it had been said that we must be renewed, the doutful speech
paraduenture might have given occasion to their cauillatio^. To. xiiii* xi.
But now when pointyng with his ^ingar to the bodies wherewith we are clothed,
he promises to them uncorruption, he plainly enough denies any new bodies to
be made. Yea he could not (says Tertullia^) speak more plainly, unless he
had holden his own skin in his hand. And they can by no cauillation escape
from this, that where in an other place he says that Christ shall be the judge
of the world, he allegeth this testimony of Esaye, Esa. xlix.xviii.
I live, (says the Lord) every knee shall bow to me: for as much as he plainly
pronounces that they to who^ he speaks shall be subject to yield an account of
their life: which could not agree, if new bodies should be brought before the
judgment seat. Now in the words of Daniel there is no doutfulnesse: Dan.
xii.
And many of them that sleep in the earth of dust, shall awake, some to
eternal life, and some to reproaches and to everlasting contempt: sith he
fetches not new matter out of the four elements to make men, but calls
dead men out of their graves. And this very plain reason teaches. For if
mortality which took beginning at the fall of man, be accidental: then the
repayring, which Christ brought, pertains to the same body which began to be
mortal. And truly, whereas the Athenians laughed when Paul affirmed the
resurrection, thereupon we may gather what manner of resurrection he preached:
and that same laughyng not smally anayleth to strengthen our faith. The saying
of Christ also is worthy to be noted: Matthew. ^.xxviii.
Fear not them which kill the body, and can not kill the soul: but fear him
which can throw both the soul and the body into hell of fire. For there is no
cause to fear, unless the body which we now bear be subject to punishment.
And no less plain is an other saying of the same Christ, John. v.xxviii.
The hour comes, when all they yt are in graves, shall hear the voice of the
son of God, and shall come forth: they that have done good, into the
resurrection of life: but they that have done euel, into the resurrection of
judgment. Shall we say that souls rest in the graves, that they lieng there
may hear Christ? and not rather that at his commandment the bodies shall
return into the liveliness which they had lost? Moreover if we shall have new
bodies gene^ us, where is the likefashioning of the head and the members?
Christ rose again: Ih. ii.xix.
was it with forgyng to himself a new body? No, but as he had said before,
Destroy this temple, and in three days I will bulde it up: he took again the
same body which he had before borne mortal, For he had not much profited us,
if a new body being put in place, the old body had been destroyed which was
offered up for a sacrifice of satisfactorie cleansing. We must also hold fast
that fellowship which the Apostle preaches: ^. Cor. xv.xii.
That we rise again, because Christ has risen again: for nothing is less
probable than that our flesh in which we bear about the mortifieng of Christ,
should be deprived of the resurrection of Christ. Which verily appeared by a
notable example, when at the risyng again of Christ, Mat. xvii.iii.
many bodies of the Saints came out of the graves. For it can not be denied
that this was forshewyng, or rather an earnest of the last resurrection which
we hope for: Candidati, men clothed in white, as were among the Romans they
that were suitors for or newly elected into office.
such as was before in Enoch and Elias, whom Tertullian calls New
possessors of the resurrection: because they being in body and soul delivered
from corruption, were received into the keeping of God.

Col. ii.x^.
For this reason baptism (as Paul witnesses) is to us a seal of the
resurrection to come: and likewise the holy Supper allureth us to the trust
thereof, when we receive with our mouth the Signs of spiritual grace. And
truly the whole exhortation of Paul, ii. Cor. vi.ii^^. and vii. To. viij.xi
that we give our me^bres to be weapons unto the obedience of righteousness,
should be cold unless that were joined which he adds afterward, He that has
raised up Christ from the dead, shall quicken also your mortal bodies. For,
what should it profit to apply our feet, hands, eyes, and tongues unto the
service of God, unless they were partakers of the fruit and reward? i. Cor.
vi.xii. and xv.xix.
Which thing Paul plainly confirms with his own words, saying: The body not
to fornication, but to the Lord: and the lord to the body. And he that has
raised up Christ, shall also raise up us by his power. More plain are those
words which follow: that our bodies are the temples of the holy ghost and the
members of Christ. In the mean time we see how he joins the resurrection
with chastity and holiness, as a little after he says that the price of
redemption pertains also to the bodies. Gala. vi.xvi^.
Now it were not reasonable that the body of Paul, in which he has borne the
prin^es of Christ, and in which he honorably glorified Christ, should lose ye
reward of the crown. Phil. iij.xxi.
Whereupon also came that glorieng, We look for the redemer from heaven, which
shall make our vile body like fashioned to the body of his brightness. And if
this be true, that we must by many afflictions enter into the kingdom of God,
Act. xiiii.xxii.
no reason suffers to debar the bodies from this entry, which God both
exercises under the standard of the cross, and honoreth with the praise of
victory. Therefore of this matter there arose among the Saints no douting, but
yt they hoped to be co^panio^s of Christ, which remoueth into his own person
all the afflictions wherewith we are proved, to teach that they bring life. Yea
and under the law he exercised the holy fathers in this faith with an outward
ceremony. For to what purpose served the usage of burieng, as we have already
showed, but that they should know that there is new life prepared for the
bodies that are laid up? Hereunto also tended the spices and other signs of
immortality, wherewith under the law the darkness of faith was helped eue^ as
it was by the sacrifices. Neither was that manner bredde by superstition, for
as much as we see yt the Spirit does no less diligently rehearse burialles than
the chief mysteries of faith. Mat. xxvi.x.
And Christ commends that work as a special work, truly for none other
reason but because it lifts up our eyes from beholding of the grave which
corrupts and destroys all, to the sight of the renewyng. Moreover the so
diligent observing of the ceremony which is praised in the Fathers,
sufficiently proves yt it was to them a rare and precious help of faith. Genesis
xxi^.iiii. and xix.
For neither would Abraham have so carefully provided for the burieng place of
his wife, unless there had been set before his eyes a religion and a profit
hier than the world, namely yt garnishing the dead body of his wife with the
signs of the resurrection he might confirm both his own faith and the faith
of his household. But a clerer proof of this thing appears in the example of
Jacob, Ge. xivii.xxx.
which to testify to his posterity yt the hope of the promised land was not
even by death fallen out of his mind, commanded his bones to be carried
thither. I beseech you, if he was to be clothed with a new body, should he not
have given a fond co^man^dement concerning dust yt should be brought to nothing?
Wherefore if their authority of the Scripture be of any force with us, there
ca^ be required of no doctrine either a more clear or more certain proof. For
this even children understand by the words of Resurrection, and raising up
again, For neither can we call it the Resurrection of that which is now first
created, neither should that saying of Christ stand fast, Ieva. vi.x^^^^.
Whatsoever the Father has given me, it shall not perish, but I will raise it up
in the last day. To the same purpose serves the word of Sleping, which
pertains only to the bodies. Whereupon also burieng places were called
Coemeteria* Sleping places. Now it remains that I speak somewhat of yt manner
of the resurrection. ^
I use this word, because Paul calling it a mystery, exhorts us to
sobriety, and bridleth the liberty to dispute like Philosophers freely and
suttelly of it. First we must hold, as we have said, that we shall rise
again in the same flesh which we bear, as touching the substance, but the
quality shall be other. As when the same flesh of Christ which had been offered
for sacrifice, was raised up again, yet it excelled in other qualities as if
it had been altogether an other flesh. Which thing Paul declares by familiar
examples. For as there is all one substance of the flesh of a man, and of a
beast, but not al one quality: as all stars have like matter, but not like
brightness: so he teaches that though we shall keep still the substance of our
body, yet there shall be a change, that the state of it may be much more
excellent. The body therefore, that we may be raised up again, shall not
perish nor vanish away: but puttyng of corruption, it shall put on
uncorruption. But for as much as God has all the elements ready at his beck,
no hardiness shall hinder him, but that he may command both the earth and
waters and fire, to render that which seems to be consumed by them. Esa.
xxvi.^^^.
Which also Esaias testifies, though not without a figure, where he says,
Behold, the Lord shall go forth of his place, that he may visit the iniquity
of the earth: and the earth shall discover her blood, and shall no more hide her
dead. But there is to be noted a difference between them that have been dead
long before, and those who^ that day shall find alive. i. Cor. xv.^i.
For we shall not all sleep (as Paul says) but we shall all be changed: that
is to say, it shall not be of necessity that there be a distance of time
between death and the beginning of the second life: because in a moment of
time, and in the twyncling of an eye, the sound of the trompet shall pearce, to
raise up the dead incorruptible, and with a sodeyne change to fashion again
the living into the same glory. i. These. iiii.^v.
So in an other place he comfort the faithful which must die: because they
which shall then remain alive shall not go before the dead, but rather they
shall first rise again which have slept in Christ. Hebr. ix.xxvii.
If any object that saying of the Apostle, that it is appointed to all mortalll
men ones to dye, it is easy to answer it with saying that when the state of
nature is changed, it is a kind of death, and is fittly so called. And
therefore these things agree well together, that all shall be renewed by death
when they shall put of their mortal body: and yet that it is not necessary
that there be a seueryng of the body and the soul where there shall be a
sodeyne changyng.

^h. xi.xxv.
We know that all were in Adam condemned to death: Christ came the
resurrection and life. Came he to give life to all mankind universally without
choice? But what is more against reason, than that they should by their
obstinate blindness obtain that which the godly worshippers of God do
obtain by only faith? Yet this remains certain, that there shall be one
resurrection of judgment, Mat. xxv.xx^^.
and an other resurrection of life, and that Christ shall come to sever the
Lambs from the Goats. I answer, that this ought not to seem strange, the
likeness whereof we see in daily experience. We see that in Adam we were
depryued of the inheritance of the whole world, and that we are by no less
just reason debarred from common food, than from the eating of the tree of
life. Whense then comes it to pass, that God does not only make his sun
to rise upon the good and evil, Matthew. v.xlv.
but also as touching the uses of this present life, his inestimable
liberality continually flows forth to them with large plentuousnesse? Hereby
verily we know that those things which properly belong to Christ and his
members, do also ouerflowe to the wicked: not that it is their rightful
possession, but that they may be made the more inexcusable. So the wicked do
oftentimes find God beneficial, by more than mean proves, yea such as
sometime do darken all the blessings of the Godly, but yet do turn to their
greater damnation. If any man object, that the resurrection is not fitly
compared to fading and earthly benefits: here also I answer that so sone as
they were estranged from God the fountain of life, they deserved the death of
the Deuell, whereby they should be utterly destroyed: Yet by the marvelous
counsel of God there was found a mean state that out of life they might
live in death. No more absurdity ought it to seem, if the resurrection happen
to the wicked, which draws them against their wills to the judgment seat
of Christ, whom now they refuse to hear for their master and teacher. For
it were a small pain to be consumed away with death, if they were not, to
suffer punishment for their obstinacy, brought before the judge, whose
vengeance they have without end and measure provoked against themselves. But
although we must hold that which we have said, and which that notable
confession Paul before Felix conteyneth, Act. xx^^^^.xv.
that he looks for the resurrection of the righteous and wicked: yet the
Scripture oftentimes sets forth election together with the heavenly glory
to the only children of God: Because Christ proprely came not to the
destruction, but to the salvation of the world. Therefore in the Creed there
is made mention of the blessed life only.

But for as much as the Prophecy of death swallowed up by victory, Ose.
xiii.xiiii. i. Cor. xv.liiii.
let us always have in mind the eternal felicity, the end of the
resurrection: of the excellency whereof, if all things were spoken which the
tongues of men where able to speak, yet scarcely the smallest parcel thereof
should be expressed. For how so ever we truly hear that the kingdom of God
shall be stuffed full with bryghtnesse, joy, felicity, and glory: yet those
things that are spoken of are most far removed from our sense, and remain
as it were wrapped in dark speeches, until that day come when he himself
shall give to us his glory to be seen face to face. i. Ih. iii.ii.
We know (says John) that we are the children of God, but it has not yet
appeared. But when we shall be like to him, then we shall see him such as he is.
Wherefore ye Prophets, because they could by no words express the spiritual
blessedness in it self, did in a manner grossly portray it out under bodily
things. But for as much as the feruentnesse of desire must with some taste of ye
sweetness be kindled in us, let us chefely continue in this thought, yt if god
do as a certain fountain which can not be drawn dry, co^teyne in him the
fullness of al good things, nothing is beyond him to be coueted of them yt tend
toward the sovereign good and the full perfection of felicity: as we are
taught in many places. Ge. xv.ii.
Abraham, I am thy reward excedyng great. With which saying accords David,
Ps. xvi.vi Psa. xvii.xv. ii. Pet. i.iiii.
The Lord is my portion, the lot has very well fallen to me. Again in an other
place, I shall be satisfied with thy countenance. But Peter pronounces that the
faithful are called to this end, that they may be made partakers of the nature
of God. How s^^ because he shall be glorified in all his saints, and shall be made
wonderful in them that have believed. If the Lord will enterparten his glory,
power, and righteousness with his elect, yea and will give himself to them to
be enjoyed, and (which is better) will after a certain manner grow into one
with them: let us remember that under this benefit is contained all kind of
felicity. And when we have much profited in this meditation, let us
reknowledge that we yet stay beneth at the bottom of the roots, if the
conceiuyng of our mind be compared with the highness of this mystery.
Wherefore in this behalf we must keep sobriety, least with how much greater
boldinesse we shall fly up on hye being unmindful of our own small measure,
so much more the brightness of the heavenly glory ouerwhelme us. We feel
also how the unmeasurable gredinesse to know more than is lawful, tickleth
us: from whense both trifling and hurtful questions do spryng from time to
time: triflyng I call those of which there can no profit be gathered. But this
second kind is worse, because they which give themselves to them, do
entangle themselves with pernicious speculations, and therefore I call them
hurtful. That which the Scriptures do teach, ought to be out of all dout
with us: namely that as God diversely distributyng his gifts to the Saints in
this world, does unequally enlighten them, so the measure of glory shall not be
equal in heaven where God shall crown his gifts. For neither does this belong
indifferently to all which Paul says, i. These. ii.xix. Mat. xix.xxviii.
Ye are my glory and crown in the day of Christ: nor also that saying of
Christ to the Apostles: Ye shall sit iudgyng the twelve tribes of Israel. But
Paul (which know that as God enricheth the holy ones with spiritual gifts
in earth, so he beautifieth them with glory in heaven) douteth not that there
is a peculiar crown laid up for him according to the rate of his labors. And
Christ, to set forth to the Apostles the dignity of the office which they did
bear, tells them that the fruit thereof is laid up for them in heaven. So
Daniel also says, Da. xii.iii
But the wise shall shine as the brightness of the firmament, and they which
justify many, as Sterres to the worlds end and for ever. And if a man
heedefully consider the Scriptures, they do not only promise eternal life to
the faithful, but also special reward to every one. Whereupon comes that
saying of Paul, ii. Timot. xiii.xiiij. Matt. xix.xxix.
The Lord render to him in that day. Which the promise of Christ confirms,
Ye shall receive a hundred fold in the eternal life. Finally as Christ
begins in this world the glory of his body with manifold diversity of
gifts, and increases it by degrees: so he shall also make it perfect in
heaven.

to them, they will not pass their appointed bonds. As for my part, I do not
only privately forbear superfluous searchyng of unprofitable things, but I
also think that I ought to beware that I do not whithe answeryng nourishe the
lightness of other. Men hungry of vain knowledge do ask how great shall be
the distance between the Prophets and the Apostles, and again between the
Apostles and the Martyrs: how many degrees Uirgins differ from married folks:
finally they leave no corner of heaven unsearched. Then it comes in their
minds to enquire to what purpose serves the repairing of the world, since the
children of God shall need nothing of all this so great and incomparable
plenty: but shall be like to the Angels, whose not eatinge is a Sign of the
eternal blessedness. But I answer yt in the very syghte there shall be so
great pleasantness, so great sweetness in the only knoweledge without any
use, that this felicity shall far pass all the helps wherewith we be now
helped. Let us imagine our selves to be set in the most wealthy coaste of
the world, and where we shall want no ple^sure: yet who^ is there whom his
sickness do not sometime hinder and not suffer to use the benefits of God?
Who is there whose course his own intemperance does not often break in sunder?
Whereupon follows that a clear enjoying and pure from al fault, although
there be no use of corruptible life, is the perfection of felicity. Some go
further and ask whether dross and other corruptions in metalles, be not far
from restoring and are contrary to it. Which though in some respect I grant
them, To. viij.xxii.
yet I look with Paul for the repairing of these faults which took their
beginning at sin, toward which repairing they groan and are in travail.
Yet they proceed further, and ask what better estate is prepared for man,
sith the blessing of issue shall them be at an end. This knot is also easy to
be loosed. Whereas the Scripture so honorably sets out that kind of
blessyng, that is referred to the encreasces wherewith God continually draws
forward the order of nature her mark: but in the perfection it is known that
there is an other manner. But sith the unware are easily taken with
allurementes, and then the maze draws them in depelier, and at length when
every man's devises please himself there is no end of stryuyng: therefore let
this be a short way for us, to be contented with the glass and dark speech
until we shall see face to face. For few of a great multitude care which way
they may go to heaven: but all do before their time covet to know what is done
there. All being commonly sluggish and slow to enter into battles, do already
paint out to themselves imagined triumphs.

Now because noe description can match the greuousnesse of the Mat.
viii.xii. and xxii.xiii. Mar. ix.xliii.
their torments and peines ar fygured to us by bodyly things, namely by
darkness, weping, gnasshinge of teethe, unquenchable fire, and a worm
endlessly gnawinge the heart. For by such manners of speech it is certain
that the Holy ghooste meante to trouble all our senses with horror: Esa.
lxxii.xxiiii.
as when yt is said that there is prepared from eternity a deep Hell, that
the nouryshmentes thereof are fire and much wood: that the blast of the Lord,
as a stream of bremstone, does set it on fire. Esa. xxx.xxxiii.
As by such things we must by helped after a certain manner to conceive the
miserable state of the wicked, so we ought chiefly to fasten our thought upon
this how wretched a thing it is to be estranged from the fellowship of God: and
not that only, but also to feel the majesty of God so bent against thee, that
thou can not escape but be fast strayned of it. For first his displeasure is
like a most violent fire, with touching whereof all things are devoured and
swallowed up. Then, all creatures so serve him to execute his judgment, that
they to whom the Lord shall so show his wrath, shall feel the heaven, earth,
sea, and beasts, as it were with cruel indignation enflamed against them and
armed to their destruction. Wherefore it is no small thing that the Apostle
pronounces when he says that the unbelieving shall suffer eternal punishment by
dyeng from the face of the Lord, i. These. i.ix.
and from the glory of his power. And so often as the Prophets do cast us in
fear with bodily figures, although they speak nothing excessiuely for our
dullness, yet they add fore shewynges of yt judgment to come, in the sun
and the moon and the whole frame of the world. Wherefore the unhappy
consciences do find no rest, from being vexed and tossed with a terrible
whirlewinde, from felyng themselves to be torn in pieces by God being angirly
bent against them, from being pierced and launced with deadly stinges, from
tre^bling at the lightening of God, and being broosed with the weight of his
hand: so that it is much more ease to enter into al bottomless depthes and
deuouryng pittes, than to stand one moment in those terrors. What and how
great then is this, to be pressed with everlasting and never cessing siege of
him? Of which thing the.xc. Psalm conteyneth a notable sentence: that
although with only sight he scatter abroad all mortal men and bring them to
naught, yet his worshippers, how much more ferefull they are in the world, so
much more he enforces them and pricketh them forward laden with the cross,
until he be all in all.

The end of the third Book.
THE FOVRTH BOOK OF THE INSTItution of Christen religion, which entreats of
the outvvard means or helps, vvherby God allureth us into the felovvshyp of
Christ and holds us therein.
The first Chapter. Of the true Church with which we ought to keep unity,
because it is the mother of all the godly.
THat by Faith of the Gospel Christ is become ours, and we be made partakers of
the salvation brought by him and of eternal blessedness, is already declared
in the last book. But because our rudeness, and slothfulness, yea and
vanity of wit, do need outward helps whereby Faith in us may both be
engendered, and grow and increase in proceeding toward the mark whereunto it
tends: God has also added them, thereby to provide for our weakness. And
that the Preaching of the Gospel might floryshe, he has left this treasure
with the Church. Ephesians. iiii.xi.
He has appointed Pastors and teachers, by whoes mouth he might teach them
that be his: he has furnyshed them with authority, finally he has left
nothing undone that might avail to the holy consent of faith and right order.
First of all he has ordained Sacraments, which we feel by experience to be
more than profitable helps to nourishe and confirm Faith. For because being
enclosed in the prison of our flesh, we do not yet attain to the degree of
Angels, God applying himself to our capacity according to his wonderful
Providence, has appointed a mean whereby we being far distant from him might
come unto him. Wherefore the order of teaching requires that now we entreat of
the Church, and of the government, orders, and power of it, and then of the
Sacraments, and lastely also of civil order: and therewithal that we call
away the godly readers from those corruptions wherewyth Satan in the Papane
has depraved all things that God had appointed for our salvation. I will
begin at the Church, into whoes bosom God will have his children to be
gathered together, not only that they should by her help and ministry be
nouryshed while they are infantes and young children, but also be ruled by her
motherly care till they grow to ryper age, and at length come to the mark of
Faith. For it is not lawful that those things be severed which God has
conjoined, that to whom he is a Father, Ma. x.ix. Gal. viii.xxvi.
the Church be also their mother: and that not only under the law, but also
sins the coming of Christ, as Paul witnesses, which teaches that we are
the children of the new and heavenly Jerusalem.

In the Creed, where we profess that we believe the Church, Believe is there
set, because oftentimes there can no other difference be noted between the
children of God and the ungodly, between his peculiar flock and savage
beasts. For whereas many do enterlace this word in, that is without probable
reason. I grant in deed that it is the more commonly used, and also wants
nor the consenting testimony of antiquity, forasmuch as even the Nicen Creed,
as it is reported in the Ecclesiastical history, adds the preposition in.
But there withal we may mark by the writings of the ancient Fathers, that
it was in old time received without controversy to say, that they believed the
Church and not in the Church. For Augustine, and that ancient writer
whatsoever he was, whoes work remains under the name of Cyprian concerning
the exposition of the Creed, do not only so speak themselves, but also do
expressly note that it should be an improper manner of speaking if the
preposition were adjoined, and they confirm their opinion with no trifling
reason. For we therefore testify that we believe in God because upon him as a
true speaker our mind reposeth it self, and in him our confidence rests
which could not so conveniently be spoken to say in the Church, no more than
it could be said, I believe in the forgiveness of sins, or in the
resurrection of the flesh. Therefore although I would not strive about
words, yet I had rather follow the propriety of speaking that should be
fittest to express the matter, tha^ curiously to seek for forms of speech
whereby the matter may without cause be darkened. But the end is, yt we should
know that although the devil attempt all means to overthrow the grace of
Christ, and though the ennemies of God be carried with violente rage to the
same entente: yet it can not be extinguished, nor the blood of Christ be made
barren, but that it will bring forth some fruit. And so is both the secret
election of God, and his inward calling to be considered: because he alone
knows who be his, and holds the^ enclosed under a seal as Paul terms
it: saying that they bear his tokens whereby they may be severally known
from the reprobate. Ep. i.xiii.
But because a small and contemptible number lies hid under a huge multitude,
and a few grains of wheat are covered with a heap of chafe, to God only
is to be left the knowledge of his Church, the fundation whereof is his
secret election. But it is not sufficient to conceive in thought and mind
the multitude of the elect, unless we think upon such an unity of the
Church into which we be truly persuaded that we our selves be engraffed. For
unless we be under our head Christ united together with all the rest of his
members, there abides for us no hope of the inheritance to come. It is
therefore called Catholic or Uniuersall, because we can not find two or three
Churches but that Christ must be torn in sonder, which can not be done. But
all the elect of God are so knitt together in Christ, that as they hang upon
one head, so they may grow together as it were into one body, cleaving
together with such a compacting of joints as the members of one self body:
being truly made one, which with one hope, Faith, Charity, with one self
Spirit of God do live together, being called not only into one
inheritance of eternal life, but also into one partaking of one God and
Christ. Wherefore although the sorowefull desolation that on each side
presents it self in sight, cries out that there is nothing left of the
Church, yet let us know that Christ's death is fruitful and that God
maruellously as it were in secret corners preserves his Church. i. Kin.
xix.xviii.
As it was said to Elias, I have kept to my self seven thousand men that
have not bowed their knee before Baal.

Albeit this article of the Creed does in some respect belong to the Act,
iiii, xxxi. Ephesians, iiii.iiii.
and Paul, when he exhorts the Ephesians to be one body, one Spirit, as
they be called in one hope. For it is not possible, if they be truly persuaded
that God is the common father, and Christ the common head to them all, but that
being conjoined among themselves with brotherly love, they should continually
communicate those things that they have. Now it much behooves us to know
what profit thereupon returns unto us. For we believe the Church to this
end, that we may be certainly persuaded that we are the members of it. For by
this mean, our salvation rests upon sure and sound stays, that it,
although the whole frame of the world be shaken, can not come to ruin and fall
down. First it stands with gods election, neither can it varye or fail
but together with his eternal Providence. Then, it is after a certain manner
joined with the steadfastness of Christ, which will no more suffer his
faithful to be plucked from him, than his own members to be rent and torn
in pieces. Beside that, we are assured that truth shall always abide with us,
so long as we are holden in the bosom of the Church. Last of all that we
feel that these promises belong to us, Joel, ii.xxxii. Abd. xv^i. Ps. xl.vi, vi.
there shall be salvation in Syon, God shall for ever abide in Jerusalem, that
it may not at any time be moved. So much can the partaking of the Church do,
that it holds us in the fellowship of God. Also in the very word Communion
is much comfort: because while it remains certain, that what soever the
Lord gives to his and our members, belongs to us, our hope is by all
their good things confirmed. But in such sort to embrace the unity of the
Church, it is not needful (as we have already said) to see the Church it
self with our eyes, or feel it with our hands: but rather by this that it
consists in Faith, we are admonished that we ought no less to think it to
be, when it passes our understanding, than if it openly appeared. Neither is
our Faith therefore the worse, because it conceiueth it unknown: for as much
as we are not herein commanded to discern the reprobate from the elect
(which is the office of God only, and not ours) but to determine assuredly
in our minds, that all they that by the merciful kindness of God the Father
through the effectual working of the Holy ghost, are come into the partaking
of Christ, are severed into the peculiar right and proper possession of
Christ: and that, for as much as we be in the number of those, we are
partakers of so great a grace.

Mat. xxii.xxx. Es. xxxvii xxxi. Joel, ii, xxxii.
For our weakness suffers us not to be dismissed from schole, till we have
been scholars throughout ye whole course of our life. Beside that out of her
bosom there is no forgiveness of sins, and no salvation to be hoped for, as
witnesses Esaye and Joel, Eze. xiii.ix.
with whom agrees Ezechiel when he declares that they shall not be in the
number of Gods people whom he puts away from the heavenly life. As on
the contrary side, they are said to write their names among the citezens of
Jerusalem, that turn them selves to the following of true godliness. After
which manner it is also said in an other Psalm: Psa, cvi, iiii.
Remember me, Lord, in the good will of thy people: visit me in thy salvation
that I may see the benefytes of thy elect, that I may be merry in the mirth
of thy people, that I may rejoice with thy enherytaunce. In which words the
fatherly favor of GOD, and the peculyar testimony of the Spiritual life is
restrained to his flock, so that the departing from the Church is always
damnable.

Ephesians. iiii.xi.
Paul writes that Christ, that he might fulfill all things, gave some
Apostles, some Prophets, some Evangelists, and some Pastors and teachers, to
the restoryng of the holy ones, into ye work of ministry, unto the
edification of the body of Christ: until we all come into the unity of
Fayeth, and of the acknowledgyng of the son of God, unto a perfect manne,
and to the measure of the full grown age of Christ. We see how God, which was
able to make the^ that be his perfect in a momente, yet will not have them
grow into manly age but by the brynging up of the Church. We see the mean
expressed, for that unto the Pastors is enjoined the preaching of the heavenly
doctrine. We see how all, not one excepted, are brought into one rule, that
they should with mild Spirit and willing to learn yield themselves to the
teachers appointed for that use. And by this mark Esaye had long before set
out the kingdom of Christ, where he says: Esa, lix, xxi,
My Spirit which is in thee, and the words that I have put in thy mouth
shall never depart, neither out of thy mouth, nor out of the mouth of thy
sede and thy childrens children. Whereupon follows that they are worthy to
perish with famyne and pining hunger, whosoever they be that refuse the
Spiritual meat of the soul reached unto them of God by the hands of the
Church. Romans x.xvii.
God does breath Faith into us, but by the instrumente of his Gospel, as Paul
says that Faith is by hearing. As also with God remains his power to save,
but (as the same Paul witnesses) he utters and displayeth the same in the
preaching of the Gospel. For this reason in old time he wylled that there
should be made holy assemblyes to the sanctuarye, Ps. cxxxii xiiii. Psa.
lxxx.ii.
that doctrine uttered by the mouth of the Priest should nourishe the consent
of Faith. And to no other end those glorious titles have respect, where the
temple is called the rest of God, and the sanctuary his house, where he is
said to sit between the Cherubins, but to bring estimation, love, reverence
and dignity to the ministry of the heavenly doctrine, which otherwise the
syghte of a mortal and despised man would not a little diminishe. ii. Cor.
iiii vii.
Therefore that we should know, that out of earthen vessels is brought
fourth unto us inestimable treasure, God himself comes fourth, and in as
much as he is author of this degree, so he will have himself to be acknowledged
present in his institution. Therefore after that he has forbidden his to give
themselves to judgment by flying of birds, Leui. xi^ xxxi.
to south sayings, magical arts, necromancie and other superstitions, he
immediately adds that he will give them that which ought to suffice in
stead of al, yt is to say, that they shall never be destitute of Prophets.
But like as he sent not the old people ^o Angels, but raised up teachers out
of the earth, which might truly perform the office of Angels: so at this
day also his will is to teach us by men. And as in the old time he was not
content with the only law, but added Priests for expositors, at whose
lips the people should enquire for the true meaning thereof: so at this day he
not only wills us to be hedefully ben^ to reding, but also appoints
masters over us, by whose trauail we may be helped: whereof comes double
profit. For on the one part by a very good trial it proves our obedience,
where we hear his ministers speaking even as it were himself. On the other
side it also prouydeth for our weakness, while after the manner of men he had
rather speak unto us by interpreters to allure us unto him, than with
thondryng drive us away from him. And truly how expedient this familiar manner
of teaching is for us, all the godly do feel by the fear wherewith ye majesty
of God does worthily astonish them. But they that think that the authority of
the doctrine is abaced by the contempt of the men that are called to teach, do
be wray their unthankfulness: because among so many excellent gifts
wherewith God has garnished mankind: this is a singular prerogative, that he
vouchesaueth to consecrate the mouths and tongues of men to himself, that his
own voice should sound in them. Wherefore on our behalues let us not be
grieved obedientlie to embrace the doctrine of salvation set fourth by his
commandment and by his own mouth: because although the power of God is
not bound to outward means, yet he has bound us to an ordinarye manner of
teaching: which while phrentyke men refuse to keep, they wrappe themselves
in many deadly snares. Either pride, or disdainfulness, or envy moves many
to persuade themselves that they can sufficiently profyt by their own private
readyng and study, and so to despise public assemblies, and to account
preaching superfluous. But since they do as much as in the^ is lose or break
in sonder the holy bond of unity, no man escapes the due punishment of this
divorce, but he bewitcheth himself with pestylente errors and most wicked
dotages. Wherefore, that the pure simplicity of Faith may flourishe among us,
let us not be grieved to use this exercise of godliness, which God by his
institution has showed to be necessary for us and so earnestly commends.
But there was never yet found any even of the most wanton dogs which would
say that we ought to stop our ears against God: but in all ages the
Prophets and godly teachers have had a hard strife against the wicked, whoes
stubbornness can never come under this yoke, to be taught by the mouth and
ministry of men. Which is as much as to blotte out the face of God
which shines unto us in doctrine. For, in old time the faithful were
commanded to seek the face of God in the Sanctuarye, Psa. cxv.iii. i. Cor.
iii.vi,
and the same is so often repeted in the law, for no other cause but for that
the doctrine of the law and the exhortations of the Prophets were to them a
lively image of God: as Paul affirms that in his preaching shines the
glory of God in the face of Christ. How much the more detestable are the
Apostates, which gredely seek to divide Churches, as though they did drive
sheep from their foldes and cast them into the mouths of wolves. But we must
hold that which we have alleged out of Paul, that the Church is no
otherwise bylded but by outward preaching, and that the holy ones are holden
together with no other bond but when with learning and profyting with one
consent they keep the order appointed by God to the Church. To this end
principally, as I have said, the faithful in old time under the law were
commanded to resort to the sanctuary. Because when Moses speaks of the
dwelling place of God, he does there withal call it the place of name, Exodus
xx.xxiiii.
where God has set the memory of his name. Whereby he plainly teaches that
without the doctrine of godliness there is no use thereof. And it is not
douteful but that for the same reason David with great bitterness of Spirit
complayneth that he is by the tirannous cruelty of his enemies kept from
entering into the Tabernacle. It seems commonly to many a childishe
lamentation, because it should be but a very small loss, and also no great
pleasure should be forgone thereby, to want the entry of the temple, so that
there were enoughe of other delytefull things. But he bewaileth that with this
one grief, anguishe, and sorrow, he is freted and vexed and in a manner
wasted. for nothing is of greater estimation with the faithful, than this
help whereby God by degrees lyfteth up his on hye. For this is also to be
noted, that God in the mirror of his doctrine always so showed himself to the
holy Fathers, that the knowledge was spiritual. Wherefore ye temple is called
not only his face, but also (to take away all superstition) his foot stole.
Ps. cxxxii vii. Ps, xcix, vi. Para. xxviii, ii, Act. vii.xlviii,
And this is that happy metyng into unity of Faith, while from the highest even
to the lowest all do aspire to the head. All the temples that ever the
Gentyles upon any other purpose builded to God, were but a mere profaning of
his worship: whereunto, though not with like grossness, yet somewhat the
Jews fell. Whereof Stephen out of the mouth of Esaias reprocheth them, where he
says, that God dwells not in temples made with hands. etc. Because only
God does by his word sanctify to himself temples to the lawefull use. And
if we rashly attempt any thing without his commandment, by and by to an
evil beginning do cleave new devises by which the evil is spread abroad
without measure. Yet Xerxes, when by the counsel of the Magitians he burned up
or plucked down all the temples of Greece, indiscreetly said, that the gods
to who^ al things ought to be freely open were enclosed within walls and tyles.
As though it were not in the power of God, to the entente he might be nere us,
after a certain manner to descend unto us, and yet neither to change place,
nor to fasten us to earthly means: but rather by certain chariotes to carry
us up to his heavenly glory, which with the inmeasurable greatness thereof
fylleth all things, yea and in heygth surmounteth the heavens.

Now forasmuch as at this time there has been great strife about Mal.
^iil.vi, Ioh. xv.xvi. i. Pete. ^.xxiii. i. Cor. liii xv. i. Cor. ix.ii. ii.
Cor. iii vi. i Cor. ii.iiii. Ga. iii ^^.i, Cor. iii.ix.
and to turn the hearts of fathers to the children, and unbelievers to the
wisdom of the righteous. Christ pronounces that he sends the Apostles,
that they should bring fruit of their labor. But what that fruit is Peter
shortly defines, saying that we be regenerate with incorruptible sede. And
therefore Paul gloryeth that he by the Gospel begat the Corinthyans, and
that they were the seal of his Apostle ship: yea that he was not a lyterall
minister, such as did only beat the ears with sound of voice, but that
there was given him an effectualnesse of Spirit, that his doctrine should not
be unprofitable. In which meaning also in an other place he says, that his
Gospel was not in word only, but in power. He affyrmeth also that the
Galathyans by hearing received the Spirit of Faith. Finallye in many places he
makes himself not only a woorker together with GOD, but also assygneth
himself the office of geuynge saluatyon. Truly he never brought fourth all
these things to this intent to give unto himself any thing were it never so
little severally from God: as in an other place he shortly declares, saying:
our labor was not unprofitable in the Lord, i. The. iii v. Ga. ii.viii
according to his power mightily working in me. Again in an other place, he
that was mighty in Peter toward the circumcision, was also mighty in me
toward the Gentiles. i Cor. iii.vii.
But how he leaves nothing severally to the ministers, appears by other
places, as: he that planteth is nothing, and he that waters is nothing, but
God that gives the increase. Again: I have labored more than all: not I, but
the grace of God that was with me. And truly we must hold fast those
sayings, where God ascrybing to himself the enlyghtenyng of the mind, and
the renewing of the heart, teaches that it is a robbery of God if man take
upon himself any part of either of them. In the mean time if any man offer
himself to the ministers whom God ordeyneth, willing to learn, he shall know
by the fruit, that this manner of teaching not in vain pleased God, and that
this yoke of modesty was not in vain laid upon the faithful.



ii. Tim. ii xix.
This is in deed the singular prerogative of God himself, to know who be his,
as we have already alleged out of Paul. And truly that the rashenesse of
men should not crepe so far, it is provided, by the very success of
things daily puttyng us in mind, how far his secret judgments do
surmounte our understanding. For even they that seemed most desperate, and
accounted utterly paste hope, are by his goodness called back into the way:
and they that seemed to stand fast in comparison of other, do oftentimes
fall. Homel. in Joan. 45.
Therefore according to the secret predestination of God (as Augustine says,
there be many sheep without, and many wolves within. For he knows them, and
has them marked that know neither him nor them selves. But of those that
openly bear his badge, his only eyes do see who be both holy without
faynyng, and who will continue even to the end, which is the very chief
point of salvation. Yet on the other side, forasmuch as he forsawe it to be
somedeale expediente, that we should know who were to be accounted his
children, he has in this part applied himself to our capacity. And because
the certainty of Faith was not necessary, he has put in place thereof a
certain judgment of charity: whereby we should acknowledge for members of the
Church those that both with confession of Faith, and with example of life,
and with partakyng of sacraments, do profess the same God and Christ with
us. But as for the knowledge of the body thereof how much more that he knew it
to be necessary for our salvation, with so much the more certain marks he
has set it out.

Lo hereupon grows and aryseth unto us, a face of the Church visible to our
eyes. For where soever we see the word of God to be purely preached and heard,
and the sacraments to be ministered according to the institution of Christ,
there it is in no wise to be douted that there is some Church of God: Math.
xviii.xx.
forasmuch as his promise can not deceive, Where soever two or three are
gathered together in my name, there I am in the mids of them. But that we
may evidently understand the sum of this matter, we must proceed by these
as it were degrees: that is to say, that the universal church is a multitude
gathered together out of all nations what soever they be, which being sundered
and severally scattered by distances of places, yet does agree in one truth of
godly doctrine, and is bound together with the bond of one self religion:
And that so under this are comprehended al particular Churches which are in
all towns and streets according to the order of men's necessity, so that
every one of them may rightfully have the name and authority of a Church: And
that all particular men which by profession of godliness are reckened among
such Churches, although they be in deed strangers from the Church, yet do
after a certain manner belong unto it, till by public judgment they be
banished out of it. Howbeit there is somewhat a diverse manner in iudgyng of
private men and of Churches. For it may fall in experience, that such men as we
shall think not to be altogether worthy of the company of the godly, yet we
must use like brethren, and account them among the faithful, for the common
consent of the Church, whereby they are suffered and borne withal in the body
of Christ. We do not by our testimony allow such to be members of the
Church: but we leave them the place that they have among the people of God,
till it be by orderly right of law taken away from them. But of the very
multitude we must otherwise think: which if it has and honors the
ministry of the Word, and the administration of Sacraments, it deserves
without doubt to be esteemed and judged a Church: because it is certain that
those things are not without fruit. So we do also preserve to the universal
Church her unity, which diuelyshe spirits have always travailed to cut in
sunder: neither do we defraude of their authority those lawful assemblies
which are disposed according to the fitness of places.

i Ti. iii.xv.
By which words Paul signifies, that to the end the truth of God should
not decay in the world, the Church is a faithful keeper thereof: because Gods
will was to have the preaching of his word kept pure, and to show him self
unto us a Father of household by her ministry and labor, while she feeds
us with spiritual n^urishementes, and procures all things that make for our
salvation. It is also no sclender praise, Ephesians. v.xxvii. Ephesians. i.xxiii.
that it is said that she is chosen and severed by Christ to be his spouse,
that should be without wrinkle and spot, the body and fulness of him.
Whereupon follows, that departing from the Church is a denyeng of God and of
Christ. Therefore so much the more we must beware of so wicked disagreement.
For while we go about, so much as in us lies, to procure the ruin of Gods
truth, we are worthy that he should send down his lyghtenyng with the whole
violent force of his wrath to destroy us. Neither can there be imagined any
fault more heinous, than with wicked breach of Faith to defile the marriage
that the only begotten son of God has vouchesaued to contracte with us.

so stablished in the Church, that when it is taken away, the edification of
the Church perishes. But now, how dangerous, yea how deadly a tentation is
it when it does but come in our mind to depart from that congregation,
wherein are seen the signs and tokens by which the Lord thought his Church
sufficiently described? We se how great head is to be taken on both sides.
For, that we should not be deceived under the title of the Church, every
congregation that pretends the name of the Church must be examined by that
manner of trial, as by a touchstone. If it have in the word and Sacraments the
order appointed by the Lord, it will not deceive us: let us boldly yield unto it
the honor due to Churches. But contrary wise if it boaste it self without the
word and Sacraments, we must no less with fearful conscience beware of such
deceites, than on the other side we must flee rashenesse and pride.

Where as we say that the pure ministry of the word and the pure Phili.
iii.xix.
The words of the Apostle are: Let all us that be perfect think all one
thing: but if ye think any thing otherwise, this the Lord shall also reuele
unto you. Does he not sufficientlye show that diversity of opinions about
these matters, that be not so necessary, ought to be no ground of
dysagreemente among Christians? It is in deed a principal point, that we
agree in all things. But for as much as there is no man that is not wrapped
with some little cloud of ignorance: either we must leave no Church at
all, or we must pardon a being deceived in such things as may be unknown
without violatyng the sum of Religyon, and without loss of salvation. But I
mean not here to defend any errors be they never so little, so as I would think
that they should be cherished with flattering and winking at them: but I say
that we ought not rashly for every light dissension forsake the Church, in
which at least that Doctrine is retained safe and uncorrupted, wherein stands
the safety of godliness, and the use of Sacraments is kept as it was
institute by ye Lord. In the mean time if we endeavor to amend yt which
displeases us, we do therein according to our duty. And hereunto belongs
that saying of Paul: i. Corin. xiiii.xxx.
If any thing better be reveled to him that sits, let the first hold his
peace. Whereby it is euidente, that all the members of the Church are every
one charged with endeavor to public edification, according to the measure of
his grace, so that it be done comely and according to order: that is, that we
neither do forsake the communion of the Church, nor abiding in it, do
trouble the peace and well ordered discipline thereof.

But in bearyng with the imperfection of life, our gentle tenderness Mat.
xiii.xlvii. Mat. xiii.xxiii. Math. iii.xii.
in which fyshes of all kinds are gathered together: and are not chosen out
till they be laid abroad upon the shore. Let them hear that it is like unto
a corn field, which being sown with good grain, is by the ennemies fraud
scattered with tares, of which it is not cleansed until the croppe be
brought into the barn floor. Finally let them hear that it is like unto a
floor, wherein the wheat is so gathered together, that it lies hydden under
the chafe, till being cleansed with fan and sy^e it be at length laid up in
ye grainer. If the Lord pronounce that the Church shall even to the day of
Judgment be troubled with this evil, to be burdened with mynglyng of evil
men: they do in vain seek for a Church sprynkled with no spotte.

here also answer them? Among the Corithians not only a few had gone out of
the way, but the infection had in a manner possessed the whole body: There
was not only one kind of sin, but many: neither were they light offenses,
but certain horrible outrageous doings: it was not only corruption of manners,
but also of doctrine. What in this case says the holy Apostle, that is to say,
the instrument of the Holy ghost, by whoes testimony the Church stands and
falls? Does he require a division from them? Does he banishe them out of the
kingdom of Christ? Does he strike them with the extremest thunderbolt of
curse? He not only does none of all these things: but he both acknowledges
and reports it a Church of Christ and fellowship of saints. If there
remain a Church among the Corinthians, i. Cori. i.xi. and. iii.iii and. v.i.
and. vi vii. et. ix.i. and. xv.xii.
where contentions, sects, and envious partakynges do broyle: where quarrels
and brawlynges be in ure, with a gredynesse of having: where that wicked dooyng
is openly allowed, which were abominable among the very Gentiles: where
Paul's name is unjustly rayled at, whom they ought to have honored as their
father: where some scorn at the resurrection of the dead, with ruin whereof
the whole Gospel falls: where the gracious gifts of God serve to ambition,
and not to charity: where many things are uncomely and unorderly done: and if
therefore there still remain a Church, because the ministry of the word and
of the Sacraments is there not refused, who dare take away the name of the
Church from them that can not be charged with the tenth part of these fau^es?
They that with so great preciseness deal so cruelly against the Churches of
this present time: what (I pray you) would they have don to the Galathians,
Galat. i.
which were almost utter forsakers of the Gospel among whom yet the same
Apostle found Churches:

They object also, how that Paul greuousely rebukes the Corinthians i. Cor.
v.ii.
If it be not lawful to eat common bread, how may it be lawful to eat
with them the bread of the Lord. I confess in deed that it is a great
dishonor, if hogs and dogs have place among the children of God: it is
also a much more dishonor if the holy body of Christ be given forth to
them. And truly if they be well ordered Churches, they will not suffer wicked
men in their bosom, and will not without choice admit both worthy and
unworthy together to that holy banquet. But forasmuch as ye Pastors do not
always so diligently watch, yea and sometime are more tender in bearyng with men
that they ought to be, or are hindered so that they can not use that severity
that they would: it comes to pass that even they that are openly evil, are
not always thruste out of the company of the holy ones. This I grant to be a
fault: neither will I dymynysshe it, sith Paul does so sharply rebuke it
in the Corinthians. But although the Church be slack in her duty, it shall
not be therefore immediately in the power of every private man, to take upon him
self the judgment to sever him. I do in deed not deny that it is the doing of
a godly man to withdraw himself from al private company of evil men, to
entangle himself in no willing familiarity with them. But it is one thing to
flee the company of evil men, and an other thing for hatred of them to
forsake the Communion of the Church. But where as they think it sacrilege to
be partakers of the Lords bread with them, they are therein much more rigorous
than Paul is. For where he exhorts us to a holy and pure partakyng, he
requires not that one should examine an other, or every man the whole Church,
but that they should echone prove him self. i. Cor. xi.xviii.
If it were unlawful to comunicate with an unworthy man, then truly Paul
would bid us to look circumspectly whether there were any in the multitude, by
whoes uncleanness we might be defiled. Now when he requires only of every
man the proof of themselves, he shows that it nothing hurts us if any
unworthy do thruste them selves in among us. And nothing else is meant by this
which he says afterward, i. Cor. xi.xxix.
He that eats unworthily, eats and drinks judgment to him self. He
does not say, to other, but to himself. And rightfully. For it ought not to
stand in the choice of every particular man, who be to be received, and who
to be rejected. The knowledge hereof belongs to the whole Church, which
knowledge can not be had without lawful order, as hereafter shall be said
more at large. Therefore it should be unrighteous, that any private man should
be defiled with the unworthiness of an other, whom he neither can nor ought
to keep back from coming to it.

Contra par. lib. in. cap. i.
Therefore Augustine says well and wisely: When godly order and manner of
Ecclesiastical discipline ought principally to have regard unto the unity of
Spirit in the bond of peace: which the Apostle commanded to be kept by
bearyng one with an other: and which being not kept, the medicine of revenge
is proved to be not only superfluous, but also pernicious, and therefore now
to be no medicine at all: those evil children, which not for hatred of other
men's iniquities, but for affection of their own contentions, do gredyly
labor either wholly to draw or at least to divide the weak common peoples
entangled with the bosting of their name, swelling with pride, mad with
stubburnesse, traitorous with sclaunders, troublesome with seditions, least
they should seem to want the light of truth, do pretend a shadow of rigorous
severity: and those things that are in the holy Scriptures commanded to be
done with a gentler kind of healing, saving the sincerity of love, and keeping
the unity of peace, to correct the faults of brethren, they abuse it to
sacrilege of schism, and to occasyon of cuttyng of. E^usd. lib. ca. ii.
But to godly and quiet men he gives this counsel, that they mercifully
correct that which they can, and that which they can not, patiently bear,
and groan and mourn with love, until God either amend and correct them, or
at the harvest root up the tares, and fan out the chafe. Let the godly
travail to fortify them selves with these armures, least while they seem to
them selves strong and courageous reuengers of righteousness, they depart
from the kingdom of heaven, which is the only kingdom of righteousness. For
sith it is Gods will to have the communion of his Church to be kept in this
outward fellowship: he that for hatred of evil men does break the toke^ of
that ^elowship, enters into a way whereby is a slippery falling from the
communion of saints. Let them think yt in a great multitude there be many
truly holy and innocent before the eyes of the Lord, whom they see not. Let
them think that even of them that be diseased there be many that do not please
or flatter them selves in their faults, but being now and then awakened with
earnest fear of God do aspire to a greater uprightness. Let them think that
judgment ought not to be given of a man by one deed: forasmuch as the holiest
do sometime fall away with a most grievous fall. Let them think that to gather a
Church there lies more weight both in the ministry of the word and in the
partaking of the holy mysteries, than that all that force should vanishe away
by the fault of some wicked men. Last of all let them consider, that in
judging the Church, the judgment of God is of greater value than the
judgment of man.

Where also they pretend that the Church is not without cause called Ephesians. v.xv.
It is true in deed which Paul says, that Christ gave himself for the Church
to sanctify it: that he cleansed it with the lauer of water with the word of
life, to make her unto himself a glorious spouse having no spotte or wrinkle
etc. Yet this is also nothing less true* that the Lord daily works in
smoothyng her wrinkles and wipyng away her spots. Whereupon follows that her
holiness is not yet fully finished. Therefore the Church is so holy, that it
daily profits and is not yet perfect: daiely proceeds, and is not yet come
to the mark of holiness: as also in an other place shall be more largely
declared, whereas therefore the Prophets prophecy that there shall be a holy
Jerusalem, Joel. iii.xvii. Esa. xxxv viii.
through which strangers shall not pass: and a holy temple wherinto unclean
men shall not enter: let us not so take it, as if there were no spotte in the
members of the Church: but for that with their whole endeavor they aspire to
holiness and sound pureness, by the goodness of God clennesse is ascribed to
them, which they have not yet fully obtained. And although oftentimes there be
but rare tokens of such sanctification among men: yet we must determine that
there has been no time sins the creation of the world wherein the Lord has
not had his Church, and that there shall also be no time to the very end of
the world, wherein he shall not have it. For albeit immediately from the
beginning the whole kind of men is corrupt and defiled by the sin of Adam:
yet out of this, as it were a polluted mass, God always sanctifies some vessels
unto honor, that there should be no age without felyng of his mercy. Which he
has testified by certain promises: Psalm. lxxxix.iiii Psalm. ^xxxii.xiii Hie.
xxxi.xxxv.
as these: I have ordained a testament to my elect: I have sworn to David my
servant, I will for ever continue thy sede: I will build thy seat in
generation and generation. Agyan, the Lord has chosen Syon, he has chosen it
for a dwelling to himself: This is my rest for ever. etc. Again, These
things says the Lord which gives the Sun for the light of the day, the
moon and stars for the light of the night. If these laws shall fail before
me, then the sede of Israel shall also fail.



Lib. iii. epist. 5.
though there be seen tares or unclean vessels in the Church, yet there is no
cause why we should depart from the Church: we must only labor that we may be
wheat: we must use diligence and endeavor as much as we may that we may be a
golden or silver vessel. But to break the earthen vessels, is the only work
of the Lord, to whom also is given an iron rod. And let no man challenge to
him self that which is proprely belongyng to the Son only, to be able
alone to fan the floor, and cleanse the chafe, and sever all the tares by
man's judgment. This is a proud obstinacy, and a presumption full of
sacrilege, which a perverse furour takes to it self. etc. Therefore let both
these things remayn certainly fixed. First that he has no excuse yt of his
own will forsakes the outward communion of the Church* where ye word of God
is preached and the sacraments ministered: then that the faults of a few or of
many are no hindra^ce, but that we may therein rightly profess our faith by the
Ceremonies institute by God: because a godly conscience is not hurt by ye
unworthiness of any other either pastor or private man, and the mysteries are to
a holy and upright man nevertheless pure and wholesome because they are together
handled of unclean me^.

Their preciseness and disdainfulnesse proceeds yet further: because Esaias xxx
iii.xiiii.
For none do atteine it, but only they that are citezens and of the household
of the Chirch, as it is red in ye Prophet. Therefore the bilding of the
heavenly Jerusalem ought to go before, wherein afterward this mercifulness of
God may have place, yt whosoever come unto it, their iniquity may be taken
away. I say yt it ought first to be bilded, not for yt there ca^ be any Chirch
without ye forgiveness of sins, but because the lord has not promised his
mercy but in ye Communion of Saints. Therefore ye first entry for us into ye
Chirch and kingdom of God, is the forgiveness of sins, without which we have
no covenant or co^ioyning with God. Ose. ii.xviii.
For thus he says by ye Prophet: In ye day I will strike you a covenant with
the beast of ye feld, with the foul of the air, and with the vermin of ye
earth. I will break ye sword and war from out of the earth, and I will make men
to sleep without fear. I will espouse you unto me for ever. I will espouse you (I
say) in righteousness, in judgment, in mercy, and in co^passions. We see how
by his mercy ye lord reco^cileth us to himself. And so in an other place, when
he foresayth yt the people shall be gathered together again, who^ he had
scattered abroad in his wrath, he says, I will cleanse the^ from al
wickedness wherewith they have sinned against me. Io. xxxiii.viii.
Wherefore by ye sign of washing we enter into ye fellowship of ye Chirch:
whereby we may be taught, yt there is no entry open for us into the householde
of God, unless our fylthynesse be first wiped away with his goodness.

But by the forgiveness of sins ye Lord does not only receive and through
the Sanctification of the Spirit, sins, have been and are daily pardoned to
us which be called and graffed into ye body of ye Chirch.

Mat. xvi.xix.^.xviii xv^^i John. xx.xxiii. 1. Cor. v.xx.
and delivered them power to forgive sins, he meante not this only, yt they
should loose them from sins yt were from ungodliness converted to the faith
of Christ: but rather yt they should continually execute this office among ye
faithful. Which thing Paul teaches, when he writes yt the embassage of
reconciliation was left with the ministers of the Church, whereby they should
oftentimes in Christ's name exhort ye people to reconcile themselves to God.
Therefore in the Communion of Saints, by ye ministry of the Chirch it self,
sins are continually forgiven us, when ye Priests or Bishops, to whom ye
office is committed, do with the promyses of the Gospel confirm godly
consciences in hope of pardon and forgiveness: and that as well publicly as
privately, according as necessity requires. For there be very many, which for
their weakness do need a singular atoneme^t. Act. xx.xx
And Paul reports yt not only in common preaching, but also in houses he had
testified the Faith in Christ, and severally admonyshed every one of ye
doctrine of salvation. Therefore we have here three things to be noted: First,
yt with how great holiness soever ye children of God do excel, yet they be
always in this estate, so long as they dwell in a mortal body, yt without
forgiveness of sins they can not stand before God. Secondly, yt this
benefit is so proper to ye Church, yt we can not otherwise enjoy it, but if
we abide in the Communion thereof. Thirdly, that it is distributed unto us by
the ministers and Pastors, either by preaching of the Gospel, or by ministryng
of the Sacraments: and that in this behalf principally appears ye power of
ye keys, which ye Lord has given to the fellowship of the faithful. Wherefore
let every one of us think this to be his duty, no where else to seek
forgiveness of sines, than where the Lord has set it. Of publyke
reco^ciliation which belongs to discipline we shall speak in place fyt for it.

Mat. vi.xi
forgive us our dettes: truly they do confess themselves detters. Nether do
they crave it in vain because the Lord has always appointed no other thing to
be asked, than that which he himself would give. Yea whereas he has
testified that the whole prayer shall be heard of his father, yet he has also
sealed this (...) solution with a peculiar promise. What will we more? The
Lord requires of the holy ones all their life long a confession of sins*
Yea and that continual, and promyseth pardon. That boldness is it, either to
exempte them from sin, or if they have stumbled, utterly to exclude them
from grace? Now whom does he will us to forgive seventy times seven times?
not to our brethren? To what end did he command it, but that we should
follow his clementie. He forgeueth therefore, not ones or twice: but as often as
being stricken down with the acknowlegyng of sins they sighe unto him.

But that (we may begin in a manner at the very swadlyng cloutes Genesis
xxx.vii.xviii.
when they conspired to murder their brother: this was a mischeuous act, to be
abhorred even of the most desperate thieves. At the last being mekened with the
monitions of Judas, Genesis xi^i.xxvii. Ge. xxxiiii.xxv. Ge. xxxv.^^^. ^^ne.
xxx^^^.xvi. ii. Sam. xi.iiii.^.xv.
they sold him: this was also an intolerable hapnousnesse. Simeon and Leui,
with wicked revenge, and such as was also condemned by their own fathers
judgment, used cruelty against the Sichemites. Ruben with most unclean lust
defiled his fathers bed. Judas when he would give himself to fornication
against the law of nature, went into his sons wife. And yet so far are
they from being wiped out of the chosen people, that they be rather raised up
to be heds of it. But what did David? when he was a gouernoure of justice, with
how great wickedness did he by sheding of innocent blood open the way to his
blind lust? He was already regenerate, and among ye regenerate garnished with
notable praises of the Lord: nevertheless he committed that heinous offense,
which is horrible even among the Gentiles: and yet he obtained pardon. And
(that we may not tarry upon single examples) how many promyses there are in the
law and ye Prophets of Gods mercy toward the Israelites, so often it is proved
that the Lord shows himself appeasable to the offenses of his people. For
what does Moses promise to come to pass, (...). xxx.iii
when the people being ^allen into Apostasy shall return unto the Lord? He
shall bring thee back out of captivity, and shall have mercy on thee, and
shall gather thee together out of the peoples to whom thou have been dispersed.
If thou be scattered even to the borders of the heaven, I will from (...) again
gather thee together.

But I will not begin a ren^all that should never be ended, Iere. i.ii^
^.xii.
can abide to return into (...) with her? but with thy fornications all the
ways are polluted. O ^^da, the earth has been filled with thy filthy loves.
But return unto me, and I will receive thee. Return thou turn away, I will not
turn away my face from thee: because I am holy, and am not angry for ever And
truly he can be no otherwise minded, Eze. xviii xxiii.^.xxiii. i. Ki. viii
xlvi.
which affirms that he wills not the death of a sinner, but rather that he
should be converted and live. Therefore when Solomon did dedicate the temple, he
appointed it also to this use, that the prayers made for obteining pardon of
sins should be heard from thense. If (said he) thy sons shall sin (for
there is no man that sins not) and thou being angry shall deliver them to
their ennemies, and they shall repent in their heart, and being turned shall
entreat thee in their captivity, saying, we have sinned, we have done
wickedly, and shall pray toward the land which thou have given to their fathers,
and toward this holy temple: thou shalt hear their prayers in heaven, and
shall be made merciful to thy people that has sinned against thee, and to all
their wickednesses wherewith they have offended thee. iiii.xxviii iii.
And not vainly the Lord ordained in the law daily Sacrifices for sins. For
if ye Lord had not forseen that his people should be troubled with continual
diseases of sins, he would never have appointed these remedies for them.

Tit. i.ix. and. iii.iiii. ii. Tim. i.ix. Math. x.xxxiii. Mar. vi.xxxviii. Mat.
xxvi xxxix. ii. The. iii.vi. ^^^t. viii.xvii. Gal. i.vi, and. iii i. and.
iiii.ix. ii Cor. xii.xxi.
What shall this be else, but to say yt Christ came to the destruction of them
that be his, and not to their salvation, if that mercifulness of God in
pardoning sins which in the old testament was continually ready for the holy
ones, be now said to be utterly taken away? But if we believe the Scriptures
which expressly cry out, yt in Christ only the grace and kyndnesse of the Lord
fully appeared, that the plentifulnesse of mercy was poured out, that the
reconciliation of God and men was fulfilled: let us not dout that there flows
unto us a more bountiful mercifulness of the heavenly father, than that it is
cut of or shortened. And hereof there want not examples Peter which had heard
that he should be denied before ye Angels of God that confessed not the name of
Christ before men, denied him thrice in one night, and yt not without
execration: yet he was not put away from pardon. They yt lived inordinatly
among ye Thessalonians are so chastised, that yet they be gently called to
repentance. Even Simon the Magician himself is not cast in desperation, but
he is rather commanded to hope well, when Peter counsels him to slay to
prayers.

Ps. lxxxix xxxii.
If his sons shall forsake my law, and shall not walk in my judgments, if
they shall defile my righteousnesses, and not keep my commandments, I will
visit their iniquities with a rod, and their sins with stripes: but my
mercy I will not take away from him. Finally by the very order of the Creed we
be taught, that there remains in the Chirch of Christ continual pardon of
sins: for that when the Church is as it were stablished, yet forgiveness of
sins is adjoined.

Some that be somewhat wiser, when they see the doctrine of Nouatus Leui. iiii
but where a man has erred by ignorance. But whereas the Lord in the law
commands one sort of Sacrifices to be offered for clensing of the wilful
sins of the faithful, and other to redeem their ignorances: how great
lewdenesse shall it be to grant no clensyng to wilful sin? I say that there
is nothing plainer, than that the only Sacrifice of Christ avails to forgive
the wylfull sins of the holy ones: forasmuch as the Lord has testified
the same by carnal Sacrifices as by signs. Again who can excuse David by
ignorance, whom it is evident to have been so well instructed in the law? Did
David not know, how great was the fault of adultrie and ma^slaughter, which
daily punished the same in other? Did brotherslaughter seem to the Patriarchs
a lawful thing? Had the Corinthyans so ill profyted that they thought that
wantonness, uncleanness, whordome, hatreds and contentions pleased God? Did
Peter being so diligently admonished not know how great a matter it was to
forswear his master? Therefore let us not with our own enuyousnesse stop up
the way against the mercy of God that so gently utters it self.

Truly I am not ignorante that the old writers expounded those

The.ii. Chapter. A comparison of the false Church with the true Church.
OF how great value the ministry of the word and Sacraments ought to be
with us, and how far the reverence of it ought to proceed, that it be unto
us a perpetual token whereby to discern the Church, it has been already
declared. That is to say, whersoeuer that ministry abides whole and
uncorrupted, there the faults or diseases of manners are no impediment, but
that it may bear the name of a Church. The^, that the very ministry it self
is by small errors not so corrupted, but that it may be esteemed lawful.
Moreover, we have showed that the errors that ought so to be pardoned, are
those whereby ye pryncipal doctrine of religion is not hurt, whereby those chief
points of religion that ought to be agreably holden among the faithful are not
destroyed, and in the Sacraments, those yt do not abolish nor empaire the
lawful institution of him yt ordained the^. But so sone as lying is broken into
the chief tower of religion, so sone as the sum of necessary doctrine is
perverted, and ye use of the Sacraments falls: truly the destruction of ye
Chirch follows: like as a man's life is at an end, when his throat is thrust
through or his heart deadly wounded. And this is clearly proved by the words
of Paul, Ep. ii.xx.
when he teaches that the fundation of the Chirch is laid upon the doctrine
of the Apostles and Prophets, Christ himself being the head corner stone. If
the fundation of the Church be the doctrine of the Prophets and Apostles, by
which the faithful are commanded to repose their salvation in only Christ:
then take away that doctrine, and how shall the bilding stand any longer?
Therefore the Church must needs fall down, where that sum of religion
falls which is only able to uphold it. Again* if the true Church be the
pillar and slay of the truth it is certain, i. Tim. iii xv.
that there is no Church, where lyeng and falshode have usurped the dominion.

that they painte out: and that all be heretics that dare ones mutter against
the doctrine thereof. But by what proves do they confirm that they have the
true Church? They allege out of the ancient Chronicles, what in old time
was in Italy, in France, in Spain. They say that they fetch their beginning
from those holy men that with sound doctrine founded and raised up Chirches,
and stablished the same doctrine and edifieng of the Church with their blood.
And that so the Church has been among them so consecrate both with spiritual
gifts, and with the blood of martyrs, and preserved with continual succession
of bishops, that it might not fall away. They rehearse how much Ireneus,
Tertullian, Origin, Augustine, and other esteemed this succession. But how
triflyng these things be, and how they be but very mockeries* I will make
them very easily to understand that will be content a little to wey them with
me. Truly I would also exhort them selves earnestly to take heed hereunto, if
I did trust that I might any thing prevail with them by teaching. But
forasmuch as they, leauyng all regard of truth, do bend themselves to this
only purpose, by all the ways that they can, to defend their own cause, I
will only speak a few things whereby good men and those that love the
truth, may wind them selves out of their subtle cauillations. First I ask
of them, why they do not allege Aphrike, and Egypt, and all Asia? Even
because in all those countries this holy Succession of Bishops has
ceased, by mean whereof they boast that they have preserved Chirches. They
come therefore to this point to say, that they therefore have a true Church,
because sins it first began to be, it has not ben destitute of bishops: for
in perpetual course they have succeeded one an other. But what if I cast
Greece in their way? Therefore I ask again of them, why they say that the
Church is lost among the Grecians, among whom that succession of Bishops was
never interrupted, which in their opinion is the only keeper and preserver of
the Church. They make the Grecians Schismatikes. but by what right? because in
departing from the Apostolic sea, they have lost their privilege: what? Do not
they much more deserve to loose it that depart from Christ himself? It
follows therefore, that the pretense of succession is but vain, unless the
posterity do keep fast and abide in the truth of Christ, which they have
received of their fathers from hand to hand.

Therefore the Romanistes at this day do allege nothing else but Hier.
vii.iiii.
that is, that they should not boaste in lying words, saying, The temple of
the Lord, the temple of the Lord, it is the temple of the Lord. Forasmuch as
the Lord does no where acknowledge any thing for his, but where his word is
heard and reverently obse^ued. So when the glory of God did sit between the
Cherubins in the Sanctuary, Eze. x.iiii
and he had promised them that that should be his steadfast seat: yet when the
Priests ones corrupted the worshipping of him with perverse superstitions, he
removed else where, and left the place without any holiness. If the same temple
which seemed to be holily appointed to the perpetual dwelling of God, might be
forsaken of God and become unholy: there is no cause why these men should feign
to us that God is so bound to persons or places, and so fast tied to outward
observations, that he must needs abide with them that have only the tittle and
show of the Church. And this is it about which Paul contendeth in the Epistle
to the Romans, from the.ix. Chapter to the.xii. For this did sore trouble
weak consciences, that the Jews when they seemed to be the people of God, did
not only refuse the doctrine of the Gospel, but also persecute it. Therefore
after that he has set out the doctrine, he remoueth this dout, and denies
that those Jews being enemies of the truth are the Church, howsoever they
wa^ted nothing that otherwise might be required to the outward form of the
Church. And therefore he denies it, because they embraced not Christ. But
somewhat more expressly in the Epistle to the Galathians* Gal. iiii.xxii.
wherein co^paring Ismael with Isaac, he says that many hold place in the
Church, to whom the inheritance belongs not, because they are not begotten
of the free mother. From whence also he descends to the comparison of two
Hierusalems. Because as the law was given in the mount Sina, but the Gospel
came out of Jerusalem. Genesis xxi.x.
So many being seruilely born and brought up, do without douting boast
themselves to be the children of God and of the Church, yea they proudely
despise the natural children of God, when themselves be but bastardes. On the
other side also, when we hear that it was ones pronounced from heaven. Cast
out the bond woman and her son, let us, standing upon this inviolable
decree, boldly despise their unsavory boastinges. For if they be proud by
reason of outward professyon, Ismael was also circumcised: if they contend by
antiquity, he was the first begotten, and yet we see that he is put away. To.
ix.vi.
If the cause be demanded, Paul assigns it, for that none are accounted
children, but they that are begotten of the pure and lawful sede of doctrine.
According to this reason God denies that he is bound to wicked Pryestes by
this that he couenanted with their Father Leui that he should be his Angel or
interpreter: yea he turns against themselves their false bostyng, wherewyth
they were wont to rise up against the Prophets, that the dignity of
Priesthode was to be had in singular estimation. This he wyllyngly admits,
and with the same condition he debateth with the^, because he is ready to keep
his covenant, but when they do not mutually perform their part to him, they
deserve to be rejected. Lo what succession avails, unless therewithal be
also joined an inuitation and euenly continuing course: even to this effect
that the successors, so sone as they be proved to have swarued from their
original, be depryued of all honor. Unless parhappes because Caiphas succeeded
many Godly bishops (yea there was even from Aaron to him a continual vnbroke^
course of succession) therefore that same mischeuous assembly was worthy the
name of the Church. But this were not tolerable even in earthly dominions,
that the tyranny of Caligula, Nero, Heliogabalus and such other, should be
called a true state of Common weal, for that they succeeded the Brutes,
Scipions, and Camilles. But specially in the government of the Church there
is nothing more fond, than leauyng the Doctrine to set the succession in the
Persons only, but neither did the holy doctors whom they falsely thruste in
unto us, mean any thing less, then to pray that precisely as it were by
right of inheritance Churches be there where bishops are successively placed
one after an other. But where as it was then out of controversy, that from the
very beginning to that age nothing was changed in Doctrine, they alleged that
which might suffice to make an end of all new errors, that is, that by
those was that doctrine oppugned, which had been even from the Apostles
constantly and with one agreing consent retained. There is therefore no cause,
why they should any longer go forward to deceive by pretending a false color
under the name of the Church, which we do reverently esteem as becomes us:
but when they come to the definition of it, not only water (as the common
saying is) cleaves unto them, but they stick fast in their own mire because
they put a stinkyng harlo^ in place of the holy spouse of Christ. That this
puttyng in of a changelyng should not deceive us, beside other admonitions, let
us remember this also of Augustine. Ad Vina cen epist. xlvii.
For speaking of the Church, he says. It is it that is sometime darkened, and
covered with multitude of offenses as with a cloud: sometime caulmnesse of
time appears quiet and free: sometime is hidden and troubled with wave of
tribulations and temptations. He brings forth examples, that oftentimes the
strongest pillars either valiantly suffered banishment for the faith, or were
hidden in the whole world.

In like manner the Romanistes do vex us, and make afraid the ignorant Ioh.
xviii xxxvii. John. x.xiiii.
He that is of the truth (says he) hears my voice. Again, I am that good
shepeherd, and I know my sheep, and am known of them. My sheep hear my
voice, and I know them and they follow me. And a little before he had said,
that the sheep follow their shepherde, because they know his voice: but they
follow not a stranger, but run away from him, because they know not the
voice of strangers. Why are we therefore wilfully mad in iudgyng the Church,
whereas Christ has marked it with an vndoutefull sign, which wheresoever it is
seen can not deceive, but that it certainly shows the Church to be there:
but where it is not there remains nothing that can give a true signification
of the Church? Ephesians. ii.xx.
For Paul rehearses that the church was builded, not upon the judgments of
men, not upon priesthodes, but upon the doctrine of the Apostles and Prophets.
But rather Jerusalem is to be severally known from Babylon, and the Church of
Christ from the conspiracy of Satan, by that difference wherewyth Christ has
made them different one from the other. He that is of God (says he) hears
the Words of God. Ioh. viii.xlvii.
Ye therefore hear not, because ye are not of God. In a sum, forasmuch as the
Church is the kingdom of Christ, and he reigns not but by his word: can it
be now doutfull to any man, but that those be the words of lyeng, by which
Christ's kingdom is feigned to be without his scepter, that is to say without
his holy word?

Lib que sti. eua^g. secund. Math.
and brotherly charity. Whervppon Augustine puts this difference between
heretics and schismatikes, that heretics in deed do with false doctrines
corrupt the pureness of Faith, but the Schismatikes sometime eue^ where there
is like Faith, do break the bond of fellowship. But this is also to be noted,
that this conioinyng of charity so hangs upon the unity of Faith, that
Faith ought to be the beginning thereof, the end, and finally the only rule.
Let us therefore remember that so often as the unity of the Chirch is commended
unto us this is required, that while our minds agree in Christ, our wills
also may be joined together with mutual well willing in Christ. Therefore
Paul, Ephesians. iiii.v. Philip. ii.ii. et. v.
when he exhorts us to that well willing, takes for his foundation that there
is one God, one Faith, and one Baptism. Yea where so ever he teaches us to be
of one mind, and of one will, he by and by adds in Christ, or according to
Christ: meaning that it is a factious company of the wicked, and not agreement
of the faithful, which is without the word of the Lord.

De simp^ praesa.
which spredeth abroad more largely into a multitude with increase of
frutefulnesse: like as there be many sun beams, but one light: and many
branches of a tree, but one body grounded upon a fast root: And when many
streams do flow from one fountain, although the number seem to be
scattered abroad by largeness of ouerflowing ple^tie, yet the unity abides
in the original. Take away a beam of the sun from the body, the unity can
suffer no division. Break a brau^che from the tree, the broken branch can
not spring. Cut of the stream from the spring head, being cut of it dries
up. So also the Chirch being ouerspred with ye light of the Lord, is extended
over the whole world: yet there is but one light that is spread every where.
Nothing could be said more fitly to express that vndiuidable knitting
together, which all the members of Christ have one with an other. We see how he
continually calls us back to the very hedde. Whereupon he pronounces that
heresies and schisms do arise hereof, that men do not return to the original
of truth, nor do seek the hedde, nor keep the doctrine of the heavenly master.
Now let them go and cry that we be heretics that have departed from their
Chirch: sith there has been no cause of our estrangyng from them but this
one, that they can in no wise abide the pure professyng of the truth: but I
tell not how they have driven us out with cursings and cruel execrations.
Which very self doing does abundantly enough acquit us, unless they will
also condemn the Apostles for Schismatikes, with whom we have all one cause.
Ioh. ^vi.ii*
Christ (I say) did forsay to his Apostles, that the time should com when they
should be cast out of the Synagoges for his names sake. And those Synagoges of
which he speaks, were then accounted lawful Chirches. Sith therefore it is
evident that we be cast out, and we be ready to show that the same is done
for the names sake of Christ* truly the cause ought first to be enquired of,
before that any thing be determined upon us, either one way or other. Howbeit,
if they will, I am content to discharge of this point. For it is enough for me*
that it behooved that we should depart from them, yt we might com to Christ

But it shall appear yet more certainly, in what estimation we ought to have
all the Chirches whom the tyranny of that Rom^ she id^ll has possessed, if it
be compared with the old Church of the Isra^^ies, as it is described in the
Prophets. There was then a true Chirch among the Jews and Israelites, when
they continued in (...) of the covenant, for they obtained those things by the
benefit of God, whereupon the Chirch consists. They had the truth of
doctrine in the law the ministry thereof was among the Priests and the
Prophets: with the sign of circumcision they entered into religion: by other
Sacraments they were exercised to the confirmation of Faith. It is no dout
that those titles wherewith the Lord has honored his Church, fittly
perteyned to their fellowship. After that, forsakyng the law of the Lord, they
went out of kind to idolatry and superstition, they partly lost that
prerogative. For who dare take a way the name of the Church from them, with
whom God has left the preaching of his word and observation of his mysteries?
Again, who dare call that the Church without any exception, where the word of
the Lord is openly and freely trodden under foot? where the ministry thereof,
the chief sinew, yea the very soul of the Chirch is destroyed?

What then? will some man say: was there therefore no parcel of ^ destruction
of the kingdom, partly were like unto him, and partlye (when they minded to be
somewhat better than he) they followed the example of Iarobeam: but they all
every one were wicked and ydolaters. In Iewrye there were now and then diverse
changes, while sum kings perverted the worshippyng of God with false and
forged superstitions, some other restored religion that was decayed: until the
very priests them selves defiled the temple of God with profane and
abominable vsages.

Exo. xxix ix.
they knew that the Leuiticall priests, howsoever they were unworthy of that
honor, yet because they were ordained by the Lord, ministers of the holy
Ceremonies, and were not as then deposed, did yet still rightfully possess that
place. But (which is the chief point of this question) they were compelled
so no superstitious worshippyng, yea they took in hand to do nothing but that
which was ordained by God. But among these men, I mean the Papists, what
like thing is there? For we can scarcely have any meting together with them,
wherein we shall not defile our selves with open ydolatrie. Truly the principal
bond of their communion is in the mass, which we abhor as the greatest
sacrilege. And whether we do this rightfully or wrongfully, shall be seen in an
other place. At this present it is enough to show that in this behalf we are in
other case than the Prophets were, which although they were present at the
Ceremonies of the wicked, were not compelled to behold or use any Ceremonies
but such as were institute by GOD. And, if they will needs have an example
altogether like, let us take it out of the kingdom of Israel. After the
ordinance of Iarobeam Circumcision remained, the sacrifices were offered, (...).
x^i.^xxi.
the law was accounted holy, the same GOD was called upon whom they had
received of their Fathers: but for the forged and forbidden forms of
worshippyng, God disalowed and condemned all that was there done. Show me one
Prophet, or any one godly man that ones worshypped or sacrificed in Bethell.
For they knew that they could not do it, but that they should defyle them
selves with sum sacrilege. We have then thus much, that the communion of the
Chirch ought not so far to be of force with the godly, that if it should
degenerate to profane and filthi vsages, they should forth with of necessity
follow it.

But about the other point we contend yet more earnestly. For i. Tim. ^ii xv^
were strangers from the Chirch of God. If those were Chirches, then the
Church was not the pillar of truth, but the stay of lyeng: not the tabernacle
of the living God, but the receptacle of idols. Therefore it was needful for
them to depart from the consent of those assembiles, which was nothing else but
a wicked conspiracy against God. In like manner if any man acknowledge the
assemblies at these days being defiled with idolatry, superstition and wicked
doctrine, to be such in whoes full communion a Christian man ought to continue
even to the consent of doctrine, he shall greatly err. For if they be
Chirches then they have the power of the keys. But the keys are vnseperablye
knytte with the word, which is from thense quite driven away. Again, if
they be Chirches, then the promise of Christ is of force among them,
whatsoever ye bind. Man. xvi.xix and xviii xviii. John. xx.xxiii.
etc. But they contrarywyse do banyshe from their communion al such as do
profess them selves not faynedly the servants of Christ. Therefore either the
promise of Christ is vain, or at least in this respect they are not Chirches.
Finally instead of the ministry of the word they have schools of
ungodliness* and a sink of all kinds of errors. Therefore either in this
respect they are not Chirches, or there shall remain no token whereby the
lawful assemblies of the faithful may be severally known from the meetings
of Turks.

But as in the old time there yet remained among the Jews certain were borne
of them, the Lord called his own, which unless it were by special
blessyng, belonged nothing to him. So when he has left his covenant in
France, Italye, Germanye, Spain, England: sins those provinces have been
oppressed with the tyranny of Antichrist, yet that his couenaunte might
remain inviolable, first he there preserved Baptism, the testimony of his
covenant, which being consecrate by his own mouth reteineth her own force
notwythstandyng the ungodliness of man: then, with his Providence he has
wrought that there should remain other remnantes, least the Chirch should be
utterly destroyed. And as oftentimes byldinges are so pulled down, that the
foundations and ruins remain: so he has not suffered his Chirch either to be
overthrown by Antichrist from the very foundation, or to be laid even with the
ground (howsoever to punish the unthankfulness of men that had despised his
word, he suffers horrible shaking and dissipation to chance) but even after
the very wasting he willed that the bylding half pulled down should yet
remain.

Whereas therefore we will not simply grant to the Papists the title of the
Church, we do not therefore deny that there be Chirches among them: but only
we contend of the true and lawefull orderyng of the Chirch: which is required
in the commmunion both of the sacraments which are the signs of profession,
but also specially of doctrine. Daniel and Paul foretold that Antichrist
should sit in the temple of God. Dani. ix.xxvii. ii. These. ^^.iiii.
With us we account the bishop of Rome the captain and sta^dard bearer of that
wicked and abominable kingdom. Whereas his seat is placed in the temple of
God, thereby is meant that his kingdom shall be such as can not abolish the name
of Christ nor of his Chirch. Hereby therefore appears, that we do not deny but
that even under his tyranny remain Chirches: but such as he has profaned
with ungodliness full of sacrilege, such as he has afflicted with outeragious
dominion, such as he has corrupted and in manner killed with evil and
damnable doctrines, as with poisoned drinks: such wherein Christ lies half
buried, the Gospel overwhelmed, godliness banished, the worshipping of God in
a manner abolished: such finally wherein al things are so troubled, that therein
rather appears the face of Babylon then of the holy city of god. In a sum,
I say that they be Chirches, in respect that the Lord there maruelously
preserves the remnauntes of his people how soever they were dispersed and
scattered abroad, in respect that there remain some tokens of the Chirch,
specially these tokens, the effectualnesse whereof neither the craft of the
Devil, nor the maliciousness of man can destroy. But on the other side because
these marks are blotted out, which in this discourse we ought principally to
have respect unto, I say that every one of their assemblies and the whole
body wants the lawful form of a Chirch.

The.iii. Chapter. Of the teachers and ministers of the Church, and of their
election and office.
Now it is mete that we speak of the order, by which it was the Lords will
to have his Church governed. For although in his Church he only must rule
and reign, yea and bear preeminence or excelle in it, and this government to
be used or executed by his only word: Mathe. xxvi.xi.
yet because he dwells not among us in visible presence, so that he can
presently with his own mouth declare his will unto us, we have said that in
this he uses the ministry of men, and as it were the travail of deputies,
not in transferryng his right and honor unto them, but only that by their
mouth he might do his own work, like as a workman to do his work uses
his instrument. I am compelled to repete again those things that I have
already declared. He might in deed do it either by himself without any other
help or instrumente, or also by mean of Angels: but there are many causes
why he had rather do it by men. For by this mean first he declares his good
will toward us, when he takes out of men them that shall do his message in
the world, that shall be the interpreters of his secret will, finally that shall
represent his own person. And so by experience he proves that it is not vain
that commonly he calls us his temples, when out of the mouths of men, as
out of his sanctuarye, he gives answers to men. Secondly, this is the best
and most profitable exercise to humility, when he accustometh us to obey his
word, Augusti. lib. i. de doctrine. christi.
howsoever it be preached by men like unto us, yea sometime our inferiors in
dignity. If he him self spoke from heaven, it were no marvel if his holy
Oracles were without delay reverently received with the ears and minds of
all men. For who would not dread his power being in presence? who would not
be thrown down at the first sight of so great majesty? who would not be
confounded with ye infinite brightness? But when some silly man risen out of
ye dust speaks in the name of God, here with very good testimony we declare
our godliness and reverent obedience toward God himself, if to his minister
we yield our selves willing to learn, which yet in nothing excels us. ii.
Corin. iiii.vii^
Therefore for this cause also he has hidden the treasure of his heavenly
wisdom in brickle and earthen vessels, that he might have the certainer
proof how much he is esteemed of us. Moreover there was nothing fitter for the
cherishyng of mutual charity, than that me^ should be bound together one to an
other with this bond, when one is made a pastor to teach the rest, and they
that are commanded to be scholars receive al one doctrine at one mouth. For if
every man were able enough to serve himself, and neded not the help of an
other: such is the pride of man's nature, that every one would despise other,
and should again be despised of them. Therefore the Lord has bound his
Chirch with that knotte, which he forsawe to be the strongest knotte to hold
unity together, when he has left with men the doctrine of salvation, and of
eternal life, that by their hands he might communicate it to the rest.
Herunto Paul had respect when he wrote to the Ephesians, Ephesians. iiii.iiii.
One body one spirit, as also ye be called in one hope of your calling. One
Lord, one Faith, one Baptism. One God, and the Father of all, which is above
all, and by all, and in us al. But unto every one of us grace is given
according to the measure of the gift of Christ. Wherefore he says: When he was
gone up on hye, he led captivity captive, he gave gifts to men. He that
went down is the self same he that went up, that he might fulfill all
things. And the same has given some to be Apostles, and some Prophets, and
some Evangelists, and other some Pastors and teachers, unto the restoryng of
the holy ones, to the work of ministration, to the edifying of the body of
Christ, until we com all into the unity of Faith, and of the knowledge of
the Son of God, into a perfect man, into the measure of full grown age: that
we be no more children that may be carried about with every wind of doctrine:
but following truth in charity, let us in all things grow into him that is
the head, even Christ, in whom the whole body conjoined and compacted together
by all the joint of subministration, according to the workyng in measure of
every part, makes increase of the body, unto the edifiyng of it self by
charity.

CHRIST (says he) is gone up on hye, that he might fulfill all things. This
is the manner of fulfillyng, that by his ministers, to whom he has committed
that office, Ephesians. iiii.x.
and has given the grace to execute that work, he disposes and distributeth
his gifts to the Church, yea and after a certain manner gives him self
present, with extendyng the power of his spirit in this institution, that it
should not be vain or idle. So is the restoryng of the holy ones performed: so
is the body of Christ edified: so do we by all things grow into him that is
the head, and do grow together among our selves: so are we all brought into
the unity of Christ, if prophecy flourishe among us, if we receive the
Apostles, Ephesians. iiii.xii.
if we refuse not the doctrine ministered unto us. Therefore he goes about the
dissipation, or rather the ruin and destruction of the Church, whosoever he
be that either endeavors to abolishe this Order of whom we speak, and this
kind of government, or minisheth the estimation of it as a thing not so
necessary. For neither the light and heat of the sun, nor meat and drink
are so necessary to nourishe and sustain this present life, as the office of
Apostles and pastors is necessary to preserve the Church in earth.

Esa. lii.vii. Math. v.xv and xiiii. Luke. x.xvi. ii. Corin. iiii.vi. ii. Cor.
iii ^x.
and blessed is the coming of them that bring tidyngs of peace: and when he
calls the Apostles the light of the world, and salt of the earth. Neither
could this office be more honorably advanced, than it was when he said: He
that hears you, hears me. He that despises you, despises me. But there is
no place more plain, than in Paul in his second Epistle to the Corinthians,
where he as it were of purpose entreats of this matter. He affirms
therefore, that there is nothing in the Church more excellent or glorious than
the ministry of the Gospel, forasmuch as it is the administration of the
Spirit, ii. Cor. iii ix.
and of righteousness, and of eternal life. These and like sayenges serve to
this purpose, that that order of governing and preserving the Chirch by
ministers, which the Lord has stablished for ever, should not grow out of
estimation among us, and so at length by very contempt grow out of use. And
how great is the necessity thereof, he has declared not only by words, but
also by examples. When his will was to shine more fully to Cornelius with the
light of his truth, Act. x.iii. Act. ix.vi
he sent an Angel from heaven to send Peter unto him. When his will was to
call Paul to the knowledge of himself, and to engraffe him into the Chirch, he
spoke not to him with his own voice, but sent him to a man, of whom he should
receive both the doctrine of salvation, and the sanctification of Baptism. If
it be not done without cause, that an Angel, which is the interpreter of God,
do himself abstain from declaring the will of God, but commands that a man
be sent for, to declare it: and not without cause that Christ the only
scholemaister of the faithful commytteth Paul to the schooling of a man, yea
even that same Paul whom he had determined to take up into the third heaven,
ii. Cor. xii ii.
and to vouchsaue to grant him miraculous revelation of things unspeakable:
who is there now that dare despise that ministry, or pass it over as a
thing superfluous, the use whereof it has pleased God to make approved by such
examples?

They that have rule of the government of ye Church according to Ephesians.
iiii.xii,
are named of Paul first Apostles, then Prophets, thirdly Evangelists,
fourthly Pastors, last of all Teachers. Of which, the two last alone have
ordinary office in the Church: the other three the Lord raised up at the
beginning of his kingdom, and sometime yet also rayseth up, as the necessity
of times requires. What is the Apostles office, Mar. xvi.xv.
appears by that commandment: go, preach the Gospel to every creature.
There are not certain bounds appointed unto them: but ye whole world is
assigned them, to be brought into the obedience of Christ: that in spreading
the Gospel among all nations whersoeuer they shall be able, they may each
where raise up his kingdom. Romans xv.xix. and. xx
Therefore Paul, when he went about to prove his Apostleship, rehearses
that he has gotten to Christ not some one city, but has far and wide spread
abroad the Gospel: and that he has not laid his hands to an other man's
fundation, but planted Chirches where the name of the Lord had never ben heard
of. Therefore the Apostles were sent to bring back the world from falling
away, Ephesians. iiii.xi.
unto true obedience of God, and each where to stablish his kingdom by
preaching of the Gospel: or (if you like that better) as the first bilders of
the Church, to lay the fundations thereof in all the world. Prophets he
calls, not all expositors of Gods will whatsoever they be, but those that by
singular revelation excelled, such as at this time either be none, or are
less notable. By Evangelists I understand those, which when in dignity
they were less than the Apostles, yet in office were next unto them, yea and
occupied their rooms. Such were Luke, Luke x.i.
Timothee, Titus and other like: and paraduenture also the seventy Disciples,
whom Christ appointed in the second place after the Apostles. Luke. xi.
According to this exposition (which seems to me agreeable both with the
words and meaning of Paul) those three offices were not ordained in the
Church to this end that they should be perpetual, but only to serve for
that time wherein Chirches were to be erected, where were none before, or at
least to be removed from Moses to Christ. Albeit I deny not, but ye afterward
also the Lord has sometime raised up Apostles, or at least in their places
Evangelists, as it has been done in our time. For it was needful to have
such, to bring back the Church from the falling away of Antichrist. Yet the
office it self I do nevertheless call extraordinary, because it has no
place in the Chirches already well set in order. Next after these are Pastors
and Teachers, whom the Church may never lack: between whom I think that
there is this difference, that the Teachers are not appointed to bear rule of
discipline, nor for the ministration of Sacraments, nor admonishmentes or
exhortations, but only to expound the Scripture, that pure and sound
doctrine may be kept among the faithful. But the office of Pastor contains
al these things within it.

Luke. vi.xiii. Gala. i.i.
So those.xii. whom the Lord did choose, that they should publish abroad to
the world the new preaching of the Gospel, in degree and dignity went before
the rest. For although by the meaning and property of the word, all the
ministers of the Church may be ryghtly called Apostles, because they are
sent of the Lord, and are his messengers: yet because it was much
behouefull, yt there should be a certain knowledge had of the sendyng of them
that should bring a thing new and unheard of, it was necessary that those xii.
(to whoes number Paul was afterward added) should be garnished with some
peculiar title above the rest. Paul himself in deed in ^^e place gives this
name to Andronicus and Iunias, whom he says to have been notable among the
Apostles: Romans xvi ^^^.
but when he means to speak properly, he refers it to none other but to
that principal degree. And this is the common use of the Scripture. Math. x.i.
Yet the Pastors (saving that each of them do govern several Chirches
appointed to them) have al one charge with the Apostles. Now what manner of
thing that is, let us yet hear it more plainly.

Math. xxviii.ix.
and to baptize them that believe unto forgiveness of sins. He had before
commanded, that they should distribute the holy signs of his body and blood,
as he had done. Lo here is a holy, inviolable and perpetual law laid upon
them that succeed in the Apostles place, whereby they receive commandment to
preach the Gospel, and minister the Sacraments. Whereupon we gather, that
they which neglect both these things, do fasly say yt they bear the person
of the Apostles. But what of the Pastors? Paul speaks not of himself only,
but of them all, when he says: i. Corin. i^^i.i. Tit. i.ix.
let a man so esteem us as the ministers of Christ, and distributers of ye
mysteries of God. Again in an other place: a Bishop must be a fast holder of
that faithful word which is according to doctrine: that he may be able to
exhort by sound doctrine, and to convince the gainesaiers. Out of those and
like places, which are echwhere to be found, we may gather, that also in the
office of the Apostles these be the two principal parts, to preach the
Gospel, and to minister the Sacraments. As for the order of teaching, it
consists not only in public Sermons, but belongs also to private
admonitions. Ac. xx.xx.
So Paul calls the Ephesians to witness that he has not fled from doing of
any of those things that were for their profyt, but that he preached and taught
them both openly and in every house, testifying both to the Jews and Grecians,
repentance and faith in Christ. Act. xx.xxxi.
Again a little after: that he has not ceased with tears to admonish every
one of them. Neither yet belongs it to my purpose at this present to express
all the qualities of a good Pastor, but only to point out what they profess
that call themselves Pastors: that is, that they are so made rulers of the
Chirch, not that they should have an idle dignity, but that they should with
ye doctrine of Christ instruct the people to true godliness, minister the holy
mysteries, and preserve and exercise vpryght discipline. Eze. xiii.xvii.
For whosoever be set to be watchemen in the Church, the Lord declares unto
them, that if any by their negligence peryshe through ignorance, he will
require the blood at their hands. That also pertayneth to them all, which
Paul says of himself: woe to me unless I preach the Gospel, forasmuch as
the distributing thereof is committed to me. Finally what the Apostles performed
to the whole world, i. Cor. ix.xvi.
the same ought every Pastor to perform to his flock to which he is
appointed.

Albeit when we assign to every one their several Chirches, yet Act.
xiiii.xxii. Tit. i.v. Phi. i.i.
So in one place he speaks of the Bishops of Philippes, and in an other
place of Archippus Bishop of the Colossians. Colo. iiii xvii. Act. xx.xviii.
And there remains a notable Sermon of his in Luke, to the Priests of the
Church of Ephesus. Whosoever therefore shall take upon him the government and
charge of one Church, let him know that he is bound to this law of Gods
calling: not that as bound to the soil (as the lawiers term it) that is,
made bond and fastened unto it, he may not ones move his foo^e from thense, if
the common profit do so require, so that it be done well and orderly: but he
that is called into one place ought not himself to think of removing, nor
seek to be delivered as he shall think to be good for his commodity. Then, if
it be expedient that any be removed to an other place, yet he ought not to
attempt it of his own private advise, but to tarry for public authority.

Tit. i.v. Phi. i.i. Ac. xx.vii Romans xii.vii. i. Cor. xii.xxviii.
And in the acts it is rehearsed, that he called together the Priests of
Ephesus, whom he himself in his own Sermon calls Bishops. Here now it is to
be noted, that hitherto we have recited none but those offices that stand in
the ministry of the word: neither does Paul make mention of any other in
that fourth chapter which we have alleged. But in the Epistle to the Romans,
and in the first Epistle to the Corinthians, he reckeneth up other offices, as
powers, the gift of healing, interpretation, gouernemente, caring for the
poor. Of the which I omitted those yt endured but for a time, because it is to
no profitable purpose to tarry upon them. But there are two that do
perpetually abide, that is to say, gouernemente and care of the poor.
Gouernoures I think were the Elders chosen out of the people, that should
together with the Bishops, have rule of the judgment of manners, and the using
o^ discipline. For a man cannot otherwise expound that which he says: let him
that rules do it with carfulness. Therefore at the beginning every Chirch had
their Senate, Romans xii.viii.
gathered of godly, grave and holy men: which had that same jurisdiction in
correcting of vices, whereof we shall speak hereafter. And that this was the
order of more than one age, experience it self declares. Therefore this office
of government is also necessary for all ages.

To xii.ix.
Forasmuch as it is certain that he speaks of the publyke offices of the
Chirch, it must needs be that there were two several degrees. Unless my
judgment deceive me, in the first point he means Deacons, yt distributed ye
alms: in the other he speaks of them that had given themselves to loking to
ye poor and sick: of which sort were the wydowes of who^ he makes mention to
Timothe. i Tim. v.x.
For women could execute no other public office, but to give themselves to
the service of the poor. If we grant this, (as we must needs grant it) then
there shall be two sorts of Deacons: of which one sort shall serve in
distributing the things of the poor, the other in loking to the poor of the
Church themselves. But although the very word Diaconia Deaconrie extends
further: yet the Scripture specially calls them Deacons, to whom the Church
has given the charge to distribute the alms, and to take care of the poor,
and has appointed them as it were stewardes of the common treasury of the
poor: whoes beginning, institution and office, Ac. vi.iii.
is described of Luke in the Acts. For when a murmuring was raised by the
Grecians, for that in the ministry of the poor their wydowes were neglected,
the Apostles excusing themselves with saying that they could not serve both
offices, both the preaching of the word and the ministering at tables, required
of the multitude, yt there might be chosen.vii. honest men, to whom they might
commit that doing. Lo what manner of Deacons the Apostolic Chirch had, and
what Deacons it were mete for us to have according to their example.

Now whereas in the holy assembly all things are to be done in order

The discourse thereof stands in four points: that we should that his
wickedness be not open. They are wont also to say that euest private men are
called to the ministry, whom they see to be me^e and able to execute it:
because verily learning joined with godliness and with the other qualities of
a good Pastor, is a certain preparation to the very office. For whom the Lord
has appointed to so great an office* he first furnishes them with those
armures that are required to fulfill it, that they should not come empty and
unprepared unto it. Whereupon Paul also to the Corinthians, when he meante to
dispute of the very offices, i. Cor. xli vi^.
first rehearsed the gifts which they ought to have that execute the
offices. But because this is the first of those four points that I have
propounded, let us now go forward unto it.

What manner of Bishops it is mete to choose, Paul does largely Tit. i.ix. ii.
Timo. iii*i.
which might both take away credit from them, and procure slander to their
ministry. Of Deacons and Elders there is altogether like consideration. It is
always to be looked unto, that they be not unable or unfit to bear the burden
that is laid upon them, Luke xxi.xv. and, xxiiii xl.x. Mar. xvi.xv. Ac.
i.viii, i. Tim. v.xxii.
that is to say, that they may be furnished with those powers that are
necessary to the fulfilling of their office. So when Christ was about to send
his Apostles, he garnished them with those weapons and instruments which they
could not want. And Paul when he had painted out the image of a good and true
Bishop, warns Timothee, that he should not defile himself with choosing any
man that differs from it. I refer this word How, not to the Ceremony of
choosing, but to the reuerente fear that is to be kept in the choosing.
Hereupon come the fastinges and prayers, which Luke recites that the faithful
used when they made Priests. For whereas they understood that they meddled with
a most earnest matter, they durst attempt nothing, but with great reverence
and carfulness. But they ch^fely applied themselves to prayers, whereby they
might crave of God the Spirit of counsel and discretion.

Ac. i.xiii.
they durst not certainly name any one man, but they brought fourth two, that
the LORD should declare by lotte, whether of them he would have to succeed.
After this manner also it is mete to take this, that Paul denies that he was
create Apostle of men or by man, Ca. i.xii.
but by Christ and GOD the Father. That first point, that is to say of men,
he had common with all the Godly ministers of the word. For no man could
rightly take upon him that execution, but he that were called of God. But the
other point was proper and singular to himself. Therefore when he glories of
this, he does not only bost that he has that which belongs to a true and
lawful Pastor, but also brings fourth the signs of his Apostleship. For when
there were some among the Galathians, which travailing to diminishe his
authority, made him some mean disciple, put in office under them by ye
principal Apostles: he, to defend in safety the dignity of his preaching,
which he knew to be shot at by those subtle devises, neded to show himself in all points nothing inferior to the other Apostles. Therefore he affirms that
he was chosen, not by the judgment of men, like some common Bishop, but by the
mouth and manifest Oracle of the Lord himself.

But no man that is sober will deny, yt it is according to the order of Gal. i.i.
Neither does that saying of Paul make to the contrary, as it is said, that he
was not sent of men, nor by men: forasmuch as he speaks not there of the
ordinary choosing of ministers, but chalengeth to himself yt which was special
to the Apostles. Howbeit God also so appointed Paul by himself by singular
prerogative, that in the mean time he used the discipline of Ecclesiastical
calling. For Luke reports it thus, when the Apostles were fasting and
praying, the Holy ghost said: Separate unto me Paul and Barnabas to the work
to which I have severally chosen them. Ac. xiii.ii.
To what purpose served that seperatio^ and putting on of hands, since the Holy
ghost has testified his own election, but that the discipline of the Church
in appointing ministers by men, might be preserved? Therefore the Lord could by
no playner example approve such order, than he did when having first declared
that he had ordained Paul Apostle for the Gentiles, yet he wills him to be
appointed by ye Chirch. Act. i.xxiii.
Which thing we may see in the choosyng of Mathias. For, because the office of
Apostleship was of so great importance, that they durst not by their own
judgment choose any one man into that degree, they did set two men in the
mids, upon the one of whom the lot should fall: that so both the election
might have an open testimony from heaven, and yet the policy of the Chirch
should not be passed over.

Now it is demanded whether the minister ought to be chosen of Tit. i.v.
Therefore I have left thee in Creta, that thou should appoynte in every
town Priests. Again to Timothee: lay not hands quicklye upon any manne.
But they are deceived if they think, i. Tim. v.xxii.
that either Timothee at Ephesus, or Titus in Creta, used a kingly power, that
either of them should dispose all things at his own will. For they were
above the rest, only to go before the people with good and wholesome
counsels: not that they only, excludyng all other, should do what they
lysted. And that I may not seem to feign any thing, I will make it plain by a
like example. For Luke rehearses that Paul and Barnabas appointed Pryestes in
diverse Chirches: but he also expresses the order or manner how, Act.
xiiii.xxiii.
when he says that it was done by voices* ordeining Priests (says he) by
lifting up of hands in every Church* Therefore they two did create them: but
the whole multitude, as the Grecians manner was in elections, did by holding up
their hands declare whom they would have. Even in like manner the Roman
hystories do oftentimes say, yt the Consul which kept the assemblies, created
new officers, for none other cause but for that he received the voices and
governed the people in the election. Truly it is not likely that Paul
granted more to Timothe and Titus than he took to himself. But we see that he
was wont to create Bishops by voices of the people. Therefore the places above
are so to be understood, yt they minishe nothing of the common right and
liberty of the Chirch. Therefore Ciprian says well, when he affirms that it
comes from the authority of God, that the Priest should be chose^ in
presence of the people before the eyes of all men, and should by public
judgment and testimony be allowed for worthy and mete. For we see that this
was by the commandment of the Lord observed in the Leuiticall Priests, ^ru.
viii.vi. Number. xx.xxvi. Act. i.xv. and, vi.ii.
that before their consecration they should be brought into the sight of the
people. And no otherwise is Mathias added to the fellowship of the Apostles: and
no otherwise the seven Deacons were created: but the people seeing and allowing
it. These examples (says Ciprian) do show, that the ordring of a Priest ought
not to be done, but in the knowledge of the people standing by: that the
orderyng may be just and lawful, which has been examined by the witness of
all. We are therefore come thus far, that this is by the word of God a
lawful calling of a minister, when they that seem mete are created by the
consent and allowaunce of the people. And that other Pastors ought to bear
rule of the election, that nothing be done amiss of the multitude either by
lightenesse, or by evil affections, or by disorder.

Ge. xlviii xiiii. Mat. xix.xv. Ac. xix.vi.
he laid his hands upon their heds. Which thing our Lord followed, when he
prayed over the infantes. In the same meaning (as I think) the Jews, by the
ordinance of the law, laid hands upon the Sacryfices. Wherefore the Apostles
by layeng on of hands did signify that they offered him to God, who^ they
admitted into the ministry. Albeit they used it also upon them, to whom they
applied the visible graces of the Spirit. Howsoever it be, this was the
solemn usage, so often as they called any man to the ministry of the Church.
So they consecrated Pastors and teachers, and so also Deacons. But although
there be no certain commandment concerning the laying on of hands, yet
because we see that it was continually used among the Apostles, their so
diligente observing of it ought to be to us instead of a commandment. And
truly it is profitable, that by such a sign, both the dignity of ye
ministry should be commended to the people, and also that he which is ordered
should be admonished, that he is not now at his own liberty, but made bond to
God and the Church. Moreover it shall not be a vain sign, if it be restored
to the natural beginning of it. For if the Spirit of God, has ordained
nothing in the Chirch in vain, we must think that this Ceremony, sith it
proceeded from him, is not unprofitable, so that it be not turned into a
superstitious abuse. Last of all this is to be holden, that not the whole
multitude did lay their hands upon the ministers, but the Pastors only.
Howbeit it is uncertain whether many did always lay on their hands or no. Act.
v^*v^ and xiii.^ii.
But it is evident that that was done in the Deacons, in Paul and Barnabas,
and a few other. But Paul himself in an other place reports, that he, and
not many other, did lay his hands upon Timothee. ii. Tim. i.vi.
I admonish thee (says he) that thou raise up the grace which is in thee by
laying on of my hands. For, as for that which in the other Epistle is spoken
of the laying on of the hands of the degree of Priests, I do not so take it,
as though Paul did speak of the company of the Elders, i. Ti. ^iii.xiiii.
but I understand by that word the very ordinance it self: as if he had
said: Make that the Grace, which thou haste received by laying on of hands
when I did create thee a priest, may not be void.

The.iiii. Chapter. Of the state of the old Church, and of the manner of
gouernyng that was in use before the Papacy.
HItherto we have entreated of the order of gouernyng the Church, as it has been delivered us out of the pure word of God: and of the ministeries, as they
were institute by Christ. Now that all these things may be more clearly and
familiarly opened, and also be better fastened in our minds: it shall be
profitable in these things to consider the form of the Old Church, which
shall represent to our eyes a certain image of Gods institution. For although
the Byshopes of those times did set soorth many Canons, wherein they seemed to
express more than was expressed in the holy Scripture: yet they with such
hedefulnesse framed all their order after the only rule of Gods word, that a
man may easily see yt in this behalf they had in a manner nothing disagreyng
from the word of God. But although there might be somewhat wantyng in their
ordinances, yet because they with sincere zeal endeavored to preserve Gods
institution, and they swarued not much from it, it shall be very profitable
here shortly to gather what manner of observation they had. As we have declared
that there are three sorts of ministers commended unto us in the Scripture: so
all the ministers that the old Church had, it divided into three Orders. For out
of the order of Elders were partly chosen Pastors and Teachers: the rest of them
had the rule of the judgment and correction of manners. To the Deacons was
committed the care of the poor, and the distributyng of the alms. As for the
Reders and Acoluthe, were not names of certain offices: but those whom they
called Clerks, they trained from their youth upward in certain exercises to
serve the Church, that they might be the better understand to what purpose
they were appointed, and might in time come the better prepared to their
office: as I shall by and by show more at large. In Esa. cap. 9.
Therefore Hierome, when he had appointed five orders of the Church, reckeneth
up Bishops, Priests, Deacons, Beleuers, and Cathecumeni: to the rest of the
Clergy and monks he gives no proper place.

Consul had in the Senate, to propounde of matters, to ask opinions, to go
before the other with counselling, monishing and exhorting, to govern the
whole action with his authority, and to put in execution that which is decreed
by common counsel: the same office had the Bishop in the assembly of the
Priests. And the old writers them selves confess, that the same was by Men's
consent brought in for the necessity of the times. Therefore Hierome upon the
Epistle to Titus says: The same was a Priest which was a Bishop. And before
that by the instinction of the Devil, there were dissentions in religion, and
it was said among peoples: I am of Paul, I am of Cephas, Chirches were
governed by common counsel of Elders. Afterward, that the seeds of
dissentio^s might be plucked up, all the care was committed to one man. As
therefore the Priests do know, that by the custom of the Church they are
subject to him that is set over them: so let the Bishops know, that they
are above the Priests, rather by Custom, than by the truth of the Lords
disposyng, and that they ought to govern the Church in common together.
Episto. ad Eua.
But in an other place he teaches, how ancient an institution it was. For he
says that at Alexandria, from Marc the Evangelist even to Heraclas and
Dionysius, the Priests did alwaie choose out one of them selves, and set him
in a hyer degree, whom they named a Bishop. Therefore every city had a company
of priests which were Pastors and Teachers. For they all did execute among
the people that office of teaching, exhortyng and correctyng, which Paul
appoints to the Bishops: ^it. i.ix.
and that they might leave sede after them, they travailed in teaching the
younger men, that had professed themselves soldiers in the holy warfare. To
every city there was appointed a certain country, that should take their
priests from thens, and be accounted as it were into the body of that Church.
Every company (as I have before said) only for preservation of Policy and
Peace, were under one Bishop: which was so above the rest in dignity, that he
was subject to the assembly of his brethren. If the compass of ground that
was under his bishoprike were so great, that he could not suffice to serve all the offices of a Bishop in every place of it, in the country it self there
were in certain places appointed Priests, which in small matters should
execute his authority. Them they called contrey-byshops, because in the
o^ntrey they represented the Bishop.

But, so much as belongs to the office, whereof we now speak, as well the
Bishops as the Priests were bound to apply the distributing of the word and
Sacraments. For it was ordained only at Alexandria, (because Arrius had there
troubled the Church) that the priest should not preach to the people, Episto.
ad E^^.
as Socrates says in the.ix. book of the Tripartite history. Which yet
Hierome confesses that he mysliketh not. Truly it should be counted
monstrous, if any man had given out himself for a Bishop, that had not also in
very deed showed himself a true Bishop. Therefore such was the severity of
those times, that all ministers were driven to the fulfillyng of such office,
as the Lord requires of them. Neither do I rehearse the manner of one age
alone: For even in Gregory's time, when the Church was now almost decayed
(certainly it was much degenerate from the ancient pureness) it had not ben
tolerable ye any Bishop should abstain from preaching. The Priest (says he in
one place) dies if there be no sound heard of him: Epi. iiii. Homel. in Eze.
Acts. xx.xvi.
because he asks against himself the wrath of the secret judge, if he go
without sound of preaching. And in an other place: When Paul testifies that
he is clean from the blood of all: in this saying we be convinced, we be
bound, we be showed to be guilty, which are called Priests, which beside the
evils that we have of our own, add also the deaths of other: because we kyl
so many as we being luke warm and silent do daily see to go to death. He
calls himself and other silent, because they were less diligent in their
work than they ought to be. When he spares not them, that did half perform
their dueti: what think you he would have done, if a man had altogether sit
idle? Therefore this was a great while holden in the Church, that the chief
duty of the Bishop was to feed Gods people with the word, or both publicly
and privately to edify the Church with sound doctrine.

But whereas every province had among their Bishops one Archbishop:

Neither was the order of the Deacons at that time any other then it goods of
the Chirch, it is not so to be understood, as though he did by him self
discharge that care: but because it was his part to appoint to the Deacon, who
should be received into the common alms of the Church, and of that which
remained, to whom it should be given, and how much to every one; because he
had an ouerseeyng whether the Deaco^ did faithfully execute that which belo^ged
to his office. For thus it is red in the canons which they ascribe to the
Apostles: We command that the Bishop have the goods of the Church in his
own power. For if he be put in trust with the souls of men, which are more
precious, much more it is mete that he have charge of money: so that by his
power all things may be distributed to the poor by the Elders and Deacons:
that they may be ministered with all fear and carfulness. And in the Counsel
of Antioche it is decreed, Cap. xxxv
that the Bishops should be restrained that meddle with the goods of the
Church, without the knowledge of the Elders and Deacons. But of that point we
need to make no longer disputation, sith it is evident by many epistles of
Gregory, that even at that time, when otherwise the ordinances of the Chirch
were much corrupted, yet this observation continued, that the Deacons should
under the Bishop be the stewardes of the poor. As for Subdeacons, it is likely
that at the beginning they were joined to the Deacons, that they should use
their service about the poor: but that difference was by little and little
confounded. But Archedeacons began then to be created, when the plenty of the
goods, required a new and more exact manner of disposyng them: Epist. ad Nepot.
Albeit Hierome does say, that it was even in his age. In their charge was the
sum of their revenues, possessions, and store, and the collection of the
daily offrynges. Whereupon Gregory declares to the Archedeacon of Salon,
Epist. 10 lib. i.
that he should be holden gilty if any of the goods of the Chirch perished
either by his fraud or negligence. But whereas it was given to them to read the
Gospel to the people, and to exhort them to prayer: and where as they were
admytted to deliver the Cup in the holy Supper, that was rather done to
garnyshe their office, that they should execute it with the more reverence,
when by such signs they were admonished that it was no profane baylywike
that they exercised, but a spiritual function and dedicate to God.

priests in that age, consecratyng their patrimonies to God, were willingly
made poor: the distributyng was such, that neither the ministers wanted
sustenance, nor the poor were neglected. But yet in the mean time it was
provided, that the ministers themselves, which ought to give example of honest
sparyng to other, should, not have so much, whereby they might abuse it to
riotous excess or deliciousness, but only wherewith to sustain their own
need. For those of the Clergy (says Hierome) which are able to live of the
goods of their parents, if they take that which is the poores, do commit
sacrilege: and by such abuse they eat and drink to them selves damnation.

First the ministration was free and voluntary, whereas the Bishops and Deacons
were of their own will faithefull, and uprightness of i. Tim. iii.ii.
And so do Gelasius and Gregory expou^de it. For Gelasius brings no other
reason why the Bishop should challenge any thing to himself, but that he might
give it prisoners and strangers. And Gregorye speaks yet more plainly. It is
the manner (says he) of the sea Apostolic, to give commandment to the Bishop
when he is ordered, that of all the revenue that arises, there be made four
portions: that is to say, the one to the Bishop and his family for
Hospitality, and entertainment: the second to the Clergy: the third to the
poor: the fowerth to the repairing of Chirches. Therefore it was lawful for
the Bishop to take nothing to his own use but so much as were enough for
moderate and mean food and clothyng. If any began to excede, either in
riotous expense, or in ostentation and pomp, he was by and by repressed by his
fellows: and if he obeyed not, he was put from his dignity.

As for that which they bestowed upon garnishing of holy things, at the first
it was very little. Afterward when the Chirch became somewhat Tripar. hist. lib.
v. Lib. xi. ca. xvi.
Cyrillus sold the vessels and garments, and spente them upon sustenance
of the poor. Likewise Acatius Bishop of Amida, whenne a great multitude of
the Persians, in a manner starued for hunger, called together the Clergy, and
when he had made that notable ora^ion, Our God needs neither dishes nor
cups, because he neither ^ateth nor drinks, he molt the vessels, to make
thereof both meat and ransom for men in misery. Ad Nepotia.
Hierom also, when he inueyeth against the to much gorgiousnesse of temples,
does with honor make mention of Exuperius Bishop of Tholosa in his time,
which carried the Lords body in a wicker basket, and his blood in glass, but
suffered no poor man to be hungry. That which I even now said of Acatius,
Ambrose rehearses of himself. Lib. i would offic. ca. 28.
For when the Arrians charged him, for that he had broken the holy vessels to
ransom prisoners, he used this most godly excuse: He that sent the Apostles
without gold, gathered Chirches together without gold. The Church has
gold, not to keep it* but to bestow it, and to give relief in necessities.
What need is to keep that which helps not? Do we not know, how much gold
and silver the Assyrians took out of the temple of the Lord? Does not the
priest better to melt them for the sustena^ce of the poor, if other reliefs do
fail, than an enemy a robber of God to bear them away? Will not the Lord
say: Why have thou suffered so many needy to die for hunger? and verily thou
had gold whereof thou might have ministered them sustenaunce. Why were so
many led away captive, and not ransomed? why were so many slain by the
enemy? It had been better that thou should save the vessels of living men,
than of metalles. To these things thou shall not be able to answer. For what
would thou say? I feared least Gods temple should want garnishyng. He would
answer: Sacraments require not gold: neither do those things please with
Gold that are not bought with gold. The raunsomyng of prisoners is a
garnishyng of Sacraments. Lib. 5. epi. xxxi. and xxxii*
In sum, we see that it is most true which the same man says in an other
place, that what soever the Church then possessed was the store of the nedy.
Again: that a Bishop has nothing that is not the poores.

^^ ^et. v. ^i^.
or of corrupt affection: forasmuch as Peter calls the whole Church the
Clergy, that is to say, the Lords inheritance. But the institution it self
was very holy and profitable, that they which would consecrate them selves and
their service to the Chirch, should be so brought up under the keeping of the
Bishop, that none should minister to the Church* but he that were well
informed aforehande, and that had from his very youth both sucked holy
doctrine, and by severe discipline put in a certain continuyng quality of
gravity and holy life, and were estranged from worldly cares, and were
accustomed to spiritual cares and studies. But as young soldiers are by
certain counter^ai^e skirmishes instructed to learn true and earnest fight, so
there were also certain rudimentes, whereby they were exercised while they were
Clerks, before that they were promoted to the very offices. Therefore first
they committed to the Clerks the charge to open and shut the Chirch, and
they named them Ostiarii, doorekeepers. Afterward they called them A coluthi,
folowers, which waited upon the Bishop in his household services, and did
continually accompany him, first for honors sake, and then that no suspicion
should arise of them. Moreover that by little and little they might become
known to the people, and get to themselves commendation: also that they might
learn to abide the sight of all men, and to speak before all men: that being
made priests, when they came forth to teach, they should not be abashed with
shame: therefore place was appointed them to read in the pulpet. After this
manner they were promoted by degrees, to show proof every one of their
diligence in all their several exercises, till they were made Subdeacons. This
only is my meaning, that those were rather gross beginnyngs, than such
offices as were accounted among the true ministeries of the Church.

Whereas we said that the first and second point in the calling of ministers, i.
(...) iii.i^.
and specially in process of ti^e they required unmarried life. But in ye other
points their observation was agreyng with Paul's description. But in this
which we made the third point, that is to say, who ought to institute
ministers, they kept not always one order. In old time, none was received into
the company of Clerks without the consent of all the people: in so much that
Cyprian labors earnestly to excuse that he appointed one Aurelius to be a
Reder without askyng advise of the Church, Lib. 2. epist. ^.
because yt was done beside the custom, though not without reason. For this he
says before: In ordering of Clerks, dear brethren, we are wont first to ask
you advise, and by common counsel to wey the manners and deservings of every
one. But because in these lesser exercises there was not much perille: because
they were chosen to a long proof, and not to a great office, therefore the
consent of the people therein ^essed to be asked. Afterward in the other degrees
also, except the Bishoprike, the people commonly left the judgment and choice
of them to the Bishop and the Priests, that they should examine who were mete
and worthy: saving peradventure when new priests were appointed for paroches:
for then it behooved that the multitude of that place namely should consent.
Neither is it any marvel, that the people in this behalf was little careful
in keeping their own right: For no man was made a Subdeacon, that had not
showed a long proof of himself in his being a Clerk, under that severity of
discipline, which the^ was used. After that he had been tried in that degree, he
was made a Deacon. From thense he came to the honor of priesthode if he had
behaved himself faithfully. So no man was promoted, of whom there had not been
in deed a trial had many years before the eyes of the people. And there were
many canons to punish their faults: so that the Church could not be
troubled with evil priests or deacons, unless it neglected the remedies.
Howbeit in the priests also there was always required the consent of them of
the same city: which the very first canon testifies in the.lxvii.
distinction, which is fathered upon Anacletus. Finally all the admissions into
orders were therefore done at certain appointed times of the year, that no
man should privily crepe in without the consent of the faithful, or should
with to much easynesse be promoted without witnesses.

Episto. 90. cap. 2
Hereupon came these sayenges: Let him be chosen, whom the clergy, and the
people, or the greater number shall require. Again: Let him that shall bear
rule over all, be chosen of all. For it must needs be, that he that is made a
ruler being unknown and not examined, is thruste in by violence. Again, Let
him be chosen, that is both chosen by the Clerks, and desired by the people:
and let him be consecrate by them of that Province, with the judgment of the
Metropolitan. The holy Fathers took so great head that this liberty of the
people should by no mean be diminished, that when the general Synod gathered
together at Constantinople did order Nectarius, they would not do it without
the allowance of the whole Clergy and people: as they testified by their
epistle to the Synod at Rome. Therefore when any Bishop did apoint a successor
to himself, it was not otherwise stablished, unless the whole people did
confirm it. Whereof you have not only an example, Epist. 10 Theod. lib. 4. ca
20.
but also the very form in Augustine in the naming of Eradius. And Theodorite,
when he reherseth that Peter was named by Athanasius to be his successor, by
and by adds, that the order of priests confirmed it, and the magistrate, and
nobility, and the people approved it with their allowyng showte.

I grant in deed that this also was by very good reason stablished Cap. 1^.
that so many head should well order any thing with one meaning: and commonly
this is true, that the uncertain communaltie is divided into contrary
affections. But for ^his peril there was used a very good remedy. For first
the Clerks only did choose: whom they had chosen they presented to the
Magistrate, or to the Senate and chief men of the people. They, after
consultation had, if they thought the election good, confirmed it: if not,
they did choose an other, whom they did rather allow. Then the matter was
moved to the multitude, which although they were not bound to those fore
judgments, yet thereby they could the less be disordered. Or if they began
at the multitude: that was done only to learn whom they did chiefly desire.
When the desires of the people were heard, then they of the Clergy did choose
him. So neither was it lawful for the Clergy to appoint whom they listed,
neither were they bound to obey the foolish desires of the people. Leo
appoints this order in an other place, Episto. lxxxvii.
when he says: There are to be looked for, both the desires of the citezens,
the peoples testimonies, the judgment of the honorable, and the election of
the clerks. Again. Let there be holden the testimony of the honorable, the
subscription of the clerks, the consent of the order and communaltie. No
reason (says he) suffers it to be otherwise done. And nothing else means
that decree of ye Sinode at Laodicea, but that the clergy, and chief of the
people, should not suffer themselves to be carried away by the indiscreet
multitude: but rather that with their wisdom and gravity they should
repress the peoples foolish affections, if at any time need should so require.

This order of choosyng was yet in force in the time of Gregory: and it is
likely that is endured long after. There remain many Epistles Lib. ii. Ep. lxix
and that many of the Millane is were by reason of the invasion of the
barbarous nations fled to Genua: he thought that the election could not
otherwise be lawful, unless they also were called together and gave their
assente. Yea there are not yet five hundred years paste, sins Pope Nicolas
decreed thus of the election of the Bishop of Rome: that the Cardinal Bishops
should begin, then that they should join to them the rest of the clergy,
Distin. xxiii. Cap. In nomine
last of all that the election should be confirmed by the consent of the
people. And in the end he recites that decree of Leo, which I even now
alleged, and commands it from thense forth to be in force. But if the malice
of wicked men shall so prevail, that the clerks to make a true election be
compelled to depart out of the city: yet he commands that some of the
people be present with them. As for the Emperors coo^sent, so far as I can
perceive, was required only in two Chirches, that is, Rome and Constantinople:
because there were the two seats of ye Empire. For whereas Ambrose was sent to
Milain with a power from Ualentinian to govern the election of the new Bishop:
yt was extraordinarily done, by reason of grievous factions wherewith the
citezens the^ boiled among themselves. But at Rome in old time the Emperors
authority was of so great force in creating of the Bishop, that Gregory
says, that he was set by his commandment in the gouernemente of the
Church: Epi. v. Lib. i.
when yet by solemn usage he was desired by the people. This was the manner,
yt when the clergy and the people had appointed any Bishop, the clergy should
forthwith move it to ye Emperor, that he should either by his allowance
confirm the election, or by disalowance undo it. Neither are ye decrees that
Gratian gathers together, repugnante to this custom: wherein is nothing else
said, but yt it is in no wise to be suffered, yt taki^g away yt canonical
election, a king should appoint a bishop after his own lust: and that ye
Metropolitan should consecrate none yt were so promoted by violente powers. For
it is one thing to spoil the Church of her right, that al should be
transferred to the lust of one man: and an other thing to grant this honor to
a king or an Emperor, that by his authority he may confirm a lawful
election.

Cheirotonia, lifting up of hands, and sometime also Cheirothesia, laying on of
hands. Howbeit Cheirotonia is properly called that kind of election, where
men's consentes are declared by holding up of their hands. There remains a
decree of the Nicene counsel, that the Metropolitan should mete together
with all the Bishops of the province to order him that is chose^. But if some of
them be hindered either by length of the way, or by sickness, or by any
necessity, that yet three at ye least should mete: and that they that are
abse^t should by letters testify their consent. And this Canon, when with
discontinuance it grew out of use, was afterward renewed with many Sinodes.
But all, or at least as many as had no excuse, were therefore commanded to be
present, that they might have the grauer trial of the learning and manners,
of him that was to be ordered: for the matter was not done without trial. And
it appears by Cipryans words, that in the old time they were wont not to be
called after the election, but to be present at the election: and to this end
that they should be as it were gouerners, that nothing should be troublesomly
done in the multitude. For where he said that the people have power either to
choose worthy Priests, or to refuse unworthy, within a little after he adds:
Wherefore according to ye tradition of God and of the Apostles, Epi. iiii lib. i.
it is to be diligently kept and holden (which is yet holden with us also and
in a manner throughoute al provinces) that for the right celebration of
orderynges, all the bishops adjoining of the same province should come together
to that people for which a governor is ordered, and that the Bishop be chosen
in presence of the people. But when they were sometime slowly gathered together,
and there was peril least some would abuse that delay to occasyon of ambitious
suing: it was thought that it should be enoughe if after the election made,
they should mete and after allowance upon lawful examination consecrate him.

Lib. ii. Ep. lxix xlvi.
Paraduenture the only Metropolitan cities kept their privilege. For all the
Bishops of the province were wont to come together to the chief city to
consecrate the Archebishoppe. But the Ceremony was laying on of hands. For I
read of no other Ceremonies used: saving that in the solemn assembly the
Bishops had a certain apparel whereby they might be distinctly known from
other Priests. They ordered also Priests and Deacons with only layeng on of
hands. But every Bishop with the company of Priests ordered his own Priests.
But although they did all the same thing: yet because the Bishop went before,
and it was all done as it were by his guiding, therefore the ordering was called
his. Whereupon the old writers have often this saying: that a Priest differs
from a Bishop in no other thing, but because he has not the power of orderyng.

The.v. Chapter. That the old form of government is utterly overthrown by
the tyranny of the Papacy.
NOw it is good to set before men's eyes the order of governing the Church,
that the sea of Rome and all the champions thereof do keep at this day, and the
whole image of that Hierachie which they continually have in their mouth, and
to compare it with that order of the first and old Church which we have
described: that by the comparison it may appear what manner of Chirch they
have, which use this only title to charge or rather to ouerwhelme us. But it is
best to begin at Calling, that we see both who, and what manner of men, and by
what order they be called to this ministry. And then afterward we shall
consider how faithfully they execute their office. We will give the first place
to Bishops: to whom I would to God this might be an honor, to have the first
place in this discourse. But the matter it self does not suffer me, ones to
touch this thing be it never so lightly, without their great shame. And yet I
will remember, in what kind of writing I am now occupied: and will not suffer my
talk, which ought to be framed only to simple doctrine, to flow abroad
beyond due bounds. But let some one of them that have not utterly lost all
shame, answer me, what manner of Bishops are at this day commonly chosen.
Truly it is now grown to much out of use, to have any examination had of
their learning: but if there be had any respect of learning, they choose some
lawyer that can rather brawle in a court, than preach in a Chirch. This is
certain, that these hundred years there has scarcely ben every hundredth man
chosen yt understood any thing of holy doctrine. I do not therefore spare ye
former ages, for yt they were much better, but because we have now only ye
present Church in question. If judgment be had of their manners, we shall
find yt there have been few or almost none, who^ the old Canons would not
have judged unworthy. He yt was not a dronkarde was a whoremonger: he yt was
also clean from this wickedness, was either a dycer, or a hunter, or
dissolute in some part of his life. For there be lighter faults, which by ye
old Canons do exclude a man from being a Bishop. But this is a most great
absurdity, yt very children scarcely ten years old, are by the Popes grant
made Bishops. They are growe^ to such shamelessnesse, and se^slesse dullness,
that they dreaded not that extreme yea and monstrous wicked doing, which is
utterly abhorring from the very sense of nature. Hereby appears how religious
their elections were, where the negligence was so careless.

i. Timo. iii.i.
a teacher, no fyghter. etc. Why therefore is the charge of choosyng removed
from the people to these men? Because forsooth the word of God was not heard
among the tumultes and seditious partakinges of the people. And why should it
not at this day be removed again from these men, which not only do break all
laws, but casting away all shame, do wantonly, couetously, ambitiously, mingle
and confound Gods and men's matters together?

But they lie, when they say, that this was devised for a remedy. We

Lo here is a noble calling, by reason whereof the Bishops boste Did. lxx
cap. i.
But in the Sinode at Chalcedon, it is contrariwise decreed, that the
orderynges should not be absolutely given, that is to say, but that a place
should be therewithal assigned to them that are ordered, where they shall
exercise their office. This decree is for two causes very profitable. First,
that the Church should not be burdened with superfluous charges: nor that
that should be spente upon idle men which should be given to the poor:
Secondly, that they which be ordered, should think that they be not promoted
to an honor, but that there is an office committed unto them, to the execution
whereof they are bound by solemn protestation. But the Romish masters
(which think that there is nothing in religion to be cared for, but their
bellye) first do expound title to be the revenue that may suffice to
sustain them, whether it be by their own lyuelhode or by benefice. Therefore
when they order a Deacon or a Priest, without taking care where they ought to
minister, they give them the order, if they be rich enoughe to find
themselves. But what man can admit this, that the title which the decree of
the Counsel requires, should be the yerelye revenue for their sustenance?
But now because the later Canons condemned the Bishops with penalty to find
them whom they had ordered without sufficient title, by this mean to restrain
their to much easy admitting: there has been also a sutteltie devised to mock
out this penalty. For he that is ordered, naming any title whatsoever it be,
promises that he will be content therewith: by this shift he is driven from his
action for his finding. I pass over a thousand frauds that are herein used:
that when some do falsely name vain titles of benefices, whereupon they can not
make five shillinges by year: other some under secret couenante do borrowe
benefices, which they promise that they will by and by restore again, but
sometime they restore not at all. And such other mysteries.



Now how much do they behave themselves better in bestowyng of benefices: and
they retain only the tittle of collation for honors sake. There are also
nominations out of schools, and resignations, either simple, or made for cause
of eschange, commendatorie writings, preuentions, and whatsoever is of that
sort. But they also behave themselves that none of them can reproach an other
with any thing. So I affirm, that scarcely every hundredth benefice, is
bestowed at this day in the papane without Simonie, as the old writers
defined Simonie. I do not say that they all bye them with ready money: but
show me one of twenty that comes to a benefice without some bye
commendation. some either kindred or alliance promoteth, and some the authority
of their parents: some by doing of pleasures do get themselves favor. Finally
benefices are given to this end, not to provide for the Chirches, but for them
that receive them. Therefore they call them benefices, by which word they do
sufficiently declare, that they make no other account of them, but as the
beneficial gifts of princes, whereby they either get the favor of their
soldiars or reward their services. I omit how these rewards are bestowed upon
barbers, cooks, moile kepers, and such dreggishe men. And now judicial
courts do ring of no matters more, than about benefices: so that a man may
say that they are nothing else but a pray cast before dogs to hunt after. Is
this tolerable even to be heard of, that they should be called Pastors, which
have broken into the possession of a Church as into a ferme of their enemy?
that have gotten it by brawlyng in the law? that have bought it for money? that
have deserved it by fylthy services? which being children yet scantly able to
speak, have received it, as by inheritance from their uncles and kinsmen, and
some bastardes from their fathers?

Would ever the licentiousness of the people, though they had been

Now (which is the second mark in judging a lawful Pastor) let us see how
faithfully they exercise their office. Of the Priests that be there created,
some be Monks, some be (as they call them) Secular. The first of these two
companies was unknown to the old Chirch: and it is so against the profession
of Monks, to have such a place in the Church, that in old time when they
were chosen out of Monasteries into the clergy, they cessed to be Monks. And
Gregory, whoes time had much dregs, yet suffered not this confusion to be
made. Epi. 11. lib. 3.
For he wylleth that they be put out of the Clergy that be made Abbots, for
that no man can rightly be together both a Monk and a clerk: since the one is
a hinderance to the other. Now if I ask, how he well fulfylleth his office,
whom the Canons declare to be unmeet: what I pray you, will they answer? They
will forsooth allege unto me those untimely borne decrees of Innocente and
Boniface, whereby Monks are so received into the honor and power of
Priesthode, that they might still abide in their Monasteries. But what reason
is this, that every unlearned ass, so sone as he has ones possessed the sea
of Rome, may with one word overthrow all antiquity? But of this matter we
shall speak hereafter. Let this suffice for this time, that in the purer
Church it was holden for a great absurdity, if a Monk did execute the office
of Priesthode. For Hierome says that he does not execute the office of a
Priest, while he is co^uersant among Monks: and makes himself one of the
common people to be ruled by the Priests. But, although we grant them this,
what do they of their duty? Of the mendicantes some do preach: all the other
Monks either sing or mu^ble up masses in their dens. As though either Christ
willed, or the nature of the office suffers, Priests to be made to this
purpose. Act. xx.xxiii.
Whereas the Scripture plainly testifies, that it is the Priests office to
rule his own Church, is it not a wicked profanation, to turn an other way,
yea utterly to change the holy institution of God? For when they are ordered,
they are expressly forbidden to do ye things that God commands all Priests.
For this song is soong to them: let a Monk, content with his cloister, not
presume to minister the Sacraments, nor to execute any thing belonging to
publyke office. Let them deny, if they can, that it is an open mockery of God,
that any priest should be made to this purpose, to abstain from his true and
natural office: and that he which has the name, may not have the thing.

Therefore when they dare not beg openly, or forasmuch as they think they
should but little profit that way, they go about like hungry dogs, and with
their importunacie, as with barkyng, they enforce out of men against their
wills somewhat to thruste into their bealy. Here if I would go about to
express in words, how great a dishonor it is to the Chirch, that the honor
and office of priesthod is come to this point. I should have no end. Therefore
it is not mete that the readers should look for at my hand such a long
declaration as may be proportional to so heinous indignity. Brefely I say,
if it be the office of priesthod, (as the word of God prescribes, i. Cor.
iiii xxi.
and the ancient canons require) to feed the Church, and to govern the
spiritual kingdom of Christ: all such sacrificers as have none other work
or wages, but in making a market of masses, are not only idle in their office,
but also have no office at all to exercise. For there is no place assigned them
to teach: they have no flock to govern: Finally there is nothing left to
them, but the altar, whereupon to sacrifice Christ: which is not to offer to
God, but to deuyls, as we shall see in an other place.

I do not here touch the outward faults, but only the inward evil,
which sticks fast by the root in their institution. I will add the
Church has received consecrate with the Lords own mouth. Or (if they will
rather have me to speak more simply and grossly) for as much as chaplains,
Canons, Deanes, Prouostes, and other idle bealies of the same sort, do not so
much as with their little finger touch any small parcel of that office, which
is necessarily required in Priests, it is not to be suffered, that in
wrongfully taking a falls honor upon them selves, they should break the holy
institution of Christ.



It appears that even in the time of Gregory, there were certain Homil.
xvii.
for he does in one place greuousely complain of it. The world (says he)
is full of priests: but yet in the harvest there are seldom workmen found:
because in deed we take upon us the office of priest, but we fulfill not the
work of the office. Again, because they have not the bowelles of charity,
they will seem lords: they acknowledge not them selves to be fathers. They
change the place of humility into the aduauncyng of lordlynesse. Again, but
what do we, O pastors, which receive the reward, and are no workmen? We are
fallen to outward business, and we take in hand one thing, and perform an
other. We leave the ministry of preaching: and to our punishment, as I see,
we are called Bishops, that keep the name of honor and not of virtue. Since he
uses so great sharpness of words against them, which were but less continuyng
and less diligent in their office: What I pray you, would he say, if he saw of
the Bishops almost none, or truly very few, and of the rest scarcely every
hundredth man ones in all his life to go up into a pulpet? For men be come to
such madness, that it is commonly compted a thing to base for the dignity of
a Bishop, to make a sermon to the people. In the time of Bernarde, things were
somewhat more decayed: but we see also with how sharp chidynges he inueyeth
against the whole order: which yet it is likely to have been then much purer
than it is now.

But if a man do well wey and examine this outewarde form of ecclesiastical

What if we descend to their manners? where shall be that light of the Math.
v.xiiii.
which Christ requires? where is the salt of the earth? where is that
holiness, which may be as a perpetual rule to judge by? There is no degree of
men at his day more il spoken of for riot, wantonness, deyntynesse, finally
all kind of lusts. There are of no degree men either fitter, or conninger
masters of al deceit, fraud, treson, and breach of faith: there is no where
so great connyng or boldness to do hurt. I pass over their disdainfulnesse,
pride, extorcio^, cruelty. I pass over the dissolute licenciousnesse in all
the parts of their life. In suffering whereof the world is so weried, that it
is not to be feared, that I should seem to enforce any thing to much. This one
thing I say, which they them selves shall not be able to deny: that of the
Bishops there is almost none, of the Parsons of paroches not the hundredth man,
but if judgment should be given of his manners, according to the old Canons,
he should be either to be excommunicate, or at lest to be put from his office.
I seem to say somewhat incredible: so far is that ancient Discipline grown
out of use, that commanded an exacter trial to be had of the manners of the
Clergy: but the truth is so. Now let them go, ye fight under the standerd and
guiding of the sea of Rome, and let them boste among themselus of the order of
prestehode. As for the order that they have, truly it is evident, yt it is
neither of Christ, nor of his Apostles, nor of the fathers, nor of the old
Chirch.



would persuade, that they have so goodly and well framed orders in their
Church, as they are wont to boaste. Let them answer me shortly, whether
deaconrie be a license to steal and rob. If they deny this, they shall also
be compelled to confess, that they have no deaconrie left: for as much as
among them, all the disposition of the goods of the Chirch is openly turned
into a spoilyng full of sacrilege.

But here they use a very fair color. For they say, that the dignity Psalm.
lxxii.x. Esa. lii.i. ^^. lx.vi.
when that kingly gorgeousness is seen in the priestly order. Not in vain
(say they) God has promised these things to his Church: Kings shall come,
they shall worship in thy sight, they shall bring thee gifts. Arise, arise,
clothe thee with thy strength, O Syon: clothe thee with the garments of thy
glory, O Jerusalem: All shall come from Saba, bryngyng gold and incense, and
speaking praise to the Lord. All the cattle of Cedar shall be gathered together
to thee. If I should tarry long upon confutyng this lewdness, I sear least I
should seem fond. Therefore I will not lose words in vain. But I ask: if
any Jew would abuse these testimonies, what solution would they give? Uerily
they would reprehende his dullness, for that he transferred those things to
the flesh and the world, that are spiritually spoken of the spiritual
kingdom of Christ. For we know, that the Prophets under the image of earthly
things, did paint out unto us the heavenly glory of God, that ought to shine
in the Church. For the Chirch had never less abundance of these blessings,
which their words express, than in the time of the Apostles: and yet al
confess, that the force of the kingdom of Christ then chiefly flourished
abroad. What then mean these sayings? Whatsoever is any where precious, hye,
excellent, it ought to be made subject to the Lord. Where as it is namely
spoken of Kings, that they shall submit their scepters to Christ, that they
shall throw down their crowns before his feet, that they shall dedicate
their goods to the Chirch: when (will they say) was it better and more fully
performed, tha^ when Theodosius, casting away his purple roabe, leauyng the
ornaments of the empire, as some one of the common people, submitted himself
before God and the Chirch, to solemn penance? then when he and other like
godly princes bestowed their endeavors and their cares to preserve pure doctrine
in the Church, and to cherishe and defend sound teachers? But how priests
at that time exceded not in superfluous richesse, that only sentence of the
Synod at Aquileia, where Ambrose was chief, sufficiently declares: Glorious
is poverty in the priests of the Lord. Truly the Bishops had at that time
some richesse, wherewith they might have set out the Chirches honor, if they had
thought those to be the true ornaments of the Church. But when they knew
that there was nothing more against the office of Pastors, than to glister and
show them selves proudly with deintynesse of fare, with gorgeousness of
garments, with great train of servants, with stately palaces, they followed and
kept the humbleness and modesty, yea the very poverty which Christ holily
appointed among his ministers.

Tholosa, whom we even now rehearsed, or Acatius, or Ambrose, or any such to
be raised from death, what they would say. Truly they would not allow that in
so great necessity of the poor, richesse in a manner superfluous should be
turned an other way. Admit I speak nothing how these uses upon which they be
bestowed, (although there were no poor) are many ways hurtful, but in no
behalf profitable. But I leave to speak of men. These goods are dedicate to
Christ: therefore they are to be disposed after his will. But they shall in
vain say, that this part is bestowed upon Christ, which they have wasted
otherwise than he commanded. Howbeit, to confess the truth, there is not
much of the ordinary revenue of the Church abated for these expenses. For
there are no bishopriks so welthy, no abbaties so fat, finally neither so
many, nor so large benefices, that may serve to fill the gluttony of priests.
But while they seek to spare them selves, they persuade the people by
superstition, to turn that which should be bestowed upon the poor, to build
temples, to set up images, to bye jewels, to get costly garments. So with
this gulf are the daily alms consumed.

Of the revenue, that they receive of their lands and possession, what Tit.
i.vii.
and bids to be content with simple living, should not only lay hands
upon towns and castles, but also violently enter upon the greatest lordships,
finally possess forceably very empires? If they despise the word of God: what
will they answer to those ancient decrees of the Synodes: whereby it is
decreed that the Bishop should have a small lodgyng not far from the Church,
mean fare and householde stuff? Conciliu^ Carthag. iiii. cap. xiiii and xv
what will they say to that praise of the Synod at Aquileia: where poverty is
reported glorious in the Priests of the Lord? For perhaps they will utterly
refuse as to much rigorous, that which Hierome advises Nepotianus, that
poor men and strangers, and among them Christ as a guest, may know his table.
But that which he by and by adds, they will be ashamed to deny, that it is
the glory of a Bishop to provide for the goods of the poor: that it is the
shame of al priests to study for their own richesse. But they can not receive
this, but they must all condemn themselves of shame. But it is not needful in
this place to speak more hardly against them, sith my meaning was nothing
else, but to show, that among them the lawful order of deaconry is long ago
taken away: that they may no more glory of this title to the commendation of
their Church: which I think I have already sufficiently showed.

The.vi. Chapter. Of the Supremicie of the Sea of Rome.
HItherto we have rehearsed those orders of the Chirch, which were in the
government of the old Chirch: but afterward corrupted in times, and from
thensefoorthe more and more abused, do now in the Popish Church reteyne
only their name, and in deed are nothing else but visours: that by comparison
the godly reader might judge, what manner of Chirch the Romanists have, for
whoes sake they make us schismatikes, because we have departed from it. But as
for the head and top of the whole order, that is to say, the supremicie of the sea of Rome, whereby they travail to prove that they only have the catholic
Chirch, we have not yet touched it: because it took beginning neither from the
institution of Christ, nor from the use of the old Chirch, as those former
parts did: which we have showed to have so proceeded from antiquity, that by
wickedness of times they are utterly degenerate, and have put on altogether a
new form. And yet they go about to persuade the world, that this is the
chief and in a manner only bond of the unity of the Chirch, if we cleave to
the sea of Rome, and continue in the obedience thereof. They rest (I say)
principally upon this stay, when they will take away the Church from us, and
claim it to themselves, for that they keep the head, upon which the unity of
the Chirch hangs, and without which the Church must needs fall asunder
and be broken in pieces. For thus they think, that the Church is as it were
a maimed and headless body, unless it be subject to the sea of Rome, as to
her head. Therefore when they talk of their Hierarchy, they a^way take their
beginning at this principle: that the Bishop of Rome (as the vicar of Christ,
which is the head of the Church) is in his steed President of the universal
Church: and that otherwise the Church is not well ordered, unless that See
do hold the Supremicie above all other. Therefore this also is to be
examined, of what sort it is: that we may omit nothing that pertains to a
just government of the Church.

Let this therefore be the principal point of the question: Whether it be Hebr.
vii.xii.
when he draws this title to himself: but to Christ, which as he alone
susteineth this office, without any vicar or successor, so he resigneth the
honor to none other. For the priesthode consists not in doctrine only, but
in the appeasyng of God, which Christ has fully wrought by his death, and in
that intercession which he now uses with his Father.

Mat. xvi.xviii. Ioh. xxi.xv.
Out of the new testament they have nothing to bring forth for proof of their
opinion, but that it was said to one: Thou art Peter, and upon this stone I
will build my Church. Again, Peter, Love thou me? Feed my sheep. But
admittyng that these be strong proves, they must first show, that he which is
commanded to feed the flock of Christ, has power committed to him over all
Chirches: and that to bynd and to lose is nothing else but to be ruler of all
the world. But as Peter had received the commandment of the Lord, i. Pe. v.ij.
so he exhorts all other priests to feed the Chirch. Hereby we may gather,
that by this saying of Christ, there was either nothing given to Peter more
then to the rest, or that Peter did egally communicate with other the power
that he had received. John. xx.^xiii.
But, that we strive not vainly, we have in an other place a clear exposition
out of the mouth of Christ, what is to bynd and to lose: that is to say, to
retain and to forgive sins. But the manner of binding and loosing, both the
whole Scripture each where shows, and Paul very well declares, ii. Cor. v,
xviii. and x.xvi.
when he says that the ministers of the Gospel, have commandment to
reconcile men to God and also have power to punish them that refuse this
benefit.

How shamefully they wrest those places, that make mention of binding Mat.
xviii xx. John. xx.xxiii.
Christ (say they) appointed Peter Prince of ye whole Chirch, when he promised
yt he would give him ye keys. But yt which he then promised to one, in an
other place he gave it also to all the rest, and delivered it as it were into
their hands. If the same power were granted to al, which was promised to one,
wherein shall he be above his fellows? Herein (say they) he excels, because he
received it both in common together with them, and severally by himself, which
was not given to the other, but in common. What if I answer with Ciprian and
Augustine, that Christ did it not for this purpose, to prefer one man before
other, but so to set out the unity of the Church. De sim. cleri.
For thus says Ciprian, yt God in the person of one gave ye keys to all, to
signify ye unity of all: and that the rest were ye same thing that Peter was,
endued with like partaking both of honor and power: but that the beginning is
taken at unity, that the Church of Christ may be showed to be one. Augustine
says: If there were not in Peter a mystery of the Church, Homil. in Ioh. l.
Homil. xi.
the Lord would not say to him, I will give thee the keys. For if this was
said to Peter, the Church has them not: but if ye Church have them, the^
Peter, when he received ye keys, betokened ye whole Chirch. And in an other
place. When they were al asked, only Peter answered, thou art Christ: and it is
said to him, I will give thee ye keys, as though he alone had received the
power of binding and loosing: whereas both he being one said the one for all, and
he received the other with all, as bearing the person of unity. Therefore one
for all, because there is unity in all.

Mat. xvi.xviii.
is no where red spoken to any other. As though Christ spoke there any other
thing of Peter, than that which Paul and Peter himself speaks of all
Christians. For Paul makes Christ the chief and corner stone, Ephesians. ii.xx
upon which they are bilded together that grow into a holy temple to the
Lord. And Peter bids us to be lively stones which being founded upon that
chosen and precious stone, i. Pe. ii.v.
do by this joint and coupling together with our God, cleave also together
among our selves. He (say they) above the rest: because he has the name
peculiarly. In deed I do willingly grant this honor to Peter, that in the
bilding of the Chirch he be placed among the first, or (if they will have this
also) the first of all the faithful: but I will not suffer them to gather
thereupon, that he should have a Supremicie over the rest. For what manner of
gathering is this? He excels other in feruentnesse of zele, in learning, and
courage: therefore he has power over them. As though we might not with better
color gather, that Andrew is in degree before Peter, because he went before him
in time, and brought him to Christ. But I pass over this. Ioh. i.xl. ^.xlii.
Let Peter truly have the first place: yet there is great difference between
the honor of degree and power. We see that the Apostles commonly granted this
to Peter, yt he should speak in asse^blies, and after a certain manner go
before them with propounding, exhorting, and admonishing: but of his power we
read nothing at all.

Mat. xvi.xvi.
Peter had confessed in his own and his brethrens name, that Christ is the
son of God. Upon this rock Christ bildeth his Church: because it is (as
Paul says) the only fundation, beside which there can be laid none other.
Neither do I here therefore refuse the authority of the Fathers, because I
want their testimonies, if I listed to allege them: i. Cor. iii.xi.
but (as I have said) I will not with contending about so clear a matter
trouble the reders in vain, specially since this point has been long ago
diligently enough handeled and declared by men of our side.

And yet in deed no man can better assoyle this question, than the that he was
one of the.xii. egal with the rest, and their fellow, but not their Lord. Act.
xv.v.
He does in deed propounde to the counsel, if any thing be to be done, and
gives warning what is mete to be done: but therewithal he hears other, and
does not only grant them place to speak their mind, but leaves the
judgment to them: when they had determined, i. Pet. v.i.
he followed and obeyed. When he writes to the Pastors, he does not command
them by authority, as Superior: but he makes them his companions, and gently
exhorts them, as egalles are wont to do. Ac. xi.iii.
When he was accused for that he had gone in to the Gentiles, although it were
without cause, yet he answered and purged him self. When he was commanded by
his fellows, Act. viii, xxiiii.
to go with John into Samaria, he refused not. Whereas the Apostles did send
him, they did thereby declare that they held him not for their superior. Whereas
he obeyed and took upon him the embassage committed to him, he did thereby
confess, that he had a fellowship with them, and not an authority over them.
Gala. i.xviii. and. ii.viii.
If none of these things were, yet the only Epistle to the Galathians may
easily take al doutyng from us: where almost in two whole Chapters together
Paul trauayleth to prove nothing else, but that he himself was egall to Peter
in honor of Apostleship. Then he rehearses that he came to Peter, not to
profess subjection, but only to make their consent of doctrine approved by
testimony to all men: and that Peter himself required no such thing, but gave
him his right hand of fellowship, to work in common together in the Lords
vineyarde: and that there was no lesser grace given to him among ye Gentiles,
than to Peter among the Jews: Finally that when Peter dealt not very
faithfully, he was corrected by him, and obeyed his reproving. All these
things do make plain, either that there was an equality between Paul and
Peter, or at least that Peter had no more power over the rest, than they had
over him. And (as I have already said) Paul of purpose labors about this,
that none should prefer before him in the Apostleship either Peter, or John,
which were fellows, not Lords.

But, to grant them that which they require concerning Peter, Consul: no
session of judges without a praetor, or propou^der, no company without a ruler, no
fellowship without a master. So should it be no absurdity, if we confessed yt the
Apostles gave to Peter such a Supremicie. But ye which is of force among few,
is not by and by to be drawn to ye whole world, to ye ruling whereof no one
man is sufficient. But (sai they) this has place no less in ye whole
universality of nature, tha^ in all ye parts, yt there be one sovereign head
of al. And hereof (and God will) they fetch a proof from cranes and bees, which
always choose to themselves one guide, not many. I allow in deed the examples
which they bring forth: but do bees resort together out of all the world to
choose the^ one king? every several king is content with his own hyue. So among
cranes, every heard has their own king. What else shall they prove hereby, but
that every Church ought to have their own several Bishop appointed them? Then
they call us to civil examples. They allege that saying of Homere, It is not
good to have many governors: and such things as in like sense are red in
profane writers to ye co^me^dation of Monarchy. The answer is easy. For
Monarchy is not praised of Ulysses in Homere, or of any other, in this
meaning, as though one ought to be Emperor of the whole world: but they mean
to show that one kingdom can not hold two kings: and that power (as he
calls it) can abide no companion.

Ephesians. iiii.xv.
when by ye pretense they will have one man to be ruler of ye universal Christ,
because it ca^ not be without a head. For Christ is the head, of whom ye whole body
coupled and knit together in every joint, where with one ministers to an other,
according to ye working of every member in the measure thereof, makes increase
of ye body. Se you not, how he sets all men without exception in the body,
and leaves the honor and name of head to Christ alone? Se you not how he gives
to every member a certain measure, and a determined and limited function:
whereby both the perfection of the grace and the sovereign power of governance
may remain with Christ only? Neither am I ignorante what they are wont to
cavil, when this is objected against them: they say yt Christ is properly
called the only head, because he alone reigns by his own authority and in
his own name: but yt this nothing wtstandeth, but that there may be under him
an other ministerial head (as they term it) that may be his vicegerent in
earth. But by this cauillatio^ they prevail nothing, unless they first show
yt this ministry was ordained by Christ. For ye Apostle teaches, yt the
whole ministratio^ is dispersed through ye members, and that ye power flows
from yt one heavenly head. Or if they will have it any plainlier spoken, Ep.
i.xxii. and. iiii.xv, and. v.xiii. Colos. i.xviii. and. ii.x.
since ye Scripture testifies ye Christ is ye head, and claims yt honor to him
alone, it ought not to be transferred to any other, but who^ Christ himself
has made his vicar. But yt is not only no where read, but also may be
largely confuted by many places.

Paul sometimes depainteth unto us a lively image of the Church, Ephesians. iiii.x.
that it is disagreing from the institution of Christ. Christ at his
ascending took from us the visible presence of himself: yet he went up to
fulfill all things. Now therefore the Church has him yet present, and always
shall have. When Paul goes about to show the mean whereby he presents
himself, Ephesians. iiii.vii and. xi.
he calls us back to the ministeries which he uses. The Lord (says he)
is in us al, according to the measure of grace that he has given to every
member. Therefore he has appointed some Apostles, some Pastors, some
Evangelists, other some Teachers etc. Why does he not say, that he has set
one over all, to be his vicegerente? For the place require (...) principally,
and it could by no means have been omitted, if it ha^^^^n true. Christ (says
he) is with us. How? by the ministry of men, whom he has appointed to
govern the Church. Why not rather by the ministerial head, to whom he has
committed his stead? He names vn^^^: but in God, and in the faith of Christ.
He assigns to me^ nothing but common ministry, and to every one a
particular measure. In tha^ commendation of unity, after that he had said
that there is one body, one Spirit, one hope of calling, one God, one Faith,
one Baptism, why has he not also immediately added one chief Bishop, that may
hold the Church together in unity? For nothing could have been more fytly
spoken, if it had been true. Let that place be diligently weyed. It is no
doubt but that he meante there altogether to represente the holy and
spiritual gouernemente of the Church, which they that came after called
Hierachie. As for Monarchy among ministers, he not only names none, but also
shows that there is none. It is also no doubt but that he meant to express
the manner of conioyning, whereby the faithful cleave together with Christ
their head. There he not only speaks of no ministerial head, but appoints to
every of the members a particular working, according to the measure of grace
distributed to every one. Neither is there any reason why they should suttelly
dispute of the comparison of the heavenly and earthly Hierarchy. For it is not
safe to know beyond measure of it. And in framing this gouernemente we must
follow no other figure, tha^ the Lord himself has painted out in his word.

Now, although I grant them an other thing, which they shall never Deute.
xxxiiii.v.
where Moses the chief Teacher and Prince of Prophets executed his ministry
and dyed.

Let us see how trimly they reason. Peter (say they) had the first: but
they say, that in removing thense, he removed to Rome the honor that he had
brought with him. For there is an Epistle under the name of Pope Marcellus to
the Bishops of Antioche, x^^. ques^^. i. cap.
where he says thus: Peter's seat was at the beginning with you, which
afterward by the Lords commandment was removed hither. So the Chirch of
Antioche, which was ones the chief, has given place to ye see of Rome. But by
what Oracle had that good man learned, that the Lord so commanded? For if this
cause be to be determined by the law, it is necessary that they answer,
whether they will have this privilege to be personal, or real, or mirt. For it
must be one of these three. If they say yt it is personal, then it belongs
nothing to the place. If they say yt it is real, the^ when it is ones given to
ye place, it is not taken away by reso^ either of the death or departure of ye
person. It remains therefore yt they must sai it is mixed: but the^ yt place
shall not be simply to be considered, unless ye person do also agree. Let them
choose which soever they will, I will by and by infer and easily prove, yt
Rome can by no mean take ye supremicie upon it self.

Gal. ii.ix.
yt seemed to be pillars, James, Peter and John. If ye first place were given to
ye see of Rome, in ye honor of Peter: do not ye sees of Ephesus and
Jerusalem, where John and James sat, deserve ye second and third place? But
among ye Patriarchs Jerusalem had the last place: Ephesus could not sit so
much as in the uttermost corner. And other Chirches were left out, both al those
yt Paul founded, and those that the other Apostles were rulers of. The seat of
Mark, which was but one of their disciples, obtained the honor. Therefore they
must either confess that yt was a preposterous order, or they must grant us
yt this is not a perpetual rule, yt there be due to every Church the same
degree of honor which the founder had.

Gala. i.xviii. Gal, ii.i.
and yt the^ he went to Antioche: where how long he was, is uncertain.
Gregory reckeneth seven years, and Eusebius twenty and five. But from the
death of Christ, to the end of Neroes Empire, (in whoes time they say that he
was slain) there shall be found but thirty and seven years. For the Lord
suffered under Tiberius, the eightenthe year of his Empire. If you rebate
twenty years during the which Paul is witness that Peter dwelte at
Jerusalem, there will remain but seuentene years at the most, which must now
be divided between two Bishoprykes. If he tarried long at Antioche he could
not sit at Rome, but a very little while. Which thing we may yet also more
plainly prove. Paul wrote to the Romans, when he was in his journey going
to Jerusalem, To. xv.xv
where he was taken and from thense brought to Rome. It is likely that this
Epistle was written four years before that he came to Rome. Therein is yet no
mention of Peter, which should not have been left out, if Peter had ruled that
Church. To. xvi.ii
Yea and in the end also, when he rehearses a great number of the Godly,
whom he bids to be saluted, where verily he gathers together all those
that he knew, he yet says utterly nothing of Peter. Neither is it needful
here to make a long or curious demonstration to men of sound judgment: for
the matter it self, and the whole argument of the Epistle cries out, that he
should not have ouerpassed Peter, if he had been at Rome.

Then Paul was brought prisoner to Rome. Luke reports that he Act. lass.
xvi.
of Peter he says nothing. He wrote from thense to many Chirches: and in some
places also he writes salutatio^s in the names of certain: but he does not in
one word show that Peter was there at that time. Who, I pray you, shall
think it likely, yt he could have passed him over with silence, Phi. ii.xx.
if he had been present? Yea to ye Philippians, where he said that he had none
that so faithfully looked unto the work of the Lord, as Timothee, he complained
that they did all seek their own. ii. Timo. iiii.xvi.
And to the same Timothee he makes a more grievous complaynte, that none was
with him at his first defense, but all forsook him: where therefore was Peter
then? For if they say that he was then at Rome, how great a shame does Paul
charge him with, that he was a forsaker of the Gospel? For he speaks of the
beleuers: because he adds, God impute it not unto them. How long therefore,
and in what time did Peter keep that seat? But it is a constant opinion of
writers, that he governed that Church even to his death. But among the writers
themselves it is not certain who was his successor, because some say Linus,
and other some say Clement. And they tell many fond fables, of the
disputation had between him and Simon the magician. And Augustine sticks not
to confess, when he entreats of Superstitions, Aug. ad Sannar.
that by reason of an opinion rashly conceived, there was a custom grown in
use at Rome, that they should not fast that day that Peter got the victory
of Simon the magician. Finally the doings of that time are so entangled with
diversity of opinions, that we ought not rashly to believe where we find any
thing written. And yet by reason of this consent of writers, I strive not
against this, that he dyed there: but yet that he was Bishop there, and
specially a long time, I can not be persuaded, neither do I much pass upon
that also: forasmuch as Paul testifies that Peter's Apostleshyp did
peculiarly belong to the Jews, and his own to us. Therefore that that
fellowship which they couenanted between themselves, may be confirmed with us,
or rather that the ordinance of the Holy ghost may stand in force among us, we
ought to have respect rather to the Apostleship of Paul than of Peter. For
the Holy ghost so divided the provinces between them, that he appointed Peter
to the Jews, and Paul to us. Now therefore let the Romanistes go and seek
their supremicie else where than in the word of God, where it is found not to
be grounded.



these words: De simpl^. pre.
The bishoprike is one, whereof each has a part wholly: and the Church is one,
which is with increase of fruitefulnesse more largely extended into a
multitude. Like as there are many sunbeames, and one light: and many branches
of a tree, but one body grounded on a fast holdyng root: and like as from one
fountain flow many streams, and though the multitude seem to be diuersely
spread abroad with largeness of ouerflowyng ple^tie, yet the unity is kept
whole in the original: so the Chirch also being ouerspread with the light of
the Lord, extends her beams abroad throughout the whole world, yet is it
but one that is each where poured forth, and the unity of the body is not
severed: she spreads her branches over the whole world, she sends out her
ouerflowing streams: yet is there but one head and one beginning etc.
Afterward. The spouse of Christ can not be an adultresse: she knows one only
house, she keeps the holiness of one only chamber with chaste shamfastnesse.
You see how he makes the universal bishoprik to be Christ only, which
comprehends the whole Chirch under him: and says that all they that execute
the office of Bishop under this head, have their parts thereof wholly. Where is
the supremicie of the sea of Rome, if the whole byshoprike remain with Christ
only, and each Bishop has his part thereof wholly? These things therefore make
to this purpose, that the reader may understand by the way, that the old
fathers were utterly ignorant of that principle, which the Romanistes do take
for confessed and undoubted, concerning the unity of an earthly head in the
Hierarchy of the Church.

The.vii. Chapter. Of the beginning and encreasyng of the Papacy of Rome,
until it advanced it self to this height, whereby both the liberty of the
Church has been oppressed, and all the right government thereof overthrown.
AS concerning the auncientnesse of the supremicie of the sea of Rome, there is
nothing had of more antiquity to stablishe it, than that decree of the
Nicene Synod, wherein the Bishop of Rome both has the first place among the
Patriarchs given unto him, and is commanded to look unto the Chirches
adioynynge to the city. When the Council makes such division between him
and the other Patriarchs, that it assigns to every one their bounds: truly
it does not appoint him the head of all, but makes him one of the chief. There
were present Uitus and Uincentius in the name of Julius, which then governed
the Church of Rome: to them was given the fowerth place. I beseech you, if
Julius were acknowledged the head of the Church, should his Legates be thrust
into the fowerth seat? Should Athanasius be chief in the Council, where
principally the image of the Hierarchicall order ought to be seen? In the
Synod at Ephesus it appears, that Celestinus which was then Bishop of
Rome, used a crooked subtle mean, to provide for the dignity of his seat.
For when he sent his deputies thither, he committed his stead to Cyrillus of
Alexandria, which should notwithstanding otherwise have been the chief. To what
purpose was that same committing, but that his name might by what mean soever
abide in the first place. For his Legates sat in a lower place, and were asked
their opinion among the rest, and subscribed in their order: in the mean time
the Patriarche of Alexandria joined Celestins name with his own. What shall I
say of the second counsel at Ephesus: where when Leos legates were present,
yet Dioscorus Patriarche of Alexandria sat the chief as by his own right?
They will take exception that it was no upright counsel, by which both the holy
man Flauianus was condemned, and Eutyches acquitted, and his ungodliness
allowed. But when the Synod was gathered, when the Bishopes took their places
in order, verily the Legates of the Bishop of Rome sat there among the rest
none otherwise than in a holy and lawful Council. Yet they striued not for
the first place, but yielded it to an other: which they would never have done,
if they had thought it to be theirs of right. For the Bishops of Rome were
never ashamed to enter into the greatest contentions for their honors, and for
this only cause oftentimes to vex and trouble the Church with many and
hurtefull strives. But because Leo saw that it should be a to much
unreasonable request, if he should seek to get the chief place for his
Legates, therefore he successed it.

The counsel at Aquile^a.
Yea there was also a general council holden in Italy it self, at which the
Bishop of Rome was not present. Ambrose was chief there, which was in very
great authority with the Emperor, there was no mention made of yt Bishop of
Rome. Therefore at yt time it came to pass by ye dignity of Ambrose, yt yt see
of Millain was more noble tha^ ye see of Rome.

As concerning the title of supremicie, and other titles of pride, whereupon
Lib. 2. Epist. 2. and lib. 4. Epist. 6.
it is not hard to judge, when and in what sort they crept in. Cyprian
oftentimes makes mention of Cornelius. He sets him out with no other name,
but by the name of brother, or fellow bishop, or fellow in office. But when he
writes to Stephen the successor of Cornelius, he does not only make him egal
with himself and the rest, but also speaks more hardly to him, charging him
sometime with arrogance, sometime with ignorance. Sins Cipriane we have what all
the Church of Africa judged of that matter. The Council at Carthage did forbid
that any should be called Prince of Priests, cap. xlvii
or chief Bishop, but only bishop of the chief see. But if a man turn over
the auncienter monumentes, he shall find that the Bishop of Rome at that time
was content with the common name of brother. Certainly so long as the face of
the Church continued true and pure, all these names of pride, wherewith sins
that time the sea of Rome has begone to wax outrageous, were utterly unheard
of: it was not known, what was the hiest Bishop, and the only head of the
Chirch in earth. But if the Bishop of Rome had been so bold to have taken such a
thing upon him, there were stout and wise men that would have by and by
repressed his foli. Hierom forasmuch as he was a priest at Rome, was not ill
willing to set out the dignity of his own Chirch, so much as the matter and
state of the times suffered: Epist. ad Euag.
yet we see how he also brings it down into fellowship with the rest. If
authority (says he) be sought for, the world is greater than a city. Why
do thou allege to me the Custom of one city? Why do thou defend
smallness of number, out of which has grown pride, against the laws of the
Chirch? Where soever there be a Bishop, either at Rome, or at Engubium, or at
Constantinople, or at Rhegium, he is of the same merit and of the same
priesthode. The power of richesse or baseness of poverty makes not a Bishop
hier or lower.

About the title of universal bishop the contention first began in the Lib. 4.
epistol. lx^vi. ^auricio Augusto. Lib. ^iii. epist^l. lx (...). Ces^antia.
(...) Li^ 4 Ep^^^ ^0.
In that contention Gregory does not allege that the right is taken away
which was due to himself: but stoutely cries out against it, that it is a
profane name, yea full of sacrilege, yea the forewarner of Antichrist. The
whole Church (says he) falls down from her state, if he fall, which is
called universal. In an other place: It is very sorrowful, to suffer
patiently, that our brother and fellow bishop, despisyng all other, should only
be named Bishop. But in this his pride what else is betake^ned but the times of
Antichrist nere at hand? because verily he follows him, that despising the
fellowship of Angels, went about to clymbe up to the top of singularity. In
an other place he writes (...) of Alexandria, and Anastasius of Antioche. None
of my (...) at any time would use that profane word: for if o^et called
universal Patriarch, the name of Patriarchs is abated from the (...) But far
may this be from a christian mind, that any should have a will to take that
upon him, whereby he may in any part, be it never so little, diminishe the
honor of his brethren. Lib. iiii. ep. lcxviii Ariano Diacono Lib. vii.
epistol. cxciiii. Maurie. August. Lib. vi. epistol. c^xxxviii.
To consent in this wicked word is nothing else but to lose the faith. It is
one thing (says he) that we owe to the preseruyng of the unity of faith, and
an other thing that we owe to the keeping down of pride. But I say it boldly,
because who soever calls him self or desires to be called universal
Bishop, he does in his proud aduancyng run before Antichrist, because he
does with showing himself proud prefer himself above the rest. Again to
Anastasius bishop of Alexandria: I have said that he can not have peace with
us, unless he amended the aduauncyng of the superstitious and proud word,
which the first apostata has inverted. And (to speak nothing of the wrong
done to your honor) if one be called universal Bishop, the universal Chirch
falls when that universal one falls. But whereas he writes, that this
honor was offered to Leo in the Synod at Chalcedon, it has no color of truth.
For neither is there any such thing read in the acts of that Synod. And Leo
himself, which with many Epistles impugneth the decree there made in honor of
the sea of Constantinople, without dout would not have passed over this
argument, which had been most to be liked of all other, if it had been true. that
he refused that which was given him: and being a man otherwise to much desirous
of honor, he would not have omitted that which made for his praise. Therefore
Gregory was deceived in this, that he thought that that title was offered to
the sea of Rome by the Synod at Chalcedon: to speak nothing, how fond it is,
that he both testifies it to have proceeded from the holy Synod, Lib. iiii.
epistol. lxxvi.
and also at the same time calls it wicked, profane, abominable, proud,
and full of sacrilege, yea devised by the devil, and published by the crier of
Antichrist. And yet he adds that his predecessor refused it, least all
priests should be deprived of their due honor, Lib. vii. epistol. l.xix.
when any thing were privately given to one. In an other place: No man at any
time has willed to be called by that word: No man has taken to him self that
presu^ptuous name: least if he should in the degree of bishoprik take to
himself a glory of singularity, he should seem to have denied the same to all
his brethren.

confirm the godly that were in distress. He was honorably received of
Julius then Bishop, and obtained that the Bishops of the west took upon them
the defense of his cause. Therefore when the godly stood in great need of
foreyn aid, and saw that there was very good succor for them in the Church
of Rome, they willyngly gave unto it the most authority that they could. But
all that was nothing else, but that the communion thereof should be hiely
esteemed, and it should be compted a great shame, to be excommunicate of it.
Afterward evil and wicked men also added much unto it. For, to escape lawful
judgments, they fled to this sanctuary. Therefore if any priest were
condemned by his bishop, or any Bishop by the Synod of his province, they by
and by appelled to Rome. And the Bishops of Rome received such appellations
more gredily than was mete: because it seemed to be a form of extraordinary
power, so to entermedle with matters far and wide about them. So when
Eutiches was condemned by Flauianus Bishop of Constantinople, he complained to
Leo that he had wrong done unto him. Leo without delay, no less indiscreetly
then sodeinly, took in hand the defense of an evil cause: he greuousely
inueyed against Flauianus, as though he had, without hearing the cause,
condemned an innocent: and by this his ambition he caused that the ungodliness
of Eutiches was for a certain space of time strengthened. In Africa it is
evident that this oftentimes chanced. For so soon as any lewd man had taken
a foil in ordinary judgment, he by and by flewe to Rome, and charged his
contreemen with many sclaunderous reports: and the sea of Rome was always ready
to entermedle. Which lewdness compelled the Bishops of Africa to make a
law, that none under peyn of excommunication should appelle beyond the sea.

But what soever it were, let us see what authority or power the sea Li. ii.
episto. lxviii. and lxx.
which should only be present, but not president. Of which thing there is an
example in Gregory: at the consecration of Constantius Bishop of Millain
after the death of Laurence. Howbeit I do not think that that was a very
ancient institution: but when at the beginning for honor and good wills sake
they sent one to an other their Legates, to be witnesses of the consecration,
and to testify communion with them: afterward that which was voluntary,
began to be holden for necessary. How soever it be, it is evident that in
old time the Bishop of Rome had not the power of consecratyng, but in the
province of his own Patriarchie, that is to say in the Chirches adioynyng to
the city, as the canon of the Nicene Synod says. To the Consecration was
annexed the sendyng of a Synodicall Epistle, in which he was nothing above the
rest. For the Patriarchs were wont immediately after their consecration, by
solemn writing to declare their faith, whereby they professed that they
subscribed to the holy and catholic Councelles. So, rendryng an account of
their Faith, they did approve them selves one to an other. If the Bishop of
Rome had received of other, and not him self given this confession, he had
thereby been acknowleged superior: but when he was no less bound to give it,
Lib. i. epist. 25. Lib. 6. epist. 169. lib. i. episto. 24.
than to require it of other, and to be subject to the common law: truly that
was a token of fellowship, not of dominion. Of this thing there is an example in
Gregory's epistle to Anastasius, and to Cyriacus of Constantinople, and in
other places to all the Patriaches together.

Then follow admonitions or censures: which as in old time the Epist. 13.
lib. 3. Ad po^p. contra epi. Stepha.
because they be thine? but he says far otherwise. This (says he) the
brotherly fellowship, wherewith we be bound one to an other requires yt we
should admonish one an other. And we see also with how great sharpnes of words
he being otherwise a man of a mild nature inueyeth against Stephen himself,
when he thinks him to be to insole^t. Therefore in this behalf also there
appears not yet, that the Bishop of Rome had any jurisdiction over them that
were not of his own province.

Tripar. hist. li. 4
because they called him not to the Synod of Antioche, whereas it was
forbidden by the Canons, that any thing should be decreed without the
knowledge of the Bishop of Rome. But who does not see that this is to be
understood of such decrees as bind the whole universal Church? Now it is
no marvel, if thus much be granted both to the antiquity and honor of the
city, and to the dignity of the sea, that there should be no general decree
made of religion, in the absence of the Bishop of Rome, if he refuse not to be
present. But what is this to the dominion over the whole Church? For we deny
not, that he was one of the chief: but we will not grant, that which the
Romanistes now affirm, that he had a dominion over all.

Now remains the fowerth kind of power, which stands in appealles. 2.
quest. cap. 4.
where he rehearsed that decree, that they should be excommunicate that appealle
beyond the sea, adds an exception: Unless peradventure they appealle to the sea of Rome. What may a man do to these beasts, which are so void of common
reason, yt they except that only thing out of the law, for whoes cause every
man sees that the law was made? For the Council when it condemns appealles
beyond the sea, forbids only this, yt none should appelle to Rome. Here the
good expositor excepteth Rome out of ye common law.

But (to determine this question at ones) one history shall make plain accused
was condemned, his cause not heard. For when he knew that the bishops had
conspired against him, he would not appear. Then the matter came to the
Emperor Constantine. He, forasmuch as he willed to have the matter ended by
ecclesiastical judgment, committed the hearing of it to Melciades bishop of
Rome. To whom he adjoined fellow commissioners many bishops of Italy, France,
and Spain. If that belonged to the ordinary jurisdiction of the sea of Rome,
to hear an appeal in an ecclesiastical cause: why does he suffer other to
be joined with him at the will of the Emperor? Yea why did he himself take
the judgment upon him rather by ye Emperors commandment, than by his own
office? But let us hear what happened afterward. There Cecilia^ got the
victory: Augus. epist. 162
Donate of the black houses was condemned for sclau^der: he appelled.
Constantine committed the judgment of the appelle to ye bishop of Orleance. He
sat as judge, to pronounce what he thought, after the bishop of Rome. If the sea of Rome has the chief power without appellation: why does Melciades suffer
himself to receive so great a shame, yt the bishop of Orlea^ce should be
preferred above him? And what Emperor does this? even Constantine, of whom
they boast that he employed not only all his endeavor, but in a manner all the
richesse of the empire to increase the dignity of their see. We se therefore
now, how far the Bishop of Rome was at that time by all means from that
supreme dominion, which he affirms to be given unto him by Christ over all
Chirches, and which he lyengly says that he has in all ages possessed by
the consent of the whole world.

I know how many epistles there be, how many writings and decrees. Did. xii
cap. Sacrosa^ct.
will think that that goodly interpretation is Anacletus his own, which is in
Gratian reported under the name of Anacletus: that is, that Cephas is a head?
The Romanists do at this day abuse for defense of their see, many such
trifles, which Gratian has patched together without judgment: and yet still
in so great light they will sell such smokes, wherewith in old time they were
wont to mock out the ignorant in darkness. But I will not bestow much labor
in confutyng those things, which do openly confute them selves by reason of
their unsavory folly. I grant yt there remain also true epistles of ye old
bishops, wherein they set forth ye honor of their see with glorious titles: of
which sort are some epistles of Leo. For that man, as he was learned and
eloquent, so was he also above measure desirous of glory and dominion: Vide
epist. 85. Epist. 83
but whether the Chirches then believed his testimony when he so aduau^ced
himself, that in deed is it that is in controversy. But it appears yt many
offended with his ambition, did also withstand his gredie desire. Sometimes he
appointed in his steed the bishop of Thessalonica throughout Grecia and other
contrees adjoining: sometime he appointed the bishop of Orleance, or some other
throughout France. So he appointed Hormisdas bishop of Hispalis to be his vicar
in Spain, but eueri where he excepteth, yt he gives out such apointme^ts upon
this condition, yt the Metropolita^s may have their ancient privileges
remainyng safe and whole. But Leo himself declares, yt this is one of their
privileges, ye if any dout happen about any matter, Episto. lxxxix.
ye metropolitan should first be asked his advise. Therefore those appointme^tes
of vicars in his stead were upon this condition, yt neither any Bishop should be
let in his ordinary jurisdiction, nor any Metropolitan in being judge of
Appealles, nor any prouincial Counsel in ordering of their Chirches. What was
this else but to abstain from all jurisdiction: but to entermedle to the
appeasing of discordes only so far as the law and nature of the communion of
the Church suffers.

In Gregory's time yt ancient order was already much changed. For Lib. i.
Episto. lxviii.
than he requires his own of them. Neither do I (says he) pricked on by
ambition, pluck from any man that which is his right: but I desire in all
things to honor my brethren. There is no saying in his writings wherein he does
more proudely bost of ye largeness of his Supremicie, Libr. ii. Epi. vl^. lib.
vii. epi. lxiii^
tha^ this: I know not what Bishop is not subject to ye see Apostolic when he
is found in fault. But he by and by adioyneth, Where fault requires not, al
according to ye order of humility are egal. He gives to himself power to
correct them yt have offended: if all do their duty, he makes himself egall
with y^ rest. But he himself gives himself this power: and they assented to
it yt would: and other that lyked it not, might freely gainesay it, which it is
well known yt the most part of them did. Beside yt he speaks there of ye
Primate of Constantinople: which when he was condemned by ye prouincial Synod,
refused ye whole iudgeme^te. His fellow Bishops informed ye Emperor of this
stubbornness of him. The Emperor willed Gregory to be judge of ye cause. We
see therefore that he both atte^pteth no thing, whereby he may break the
ordinary jurisdiction, and the same thing that he does for the helping of
other, he does not but by the commandment of the Emperor.

This therefore was the^ al ye power of ye Bishop of Rome, to set himself lib.
ii. Episto. xxxvii. Epi. xvi
tha^ in an other place he grants to al other over himself, when he
confesses yt he is ready to be corrected of al, to be amended of al. So in an
other place he does in deed command ye Bishop of Aquilela to come to Rome, to
plead his cause in a co^trouersy of faith that was rise^ between him and
other: but he does not command him of his own power, but because yt Emperor
had so commanded. Neither does he give warning that he alone shall be judge, but
promises that he will assemble a Synod by whom the whole matter may be judged.
But although there was yet such moderation, that the power of the sea of Rome
had her certain bounds, which it might not pass, and the Bishop of Rome
himself was no more about tha^ under other: yet is appears how much Gregory
misliked such state. Li i. ep. v.
For he now and the^ co^plaineth, that under color of Bishoprike he was
brought back to the world: and that he was more entangled with earthly cares,
than ever he had served them while he was a lay man: yt he was in yt honor
oppressed with tumult of worldly affairs. In an other place: so great burde^s
(says he) of business do hold me down, Lib. i. epi. vii. and. xv.
yt my mind can nothing at all be raised up to things above. I am shaken with
many waves of causes: and after those leysures of rest I am tossed with
te^pestes of troublesome life: so yt I may rightly say, I am come into ye depth
of the sea, and the tempest has drowned me. Hereby gather, what he would have
said, if he had happened to be in these times. Although he fulfilled not the
office of a Pastor, yet he was doing it. He absteyned from the government of
yt civil Empire, and confessed himself to be subject to the Emperor as other
were. He did not thrust himself into the cure of other Chirches, but being
compelled by necessity. And yet he thinks himself to be in a maze, because
he can not apply himself altogether only to the office of a Bishop.

At yt time ye Bishop of Constantinople striued with the Bishop of Rome for ye
Supremicie, as it is already said. For after yt the seat of y^ Empire was
stablished at Co^sta^tinople, the majesty of ye Empire seemed to require, y^
that Church also should have y^ second place of honor after the Church of
Rome. And truly at the beginning, nothing more auailed to cause yt Supremicie
to be given to Rome, but because ye head of ye Empire was there at yt time.
Did. lxxx. CaP. vi.
There is in Gratian a writing under the name of Pope Lucinus, where he says,
yt cities were no otherwise divided, where Metropolitanes and Primates ought to
sit, tha^ by ye reason of y^ civil government yt was before. There is also an
other under ye name of Pope Clement, where he says, yt Patriarchs were
ordained in those cities that had had ye chief Flamines in the^. Which,
although it be false, yet is taken out of a truth. For it is certain, yt, to
the end there should be made as little change as might be, the provinces were
divided according to yt state of things that the^ were: and that Primates and
Metropolitanes were set in those cities that excelled the other in honors and
power. Therefore in the Counsel at Taurinu^ it was decreed, Cap. i.
yt those cities which in the civil government were yt chief cities of every
province, should be the chief sees of Bishops. And if it happened the honor of
ye civil government to be removed from one city to an other, yt the^ the
right of the Metropolitan city should therwtal be removed thither. But
Innocentius Bishop of Rome, when he saw the ancient dignity of his city to
grow in decay, after that the seat of the Empire was removed to
Constantinople, fearing the abaceme^t of his see, made a contrary law: wherein
he denies it to be necessary yt the ecclesiastical mother cities should be
changed as ye Imperial mother cities change. But the authority of a Synod
ought of right to be preferred above one man's sentence. Also we ought to
suspecte Innocentius himself in his own cause. Howsoever it be, yet by his
own prouiso he shows, that from the beginning it was so ordered, that the
Metropolitan cities should be disposed according to the outward order of the
Empire.

According to this ancient ordinance, it was decreed in ye first Counsel
Socra. hist. tri^ part. lib. ix. cap. xiii. Decret. xxii. did
yt the Bishop of yt city should have the privileges of honor next after the
Bishop of Rome, because it was a new Rome. But a long time after, when a like
decree was made at Chalcedo^, Leo stoutly cried out against it. And he not only
gave himself leave to esteem as nothing yt which six hundred Bishops or more
had decreed: but also bitterly taunted them, for yt they took from other sees
that honor which they were so bold to give to the Church of Constantinople. I
beseech you, what other thing could move a man to trouble ye world for so small a
matter, but mere ambition? He says y^ that ought to be inviolable, which the
Nicene Sinode has ones decreed. As though forsooth the Christian faith were
endangered, if one Chirch be preferred before an other: or as though
Patriarchies were there divided to any other end, but for policies. But we
know that policy receives, yea requires diverse chaunges, according to the
diversity of times. Therefore it is fond that Leo pretends, that the honor,
which by the authority of the Nicene Sinode was given to the sea of
Alexandria, ought not to be given to the sea of Constantinople. For common
reason tells this, that it was such a decree, as might be taken away
according to the respect of times. Yea none of the Bishops of the East
withstode it, who^ that thing most of all concerned. Truly Proterius was
present, whom they had made Bishop of Alexandria in the place of Dioscorus.
There were present other Patriarchs, whoes honor was diminished. It was their
part to withstand it, not Leos which remained safe in his own place. But when
all they hold their peace, yea assent unto it, and only the Bishop of Rome
resists: it is easy to judge, what moves him: that is, he foresaw yt which
not long after happened, that it would come to pass, that, the glory of old
Rome decaying, Constantinople not contented with the second place, would
strive with Rome for ye Supremicie. And yet with his crying out he did not so much
prevail, but that the decree of the Council was confirmed. Therefore his
successors, when they saw themselves overcome, quietly gave over that
stiffenesse: for they suffered that he should be accounted the second
Patriarche.

But within a little after, John which in Gregory's time ruled the Lib. vil.
Episto. xxx.
and abominable, whosoever take it upon him. Yea and also in one place he is
angry with Eulolius Bishop of Alexandria, which had honored him with such a
tittle. Behold (says he) in the preface of the Epistle which ye directed to
my self that have forbidden it, ye have cared to emprinte the word of proud
calling, in manyng me universal Pope. Which, I pray that your holiness will
no more do because that is withdrawn from you, which is given to an other
more than reason requires. I count it no honor, wherein I se the honor of my
brethren to be diminished. For my honor is the honor of the universal Church,
and the sound strength of my brethren. But if your holiness call me the
universal Pope, it denies it self to be that which it confesses me to be
wholly. Truly Gregory stood in a good and honest cause. But Ihon helped by
the favor of Maurice the Emperor, could never be removed from his purpose.
Ciriacus also his successor never suffered himself to be entreated in that
behalf.



and a scattering abroad of the whole order of the Church, was in Bernardes
time. He co^playneth yt there resort by heaps to Rome out of all the world,
Lib. i. de consi. ad Euge.
ambitious men, covetous, Simonians, robbers of God, kepers of concubines,
co^mitters of incest, and all such monsters, to obtein or retain
ecclesiastical honors by ye Apostolic authority: and ye fraud and
undermining, and violence were growe^ in force. He says yt that manner of
judging which the^ was used, was abominable, and unseemly, not only for the
Church, but also for a judicial court. He cries out that the Church is full
of ambitious men: and yt there is none that more dredeth to commit mischeuous
Acts, than robbers do in their cave, when they divide the spoils of
wayfairing men. Few (says he) do look unto the mouth of the lawgeuer, but
unto his hands. But not without cause. For those hands do all the Popes
business. What a thing is this, yt they are bought of the spoils of Chirches,
yt say to thee, oh well done, well done? The life of the poor is sowe^ in the
streets of the rich: silver glistereth in the mire: me^ run to it from al
places: not the poor, but the stranger takes it up, or he paradue^ture ye
runs fastest before. But this manner, or rather this death, came not of thee,
I would to God it might end in thee. Among these things thou a Pastor go
forward compassed with much and precious array. If I durst say it, these are
rather the Pastors of devils, than of sheep. Forsooth Peter did thus, Paul
played thus. Lib. iii.
Thy court is more accustomed to receive men good tha^ to make them good. For
the ill do not there profit, but the good do decay. Now as for the abuses of
appealles yt he rehearses, no godly man can read them without great horror. At
the last he thus concludes of ye unbridled gredinesse of the sea of Rome in
the usurping of jurisdiction: I speak ye murmour and common complaynt of the
Chirches. They cry out that they be mangled and dismembered. There are either
none or few that do not either bewail or fear this plage. Ask thou what
plage? The Abbotes are plucked from the Bishops, the Bishops from the
Archebishops etc. It is marvelous if this may be excused. In so doing ye prove
that ye have fullness of power, but not of righteousness. Ye do this, because
ye can do it: but whether ye also ought to do it, is a question. Ye are set to
preserve, not to envy to every man his honor and his own degree. These few
things of many I listed to rehearse, partly yt the reders may see, how sore
the Church was then decayed, and partly that they may know in how great sorrow
and mourning this calamity held all the godly.

But now, albeit that we grant to the Bishop of Rome at this as confirmed
with the divine voice of Peter: that the prouincial Sinodes, are without force,
because they want the presence of the Pope: that they may order clerks of any
Church that they will: and may call them to their see that have been ordered
else where. Innumerable of y^ sort are in Gratia^s pack, which I do not now
rehearse, least I should be to tedious to the Reders. But this is the sum of
them, that only the Bishop of Rome has the Supreme hearing and determining of
all ecclesiastical causes, whether it be in judging and defining of doctrines,
or in making of laws, or in stablishing of discipline, or in executyng of
judgments: It were also long and superfluous to rehearse the privileges that
they take to themselves in reseruatio^s, as they call them. But, (which is most
intolerable of al other) they leave no judgment in earth to restrain and
bridle their outrageous lust, Decre^. xvii. quest. iii. cap. Nemini. Innocent
ix. que. ^ cap. nemo. Sym ix. que. ^ Cap. Alioru^. Auther. Ibid. ca. facta.
if they abuse so immeasurable power. It is lawful for no man (say they) to
revoke ye judgment of that see, because of the Supremicie of the Church of
Rome. Again. The judge shall be judged neither by ye Emperor, nor by kings, nor
by all the Clergy, nor of the people. That is in deed to imperiously done, that
one man makes himself judge of al men, and suffers himself to obey the
judgment of no man. But what if he use tyranny over the people of God? if he
scatter abroad and wast the kingdom of Christ? if he trouble the whole Chirch?
if he turn the office of Pastor into robbery? Yea though he be never so
mischeuous, he says that he is not bound to yield account. For these be the
sayings of the Bishops: gods will was to determine the causes of other men by
me^, but he has without question reserved y^ Bishop of this see to his own
judgment. Again. The doings of subjects are judged of us: but ours, of God
only.

Ibidi. ca Ant.
that they have set forth a writing under the name of Anastasius Patriarche of
Constantinople, wherein he testifies that it was decreed by the old rules,
that nothing should be done even in the furthest provinces, that were not first
moved to the sea of Rome. Beside this that it is certain yt this is most
vain, what man shall think it likely, that such a commendation of the sea of
Rome proceeded from the adversary and enuier of the honor and dignity thereof?
But verily it behooved that these Antichrists should be carried on to so
great madness and blindness, that their lewdenesse might be plain for all
men to se, at least so many as will open their eyes. But the decretall epistles
heaped together by Gregory the.ix. again the Clementines, and Extrauagantes
of Martine, do yet more openly and with fuller mouth each where breathe forth
their outrageous fierceness and as it were the tyranny of barbarous kings.
But these be the oracles, by which the Romanistes will have their papacy to be
weyed. Hereupon arose those notable principles, which at this day have every
where in ye papacy ye force of oracles: yt the Pope c^^not err: that ye Pope
is above the Councels: that the Pope is the universal Bishop of al Bishops,
and the Supreme head of the Church in earth: I pass over the much absurder
follies, which the foolish Canonistes babble in their schools: to which yet ye
Romish divines do not only assente, but do also clap their hands at them, to
flatter their idol.

I will not deal with them by extremity of right. Some other man Lib. iiii.
Ep. xcii
John, Andrew and James ye heds of particular peoples: yet they all are members
of the Chirch under one head: yea ye holy ones before ye law, ye holy ones under
ye law, ye holy ones under grace, are set among members, altogether making up
ye body of the Lord: and no man ever willed to have himself called universal.
But whereas ye Bishop of Rome takes upon himself ye power of commanding, yt
thing smally agrees with that which Gregory says in an other place. Lib. vii.
Episto. xxviii.
For whereas Eulolius Bishop of Alexandria, had said that he was commanded by
him, he answered in this wise. I pray ye, take away this word of co^ma^ding
from my hearing. For I know what I am and what ye be. In place, ye be to me
brethren: in manners, ye be to me fathers. Therefore I comanded not, but I
cared to tell you those things yt I thought profitable. Whereas he so extends
his jurisdiction without end, he does therein great and hayno^s wrong, not only to
ye other Bishops, but also to al particular Chirches, which he so teareth and
plucketh in pieces, yt he may bilde his seat of their ruins. But whereas he
exe^pteth himself from al judgments, and will so reign after the manner of
tirantes, yt he accompteth his own only lust for law, yt verily is so heinous,
and so far from ecclesiastical order, that it may in no wise be borne: for it
utterly abhors not only from al feling of godliness, but also from all
humanity.

But yt I be not compelled to go through and examine al things particularly,
Libro. i. Epist. v.vii. and. xxv. and. alibi.
yt he is to much diversely drawn away with foreign business: yt he is under
ye color of Bishoprike brought back to the world: wherein he serves so many
cares of the world as he never remembers that he served when he was a lay man:
that he is pressed down with tumulte of worldly affairs, that his mind is
nothing raised up to things above: that he is shaken with many waves of
causes, and tossed with tempests of troublesome life: so that he may worthily
say, I am come into the depth of the sea. Truly among those earthly
businesses, he might yet teach the people with Sermones, privately admonish
and correct such as it behooved, order the Church, give counsel to his fellow
Bishops and exhort them to their duty: beside these things there remained
some time to write: and yet he lamenteth his calamity, that he is drowned in
the depest sea. If the government of that time was a sea: what is to be said
of the papacy at this time? For what likeness have they together? Here be no
preachinges, no care of discipline, no zele to ye Chirches, no spiritual
doing, finally nothing but the world. Yet this maze is praised, as though there
could nothing be found more orderly and better framed. But what co^plaintes
does Bernarde pour out, what groans does he utter, when he looks upon the
faults of his age? What then would he do, if he beheld this our age of iron,
and worse if any be worse than iron? What obstinate wickedness is this, not
only stiffly to defend as holy and divine, that which all the holy men have with
one mouth condemned: but also to abuse their testimony to the defense of the
papacy, which it is certain that they never knew of? Howbeit of Bernardes
time I confess, that then the corruption of all things was so great, that it
was not much unlike our time. But they are without all shame, that fetch any
pretense for it, out of that mean age, yt is the time of Leo, Gregory, and
such other. For they do like as if one, to stablyshe the Monarchy of
Emperor, would praise the old state of the Empire of Rome: that is, would
borrowe the praises of liberty, to set forth the honor of tyranny.

requires? Let us call to remembrance that which has before ben spoken of the
office of Priests and of a Bishop. If we shall bring the office of Cardinals
to be tried by that rule, we shall confess that they are nothing less than
Priests. As for the chief bishop himself, I would feign know what one thing at
all he has bishoplike. First it is the principal point in the office of a
Bishop, to teach the people with the word of God: an other and the next point
to that is, to minister the sacraments: the third is to admonish and exhort,
yea and to correct them that offend, and to hold the people together in holy
discipline. What of these things does he? yea, what does he feign himself to
do: Let them tell therefore, by what mean they would have him to be compted a
Bishop, that does not with his little finger, no not ones so much as in
outewarde show, touch any part of a bishops office.

It is not so of a Bishop as it is of a king. For a king, although he do

We seem to be to much evil speakers and railers, when we call the bishop of
Rome Antichrist. But they that so think, do not understand that they accuse
Paul of immodestie, after whom we so speak, yea out of whoes mouth we so
speak. And least any man obiecte, that we do wrongfully wrest against the
bishop of Rome, these words of Paul that are spoken to an other intent. I will
brefely show, that they can not be otherwise understood, ii. These. i^.iiii.
Dan. vii.xxv.
but of the Papacy. Paul writes, that Antichrist shall sit in the temple of
God. In an other place also the Holy ghost describyng his image in the person
of Antiochus, shows that his kingdom shall consist in hautinesse of speech,
and blasphemyngs of God. Hereupon we gather, that it is rather a tyranny over
souls, than over bodies, that is raised up against the spiritual kingdom of
Christ. Then, that it is such, as does not abolish the name of Christ and the
Chirch: but rather should abuse the pre^ence of Christ, and lurk under the
title of the Church, as under a disguised visour. But although all the
heresies and sects that have been from the beginning, belong to the kingdom of
Antichrist: yet where as Paul prophecieth, that there shall com a departing, by
this description he signifies, that that seat of abomination shall then be
raised up, when a certain universal departing shall possess the Church:
howsoever many members of the Chirch here and there continue in the true unity
of Faith. But where he adds, that in his time he began in a mystery to set
up the work of iniquity, which he would afterward show openly: thereby we
understand, yt this calamity was neither to be brought in by one man, nor to
be ended in one man. Now where as he does set out Antichrist by this mark,
that he should pluck away from God his due honor, to take it to him self:
this is the chief token that we ought to follow in seeking out of Antichrist,
specially where such pride proceeds even to the public dissipation of the
Church. Sith therefore it is certain, that the bishop of Rome has
shamelessely conveyed away to himself that which was the chief propre thing
to God alone and Christ, it is not to be douted but that he is the captain
and standerdbearer of the wicked and abominable kingdom.

Eusebius. lib. iii. cap. 5.
Eusebius tells, how God, that there might be place for his vengeance,
removed the Chirch that was at Jerusalem to Pella. That which we hear to
have been ones done, might be ofter done. Therefore so to by^de the honor of
supremicie to a place, that he which is in deed the most hateful enemy of
Christ, the highest adversary of the Gospel, the greatest waster and destroyer
of the Church, the most cruel slaughterman and butcher of the saints, should
nevertheless be accounted the vicar of Christ, the successor of Peter, ye
chief bishop of ye Church, only because he occupies the sea that was ones
the chiefest of all: that verily is to much to be scorned and foolish. I
speak not, how great difference there is between the popes chauncerie, and a
well framed order of the Church. Howbeit this one thing may well take away all
dout of this question. For no man that has his right wit, will think the
bishoprike enclosed in lead and bulls: much less, in that school of
frauds and deceites, in wiche things the Popes spiritual government
consists. Therefore it was very well said by a certain man, that that Church
of Rome which is bosted of, is long ago turned into a court which only is
now seen at Rome. Neither do I here accuse the faults of men: but I show
that the Papacy it self is directly contrary to the true order of a Church.

But if we come to the persons of men, it is well enough known Luc. ^^^^
xxxii.
that thy faith should not faint. What, I pray you, win they by mocking so
shamelessely, but that the whole world may understand, that they are come to
that extremity of wickedness, that they neither fear God, nor stand in awe
of men?

But let us imagine, that the ungodliness of those Popes whom I Gerson which
lived the^
but the school of Parise moved the king of France to compel him to recant
it. The king forbade his subjects to communicate with him, unless he did out
of hand repent: and the same, as the manner is, he proclaimed by a heralde. The
Pope compelled by this necessity, abiured his error. This example makes that
I need not to dispute any more with my adversaries about this that they say,
that the sea of Rome and the Bishops thereof, can not err in the faith,
because it was said to Peter, I have prayed for thee, Luc. x^^^.xxxii.
that thy faith may not fainte. Truly he fell with so foul a kind of fall
from the right faith, that he is a notable example to them that come after,
that they are not all Peter's which succeed after Peter in the bishoprike.
Howbeit this is also of it self so childishe, that it needs no answer. For
if they will draw to Peter's successors whatsoever was spoken to Peter, Mat.
^vi ^^iii.
it shall ^olowe that they are all Satan's, for as much as the Lord said this
also to Peter. Go behind, thou Satan, because thou art an offense to me. For
it shall be as easy for us to turn back this later saying against them, as it
shall be for them to object the other against us.

But I list not to strive with them in playeng the fool. Therefore I ii.
These. i.iiii.
than an idol, when it is set in the temple of God, is to be taken for God.
Now if their manners be to be judged upon, let the Popes them selves answer
for them selves: what one thing at al there is in them, wherein they may be
known for bishops. First whereas there is such life at Rome, they not only
winking at it, but also as it were with secret countenance allowyng it, this is
utterly unmeet for bishops, whoes duty is with severity of discipline to
restrain the licentiousness of the people. But I will not be so rigorous
against them, to charge them with other men's faults. But where as they
themselves, with their own household, with almost the whole college of
Cardinals, with the whole flock of their clergy, are so given forth to all
wickedness, filthiness, uncleanness, to all kynds of lewd and mischeuous
doings, that they resemble rather monsters than men: therein truly they bewray
them selves to be nothing less than bishops. And yet they need not to fear
least I should further disclose their filthiness. For both I am weary to have
to do in so stinkyng mire, and I must favor chaste ears, and I think that I
have already enough and more proved that which I went about: that is, that
although Rome had in old time ben the head of Chirches, yet at this day she is
not worthy to be judged one of the smallest toes of the Chirches feet.

changed, that they are become the cousins of kings and Emperors. And it is
no doubt but that they grew up by littell and littell together with their
head, till they were advanced to this hie top of dignity. But this also I
thought good to touch shortly by the way, that he reders might the better
understand, that the Sea of Rome, such as it is at this day, does much
differ from that ancient one, under pretense whereof, it does now maynteine
and defend it self. But of what sort soever they were in old time, forasmuch
as they have now nothing of ye true and lawful office in the Church, they
retain only a deceitful color and vain visour: yea forasmuch as they have
all things utterly contrary, it was necessary that that should happen to
them, which Gregory writes so often. Lib. iiii. epist. xxv. and lv. Lib. v.
epist. vii. Mala. ii.viii.
I say it (says he) weeping: I give warnyng of it, groaning: that since the
order of priesthode is fallen within, it shall also not be able to stand long
without. But rather it behooved that this should be fulfilled in them which
Malachie says of such: Ye have gone back out of the way, and have made many
to stumble in the law. Therefore ye have made void the covenant of Leui, says
the Lord. Therefore behold I have given you out of estimation, and vile to all
the people. Now I leave it to all the godly to think of what sort is that
supreme height of the Hierarchy of Rome, whereunto the Papists with
abominable shamlessenesse stick not to make subject the very word of God,
which ought to have been honorable and holy both to heaven and earth, men and
Angels.

The.viii. Chapter. Of the power of the Church as touching the articles of
Faith: and with how unbridled lice^tiousnesse it has in the Papacy ben
wrested to corrupt all pureness of Doctrine.
Now follows the third place, of the power of the Church, which partly
consists in all the bishops, and partly in the Counsels, and those either
provincial or general. I speak only of the spiritual power, which is
propre to the Chirch. That consists either in doctrine, or in jurisdiction,
or in making of laws. Doctrine has two parts, the authority to teach
articles of Doctrine, and the expoundyng of them. Before that we begin to
discourse of every one of these in specialtie, we will that the godly readers
be warned, that whatsoever is taught concerning the power of the Church,
they must remember to apply to that end, whereunto (as Paul testifies) it
was given: ii. Cor. x.viii. and. xiii x.
that is, to edification, and not to destruction: which who so lawfully use,
they think them selves no more than the ministers of Christ, and therwithall
the ministers of the people in Christ. Now of the edifyeng of the Chirch, this
is the only way, if the ministers themselves endeavor to preserve to Christ
his authority, which can not otherwise be safe, unless that be left unto
him, which he received of his Father: that is, that he be the only
schole-maister of the Church. Mat. xvii v.
For it is written, not of any other, but of him alone, Hear him. The power of
the Church therefore is not to be sparingly set forth, but yet to be enclosed
within certain bounds, that it be not drawn hither and thither after the lust
of men. Herunto it shall be much profitable to note, how it is described of the
Prophets and Apostles. For if we simply grant unto men such power as they list
to take upon them, it is plain to all men, what a slippery readiness there is
to fall into tyranny, which ought to be far from the Chirch of Christ.

Therefore here it must be remembered, that whatsoever authority or Exodus
iii.iiii.
to the intent that they should speak nothing beside his word. Moses
himself, the prince of all the Prophets, was to be heard above the rest:
Exo. xiiii xxxi. Deuter. xvi.ix.
but he was first instructed with his commandments, that he might not
declare any thing at all, but from the Lord. Therefore it is said, that the
people when they embraced his doctrine, believed in God and in his servant
Moses. Also that the authority of the priests should not grow in contempt,
it was stablished with most grievous penalties. But therwithal the Lord shows
upon what condition they were to be heard, Mala. ii.iiii.^^.vi.
when he says that he has made his covenant with Leui, that the law of
truth should be in his mouth. And a little after he adds: The lips of the
priest shall keep knowledge, and they shall require the law at his mouth:
because he is the angel of the God of hosts. Therefore if the priest will be
heard, let him show himself the messinger of God: that is, Deu. xvii x.
let him faithfully report the commandments that he received of his author.
And where it is specially entreated of the hearing of them, this is expressly
set, That they may answer according to the law of God.

Ezec. iii.xvii.
Thou son of man (says the Lord) I have given thee to be a watcheman to the
house of Israel. Therefore thou shalt hear the word out of my mouth, and
thou shalt declare it to them from me. He that is commanded to hear out of
the mouth of the Lord, is he not forbidden to invent any thing of himself? But
what is to declare from the Lord, but so to speak as he may boldly boast,
that it is not his own, Hie. xxiii.xxviii.
but the Lords word that he has brought? The self same thing is in
Hieremie, in other words. Let the Prophet (says he) with whom is a dream,
tell a dream: and let him that has my word speak my word true. Certainly
he appoints a law to them all. And that is such, yt he permits not any to
teach more than he is commanded. And after he calls it chafe, all that is
not come from himself only. Therefore none of the Prophets them selves opened
his mouth, but as the Lord told him the words before. Esa. vi.v. Ioh. i.vi.
Whereupon these sayings are so often found among the^: the word of the Lord,
the burden of the Lord, so says the Lord, the mouth of the Lord has spoken.
And worthily. For Esaie cried out that he had defiled lyppes, Esaias. vi.v.
Iere. i.vi.
Jeremy confessed that he could not speak, because he was a child: What
could proceed from ye defiled mouth of the one, and the foolish mouth of the
other, but unclean and unwise, if they had spoken their own speech? But this
lyps were holy and pure, when they began to be the instruments of the Holy
ghost. When the Prophets are bound with this religion, that they deliver
nothing, but that which they have received, the^ they be garnished with notable
power and excellent titles. For when the Lord testifies, that he has set
them over nations and kingdoms, to pluck up and to root out, Iere. i.^.
to destroy and pluck down, to build and to plant, he by and by adioyneth
the cause: because he has put his words in their mouth.

Now if you look to the Apostles: they are in deed commended with Ma xxviii
ix.
when he commanded them to go and teach al nations, al those things that he
had commanded. Yea and he himself also received this law, and laid it upon
himself, that it should be lawful for no man to refuse it. My doctrine (says
he) is not mine, but his that sent me, Ioh vii.xvi.
my fathers. He that was always the only and eternal cou^seller of the Father,
and he that was appointed by the Father the Lord and scholemaister of all men,
yet because he executed ye ministry of teaching, prescribed by his own
example to all ministers what rule they ought to follow in teaching. Therefore
the power of the Chirch is not infinite, but subject to the word of the lord,
and as it were enclosed in it.

But since this has from the beginning ben of force in the Church, and at this
day ought to be in force, that the servants of God should teach nothing,
which they have not learned of him: yet according to the diversity of times
they had diverse orders of learning. But that order which is now, much
differs from those that were before. First if it be true which Christ
says, Mat. xi.xxvii.
that none has seen the Father, but the Son, and he to whom it has pleased
the Son to show him: it behooved verily that they should be always directed by
that eternal wisdom of the Father, which would come to the knowledge of God.
For how should they either have comprehended in mind, or uttered the mysteries
of God, but by his teaching, to whom alone the secrets of the Father ar open?
Therefore the holy fathers in old time knew GOD no other wise but beholding him
in the Son as in a glass. When I say this, I mean that God did never by any
other mean disclose himself to men but by the Son, that is, his only wisdom,
light, and truth. Out of this fountain did Adam, Noe, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob
and the other draw all the knowledge yt they had of heavenly doctrine. Out of
the same fou^tain have also all the Prophets themselves drawn all the heavenly
Oracles that they uttered. For verily this Wisdom has always disclosed (...)
self by more ways than one. To the Patriarchs he used secret revelations:
but therwithall to confirm their minds, he adjoined such signs, that it
could not be doutefull to them, that is was God that spoke. The Patriarchs
conveyed over from hand to hand to posterity, that which they had received.
For the Lord left it with them to this intent, that they should so sprede it
abroad. But the children and childrens children, by God secretly informyng
them, did know that that which they heard was from heaven, and not from the
earth.

But when it pleased God, to raise a more apparent form of a Church, Mala.
ii.vii.
when the prestes are commanded to teach out of the mouth of the Lord, ye
meaning is, that they should teach nothing strange or differing from that kind
of learning which the Lord comprehended in the law: and to add and diminishe
was unlawful for them. Then followed the Prophets, by whom in deed the Lord
published new oracles to be added to the law: but yet not so new, but that they
came out of the law, and had respect unto it. For, as touching doctrine, they
were only expositors of the law, and added nothing unto it, but prophecies of
things to come. Those excepted, they uttered nothing else but a pure exposition
of the law. But because it pleased the Lord that there should be a plainer and
larger doctrine, that weak consciences might be the better satisfied: he
commanded that the Prophecies also should be put in writing, and accounted
part of his word. And hereunto were added the histories, which are also the
works of the Prophets, but made by the endityng of the Holy ghost. I reckon
the Psalms among the Prophecies, because that which we attribute to the
prophecies is also common to the psalms. Therefore that whole body co^pacted of
the law, prophecies. psalms and histories, was the word of the Lord to the
old people, by the rule whereof the prestes and teachers even unto Christ's
time were bound to examine their doctrine: neither was it lawful for them to
swerve either to the right hand or to the left: because all their office was
enclosed within these bounds, that they should answer the people out of the
mouth of God. Mal. iiii.iiii,
Which is gathered of a notable place of Malachie, where he bids them to be
mindful of the law, and to give head to it, eue^ to the preaching of the
Gospel. For thereby he forbids them all new found doctrines, and grants
them no leave to swerve never so little out of the way which Moses had
faithfully showed them. And this is ye reason why David so honorably sets
out the excellence of the law, and reherseth so many praises of it: that is,
that the Jews should couete no foreign thing without it, since within it was all
perfection enclosed.

Heb. i.i.
but yt in these last days he began to speak to us by his beloved Son. For
he signifies, yea he openly declares, that God will not hereafter, as he did
before, speak sometime by some and sometime by other, nor will add Prophecies
to Prophecies, or revelations to revelations: but that he has so fulfilled all the parts of teaching in the Son, yt they must have this of him for the last
and eternal testimony. After which sort all this time of the new Testament
wherein Christ has appeared to us with the preaching of his Gospel even to
the day of judgment, is expressed by the last hour, the last times, the last
days: to the end verily that contented with the perfection of the doctrine of
Christ, we should learn neither to feign us any new beside it, or receive it
fained of other. Therefore not without cause the Father has by singular
prerogative ordained the Son to be our Teacher: commanding him, and not any
man, Mat. xvii.v.
to be heard. He did in deed in few words set out his scholemaistership
unto us, when he said, hear him: but in which there is more weight and force
than men commonly think. For it is as much in effect, as if leading us away
from al doctrines of men, he should bring us to him only, and commau^de us to
look for all the doctrine of salvation at him alone, to hang upon him alone, to
cleave to him alone, finally (as the very words do sound) to harke^ to the
voice of him alone. And truly what ought there now to be either looked for or
desired at ye hand of man, when the very word of life has familiarly and
openly disclosed himself unto us? Yea but it is mete yt the mouths of al me^
be shut, after yt he, in whom the heavenly Father willed to have all the
treasures of knowledge and wisdom to be hidden, has ones spoken, and so
spoken as became both the wisdom of God (which is in no part imperfect) and
Messiah at whoes hand the revelation of al things is hoped for: John. iiii.xxv.
that is to say, that he left nothing afterward for other to be spoken.

Let this therefore be a steadfast principle: yt there is to be had no other
Mathe. xxviii.xx.
For Christ limited their embassage with this condition, when he commanded them
to go and teach, not such things as they themselves had rashly forged, but
al those things that he had commanded them. Mat. xxiii viii.
And nothing could be more plainly spoken, tha^ that which he says in an
other place: but be not ye called masters for only one is your master,
Christ. Then, to emprint this more depely in their mind, he repeteth it twice
in the same place. And because their rudeness was such, that they could not
conceive those things that they had heard and learned of the mouth of their
master, Ioh xiii^.xxvi. and. xvi.xiii.
therefore the Spirit of truth is promised them, by who^ they should be
directed to the true understanding of al things. For ye same restrayning is to
be diligently noted, where this office is assigned to the Holy ghost, to put
them in mind of al those things yt he before taught them by mouth.

i. Pe. iiii.xxi.
Let him yt speaks (says he) speak as the words of God, yt is to say, not
doutingly, as they are wont to tremble whoes own conscience misgeueth them, but
with sure co^fide^ce, which becomes ye servant of God furnished with assured
instructions. What other thing is this, but to forbid al inventions of man's
mind, from what head soever they have proceeded, that the pure word of God may
be heard and learned in ye Chirch of ye faithful? to take away the ordinances
or rather the fained devises of al men, of what degree soever they be, that the
decrees of God only may remain in force? These be those spiritual armures,
mighty through God to cast down holds: ii. Cor. x.iiii.
by which ye faithful servants of God may throw down counsels, and al height
that aduaunceth it self against the knowledge of God, and may lead al knowledge
captive to obey Christ. Lo this is the sovereign power, wherwt it behooves ye
Pastors of the Chirch to be endued, by what name soever they be called, that
is, that by the word of God they may with co^fide^ce be bold to do al things:
may co^pel all the strength, glory, wisdom and height of the world to yield and
obey to his majesty: being vpholde^ by his power, may command al eue^ from
the hiest to the lowest: may bilde up the house of Christ and pull down the
house of Satan: may feed the sheep and drive away the wolves: may instruct and
exhort the willing to learn* may reprove, rebuke and subdue the rebellious and
stubborn: may bind, and loose: finally may thu^der and lighte^, if need be:
but al things in ye word of God. Howbeit there is, as I have said, this
difference between ye Apostles and their successors, yt the Apostles were ye
certain and authe^tike secretaries of the Holy ghost, and therefore their
writings are to be esteemed for the Oracles of God: but the other have none
other office, but to teach yt which is set fourth and written in the holy
Scriptures. We determine therefore, yt this is not now left to faithful
ministers, that they may coin any new doctrine, but that they ought simply to
cleave to ye doctrine, whereunto ye lord has made al me^ wtoute exception
subject. When I say this, my meaning is not only to show what is lawful for all
particular me^, but also what is lawful for the whole universal Chirch. Now as
touching al particular me^: Paul verily was ordained by ye Lord Apostle to ye
Corinthia^s: but he denies yt he has dominion over their faith. i. Cor.
i.xiiii.
Who now dare take a dominion upon himself, which Paul testifies yt it
belongs not to him? If he had acknowleged himself to have this liberty of
teachi^g, yt whatsoever ye Pastor teaches he may therein of right require to be
believed: he would never have taught the Cori^thia^s this discipline, i. Cor
iii.xiiii.xxix.
yt while twoe or three Prophets speak, ye rest should judge, and if it were
reveled to any yt sat, ye first should hold his peace. For so he spared none,
whoes authority he made not subject to ye judgment of ye word of God. But, will
some man say, of ye whole universal Chirch ye case is otherwise. I answer yt
in an other place Paul meteth with this dout also, where he says, yt Faith is
by hearing, and hearing by ye word of God. Romans x.
Truly if Faith hang of ye word of God only, has respect unto and rests
upon it alone, what place is there now left to ye word of the whole world? For
herin no man may dout, yt has well known what Faith is. For Faith ought to be
stayed upon such assuredness, whereby it may stand invincible against Satan,
and all the engines of the hells, and against ye whole world. This assuredness
we shall no where find but in ye only word of God. Again, it is a general rule,
which we here ought to have respect unto: yt God does therefore take from men
the power to set fourth a new doctrine, yt he only may be our scholemaister in
heavenly learning, as he only is true which ca^ neither lie nor deceive. This
rule belongs no less to ye whole Chirch, than to every one of the faithful.

But if this power of the Church, which we have spoken of, be compared with
that power, whereof the spiritual tyrants, that have falslye called themselves
Bishops and Prelates of religion, have in certain ages past bosted themselves
among the people of God, the agreemente shall be no better than Christ has with
Beliall. Yet it is not in this place my purpose to declare in what sort and
with how wicked means they have exercised their tyranny: I will but rehearse
the doctrine, which at this day they defend, first with writings, and then
with swerd and fire. Because they take it for a thing confessed, that a general
Counsel is the true image of the Church, when they have taken this principle,
they do without dout determine, that such counsels are immediately governed of
the Holy ghost, and that therefore they can not err. But whereas they
themselves do rule, the counsels, yea and make them, they do in deed challenge
to themselves whatsoever they affirm to be due to the Cou^cells. Therefore they
will have our Faith to stand and fall at their will, that whatsoever they shall
determine on the one side or the other, may be stablished and certain to our
minds: so that if they allow any thing we must allow the same without
douting: if they condemn any thing we must also hold it for condemned. In the
mean time after their own lust, and despising the word of God, they coin
doctrines, to which afterward they require by this rule to have Faith given.
For they also say that he is no Christian, that does not certainly consent to
all their doctrines as well affirmative as negative: if not with expressed yet
with unexpressed Faith: because it is in the power of the Church, to make new
articles of the Faith.

First let us hear by what arguments they prove yt this authority is given
to the Church: and then we shall se how much that makes for them which they
allege of the Chirch. The Chirch (say they) has notable promises, that it shall
never be forsaken of Christ her spouse, but that it shall be guided by his
Spirit into al truth. But of the promises which they are wont to allege, many
are given no less to every one ye faithful particularly, tha^ to the whole
Church universally. For though the Lord spoke to the.xii. Apostles, Math.
xxviii xx. Ioh. xiiii.xvi.
when he said: Behold I am with you eue^ to the end of the world: Again: I will
ask my Father, and he shall give you an other co^forter, namely the Spirit of
truth: yet he made the promise not only to the whole number of the.xii. but
also to every one of them: yea to the other disciples likewise, either those yt
he had already received, or those yt should afterward be added to them. But
when they expou^de such promises full of singular comfort, as though they were
given to none of ye Christians, but to the whole Church together: what do they
else, but take away from al Christians that confidence which they all ought to
receive thereby to encourage the^? Yet I do not here deny, but yt the whole
fellowship of the faithful furnished with manifold diversity of gifts, is
endued with much larger and more plentiful treasure of the heavenly wisdom,
than each one severally: neither is it my meaning, yt this is so spoken in
common to the faithful, as though they were al alike endued with the Spirit of
understanding and doctrine: but because it is not to be granted, to the
adversaries of Christ, yt they should for the defense of an evil cause wrest
the Scripture to a wrong sense. But, omitting this, i. cor. i.xii.
I simply confess yt which is true, yt the lord is perpetually present with
his, and rules them with his Spirit. And yt this Spirit is not the Spirit of
error, ignorance, lyeng or darkness: but of sure revelation, wisdom,
truth, and light, of who^ they not deceitfully may learn those things that
are given them, Ephesians. i.xviii.
that is to say, what is the hope of their calling, and what be the richesse of
the glory of the inheritance of God in the saints. But whereas the faithful,
even they that are endued with more excellent gifts above the rest, do in this
flesh receive only the first fruits and a certain taste of yt Spirit: there
remains nothing leeuer to them tha^ knowing their own weakness, to hold
themselves carefully within the bounds of the word of God: least, if they
wander far after their own sense, they by and by stray out of ye right way,
in so much as they be yet void of that Spirit, by whoes only teaching truth
is discerned from falshode. Phi. iii.xi
For all men do confess with Paul, that they have not yet atteined to ye
mark. Therefore they more endeavor to daily profiting, than glory of perfection.

Ephe. v.xxv. i. Tim. iii xv.
that the Church is cleansed with the washing of water in the word of life, yt
it might be without wrincle and spot, and yt therefore in an other place it is
called the pillar and stay of truth. But in the first of these two places is
rather taught, what Christ daily works in it, than what he has allredy done.
For if he daily sanctifies, purges, polysheth, wypeth from spots all them
that be his: truly it is certain that they are yet besprinkled with some
spots and wrincles, and that there wants somewhat of their sanctification.
But how vain and fabulous is it, to judge the Chirch already in every part holy
and spottlesse, whereof all the members are spotty and very unclean? It is true
therefore that the Church is sanctified of Christ. But only the beginning of
that sanctifieng is here seen: but the end and full accomplishment shall be,
when Christ the holiest of holy ones shall truly and fully fill it with his
holiness. It is true also that the spots and wrincles of it are wiped away:
but so that they be daily in wiping away, until Christ with his coming do
utterly take away all that remains. For unless we grant this, we must of
necessity affirm with the Pelagians, that the righteousness of the faithful
is perfect in this life: and with the Cathani and Donatistes we must suffer no
infirmity in the Chirch. The other place, as we have else where seen, has a
sense utterly differing from that which they pretend. For when Paul has
instructed Timothee, and framed him to the true office of a Bishop, he says
yt he did it to this purpose, yt he should know how he ought to be have
himself in ye Chirch. And yt he should with the greater religiousnesse and
endeavor bend himself thereunto, he adds that the Chirch is the very pillar
and stay of truth. For what else do these words mean, but yt the truth of God
is preserved in ye Chirch, namely by the ministry of preaching? As in an
other place he teaches, that Christ gave Apostles, Ephesians. iiii.xi.
Pastors and Teachers, that we should no more be carried about with every wind
of doctrine, or be morked of men: but that being enlightened with the true
knowledge of the Son of God, we should altogether mete in unity of Faith.
Whereas therefore the truth is not extinguished in the world, but remains safe,
yt same comes to pass because it has the Church a faithful keeper of it, by
whoes help and ministry it is sustained. But if this keeping stands in the
ministry of the Prophets and Apostles, it follows yt it hangs wholly
herupo^, if the word of the Lord be faithfully preserved and do keep his
purity.

But that the reders may better understand, upon what point this memory what
use the Lord would have us to receive of his holy Spirit. Ioh. xvi.vii. and.
xiii.
The Spirit (says he) which I will send from my Father, shall lead you into al
truth. But how^ because (says he) he shall put you in mind of al those
things that I have told you. Therefore he gives warning that there is nothing
more to be looked for of his Spirit, but that he should enlighte^ our minds to
perceive the truth of his doctrine. Therefore Chrysostom says excellently
well. Many (says he) do boste of the holy Spirit: Sermo. de sanc, to and
adorand. Spiri. John. xii.l. and. xiiii.x
but they which speak their own do falsely prete^de that they have him. As
Christ testified that he spoke not of himself: because he spoke out of the law
and the Prophets: so if any thing beside the Gospel be thrust in under the
title of ye Spirit, let us not believe it because as Christ is the fulfilling
of the law and the Prophets: so is the Spirit, of the Gospel. These be his
words. Now it is esy to gather, how wrongfully our adversaries do, which bost
of the Holy ghost to no other end, but to set fourth under his name strange
and foreine doctrines from the word of God: whereas he will with unspeakable knott
be conioined with the word of God, and the same does Christ profess of him when
he promises him to his Chirch. So is it truly. What sobriety ye Lord has
ones prescribed to his Chirch, ye same he will have to be perpetually kept. But
he has forbidden her, yt she should not add any thing to his word, nor take
any thing from it. This is the inviolable decree of God and of the Holy ghost,
which our adversaries go about to abrogate, when they feign that the Church
is ruled of the Spirit without the word.

Ioh. xvi.xii.
which without the Scripture have been received only in use and manners. But what
shamelessenesse is this? I grant the disciples were yet rude, and in a manner
unapt to learn, when the Lord said this unto them. But were they then also
holde^ with such dullness, when they did put their doctrine in writing, yt they
afterward neded to supply with lively voice yt which they had by fault of
ignorance omitted in their writings? But if they were already led by the
Spirit of truth into al truth when they did set fourth their writings: what
hindered yt they have not therein contained and left written a perfect knowledge
of the doctrine of the Gospel? But go to: let us grant them that which they
require. Only let them point out what be those things yt it behooved to be
reveled without writing. If they dare enterprise that, I will assail them with
Augustines words: Hom. in Ioh. xcvi
that is, When the Lord has said nothing of them, which of us dare say, these
they be or those they be? or if any dare say so, whereby does he prove it? But
why do I strive about a superfluous matter? For a very child does know, that
in the writings of the Apostles, which these men do make in a manner lame and
but half perfect, there is the fruit of that revelation which the Lord did
then promise them.

Mat. xviii xvii.
when the commands him to be taken for a heathen man and a Publicane that
dare say against her? First in that place is no mention made of doctrine, but
only the authority of the censures is established for correcting of vices,
that they which have been admonished or rebuked should not resist her judgment.
But omitting this, it is much marvel, that these losels have so little shame,
that they dare be proud of that place. For what shall they get thereby, but yt
the consent of the Church is never to be despised, which never consents but
unto the truth of the word of God? The Chirch is to be heard, say they. Who
denies it? forasmuch as it pronounces nothing but out of ye word of the
Lord. If they require any more, let them know that these words of Christ do
nothing take their part therein. Neither ought I to be thought to much
contentious because I stand so earnestly upon this point, That it is not
lawful for the Church to make any new doctrine, that is, to teach and deliver
for an Oracle any more than yt which the Lord has reveled by his word. For
men of sound wit do se how great danger there is, if so great authority be
ones granted to me^. They se also how wide a wyndowe is opened to the
mockynges and cauillations of the wicked, if we say that that which men have
judged is to be taken for an Oracle among Christians. Beside that, Christ
speaking according to the consideration of his own time, gives this name to
the Sinagoge, that his disciples should afterward learn to reverence holy
assemblies of the Church. So should it come to pass yt every city and
village should have egall authority in coining of doctrines.

The examples which they use, do nothing help them. They say that Histo.
eccle. li. ^ Cap. v.
In disputations (says he) of divine matters, there is a prescribed doctrine
of the Holy ghost: the books of the Gospels and of the Apostles, with the
Oracles of the Prophets, do fully show us the meaning of God. Therefore
layeng away discord, let us take the discussinges of questions out of the
words of the Spirit. There was at that time no man that spoke against these
holy monitions. No man took exception, that the Church might add somewhat of
her own: that the Spirit reveled not all things to the Apostles, or at least
uttered them not to those that came after: or any such thing. If it be true
which our adversaries would have: first, Constantine did evil, that took
from the Church her authority: then, whereas none of the Bishops at that time
rose up to defend it, this was not without breach of their faith: for so they
were betraiers of the right of the Church. But since Theodorite reherseth that
they willingly embraced that which the Emperor said, it is certain that this
new doctrine was then utterly unknown.

andThe.ix. Chapter. Of Councels and of their authority.
NOw, although I grant them al things concerning ye Chirch: yet they shall
thereby not much prevail for their intent. For whatsoever is said of the
Chirch, the same they by and by give to the Councels, forasmuch as in their
opinion those represent the Chirch. Yea where they so stiffly contend for the
power of the Church, they do it of no other purpose, but to give all that
they can get to the Bishop of Rome and his guard. But ere I begin to discuss
this question, I must needs here make protestation of two things aforehande.
First, that where I shall in this point be somewhat roughe, it is not because I
less esteem the old Councels than I ought to do. For I reverence them from
my heart, and wish them to be had in their due honor with all men. But herein
is some mean, that is, that there be nothing withdrawn from Christ. Now this
is the right of Christ, to be the head in all Counsels, and to have no man
fellow with him in this dignity. But I say that then only he is the head, when
he governs the whole assembly with his word and Spirit. Secondly, whereas
I give less to Counsels tha^ the adversaries require, I do it not for this
cause that I am afraid of the Counsels, as though they did make for their
side, and were against ours. For as we are abundantly furnished with the word
of the Lord to the full proof of our own doctrine fully, and to the overthrow
of the whole Papistrie, that we need not much to desire any other thing beside
it: so if the matter require, the old Counsels do for a great part minister
unto us so much as may suffice for both.

Mat. xviii xx.
But the dout of the question stands not therein: but because there is a
condition added, that God will so only be in the midst of the Council, if it
be gathered together in his name. Therefore although our adversaries do a
thousand times name Counsels of Bishops, they shall little preuail: neither
shall they make us to believe that which they affirm, that is, that they be
governed of the Holy ghost, until they have proved that they are gathered
together in the name of Christ. For it is as possible yt wicked and evil
Bishops may conspire against Christ, as good and honest Bishops may come
together in his name. For a very clear proof hereof are many decrees yt have
proceeded from such Counsels. But this shall be seen hereafter. Now I do but
answer in one word, that Christ promises nothing, but to them that are
gathered to gether in his name. Let us therefore define what that is. I deny
that they be gathered together in the name of Christ, Deu. iiii ii. Reuela.
xxii.xviii.
which casting away the commandment of God, wherein he forbids any thing
to be added to his word, or taken from it, do decree every thing after their
own will: which being not contented with the Oracles of the Scripture, that is
to say the only rule of perfect wisdom, do imagine some new thing of their
owned head. Surely sith Christ has not promised that he will be present at
all Councels, but has adjoined a peculiar mark, whereby to make true and
lawful Counsels differente from other: it is mete that we should not neglect
this difference. This is the covenant, which in old time God made with the
Leuitical Priests, Malac. ii.vii.
yt they should teach out of his mouth. This he always required of the Prophets:
this law also we see to have been laid upon the Apostles. Who so break this
covenant, God does not vouchsafe, to let them have the honor of Presthode, nor
any authority. Let the adversaries undo me this knotte, if they will make my
faith bond to the decrees of men beside the word of God.

For whereas they think not yt truth remains in the Chirch, unless it be
among the Pastors: and that the Chirch it self stands not, unless it appear
in general Counsels: that is far from having ben always true, if the
Prophets have left unto us true testimonies of their own times. There was in
the time of Esaie a Chirch at Jerusalem, which God had not yet forsaken. Esa.
lvi.x
But of the pastors he says thus: The watchmen are all blind, neither know
they any thing. They are all dumme dogs, neither are they able to bark. They
lie along and sleep, and love sleping: and the Pastors themselves know
nothing, nor do understand: and they do altogether look back unto their own
ways. After the same manner Osee says: Osee. ix.viii. Hiere. vi.xiii.
The watcheman of Ephraim with God, the snare of the fouler, hatred in the
house of God. Where joining them with God by way of mockage, he teaches that
their pretense of the presthod is vain. The Church also endured unto the time
of Hieremie. Let us hear what he says of the Pastors. From the Prophet even
to the priest, Hier. xiiii ii^i.
every one follows lying. Again. The Prophets do prophecy a lie in my
name, when I have not sent them, nor commanded them. And least we should be
to long in recityng his words, let those things be red that he has written
in the whole.xxiii. and.xl. chapiters. Eze. xxii.xxv.
At that time on the other side Ezechiel did no more gently inueye against the
same men. The conspiracy (says he) of the Prophets in the mids of her as
a roaryng lion, and that violentlye takes his pray. Her prestes have broken
my law, and have defiled my holy things, and have made no difference between
holy and profane: and the rest that he adioyneth to the same effect. Like
complaints are every where in the Prophets, so that nothing is ofter found in
them.

But perhaps it might be that that was so among the Jews: but our age is
free from so great an evil. I would to God in deed it were so: but the Holy
ghost has given warnyng that it shall be far otherwise. The words of Peter
are plain. ii. Pet. ii.
As (says he) there were in the old people false Prophets, so shall there
also be among you false teachers, slyly bryngyng in sects of perdition. See
you not how he says, that there is danger to come, not by men of the common
people, but by them that shall boste themselves with the title of Teachers and
Pastors? Math. xxiiii.xi. and. xxiiii. ii. These. ii.iiii.
Moreover how often has it ben forespoken by Christ and his Apostles, that there
should very great dangers hang over the Chirch by the Pastors? Yea Paul
plainly shows, that Antichrist shall sit in no other place than in the temple
of God. Whereby he signifies, that the horrible calamity of which he there
speaks, shall come from no where else but from them that shall sit instead
of Pastors in the Chirch. And in an other place he shows, that the beginnyngs
of so great a mischief are even already nere at hand. For when he speaks to
the bishops of Ephesus. I know (says he) that after my departure there shall
enter in to you rauenyng wolves not sparing the flock. Acts. xx.xix.
And they shall be of your own selves, that shall speak perverse things, to
lead away disciples after them. How much corruption might a long course of
years bring among Pastors, when they could so far go out of kind in so
small a space of time? And, not to fill much paper with rehersyng them by
name: we are admonished by the examples in a manner of al ages, that neither the
truth is always nourished in the bosom of the pastors, nor the safety of the
Chirch does hang upon their state. They ought in deed to have been the
governors and kepers of the peace and safety of the Church, for preservation
whereof, they are ordained: but it is one thing for a man to perform that
which he ought, and an other thing to owe that which he performs not.

^acha. xii.iiii.
Neither do they most foolish me^ understand, that they sing the same song,
which those in old time did sing that warred against the word of God. For the
enemies of Hieremie did thus prepare them selves against the truth: Hie. xviii
xviii.
Come, and we will imagine imaginations against Jeremy: forasmuch as the law
shall not perish from the Priest, nor counsel from the wise man, nor the
word from the Prophet.

Hier. iiii.ix.
We hear what God says, not to one or two of them but to the whole order: The
prestes shall be astonished, and the prophets shall be made afraid. Again, The law
shall perish from the pressed, and counsel from the Elders. Eze. vii.xxvi.
Mich. iii.vi.
Again, Night shall be to you in steed of a vision, and darkness instead of
prophecieng: and the sun shall fall down upon the Prophets, and be darkened
upon these days. etc. Well: if all such had then ben gathered together in
one, what Spirit should have governed in that assembly? of that thing we have
a notable example in that Council which Achab called together. There were
present four hundred Prophets. i. Kin. xxii vi. et. xxii.
But, because they were come together of no other mind but to flatter the
wicked king: therefore Satan was sent of the Lord to be a lying spirit in the
mouth of them all. There by all their voices the truth was condemned, Micha
was condemned for an heretic, stricken and cast in prison. So was done to
Hieremie, so to the other Prophets.

But let one example suffice for all, which is more notable then the Ioh. xi,
xlvi^.
In that Council which the Bishops and Pharisees gathered at Jerusalem
against Christ, what can a man say that there wanted, in so much as pertained
to the outward show? For if there had not then ben a Chirch at Jerusalem,
Christ would never have communicate with their sacrifices and other ceremonies.
There was made a solemn summoning of them together: the hie Bishop sat as
chief* the whole order of prestes sat by him: yet Christ was there condemned,
and his doctrine driven away. This doing is a proof that the Church was not
enclosed in that Council. But there is no peril that any such thing should
happen to us. Who has given us assurance thereof? For it is not without fault
of sluggishnesse, to be to careless in so great a matter. But where the Holy
ghost does with express words prophecy by the mouth of Paul, ii. The^
ii.iii.
that there shall come a departing (which can not come but that the Pastors
must be the first that shall forsake God) why are we herin wilfully blind to
our own destruction? Wherefore it is in no wise to be granted, that the Chirch
consists in the company of Pastors, for whom the Lord has no where
undertaken that they shall perpetually be good, but he has pronounced that
they shall sometime be evil. But when he warns us of the danger, he does
it to this entente to make us the warer.

What then? will thou say: Shall the Counsels have no authority ought I to
object against thee the Synod of Nice, nor thou against me the Synod of
Ariminum, as to the intent to conclude one an other by foreiudged sentence,
neither am I bound by the authority of the one, nor thou of the other. By
authorities of Scriptures, not such as are propre to either one, but such as
are common to both, let there strive matter with matter, cause with cause, reason
with reason. So should it come to pass, that Councils should have the majesty
that they ought: but in the mean season the Scripture should be alone in the
hier place, that there might be nothing that should not be subject to the rule
thereof. So these old Synods, as of Nice, of Constantinople, the first of
Ephesus, of Chalcedon, and such other, which were holde^ for confutyng of
errors, we willyngly embrace and reverence as holy, so much as belongs to the
doctrines of faith: for they contain nothing but the pure and natural
exposition of Scripture, which the holy fathers with spiritual wisdom
applied to the subduyng of the enemies of religion that then rose up. In some
of the later Councels also, we se to appear a true zele of godliness, and
plain tokens of wit, learning, and wisdom. But as things ar wont commonly
to grow to worse, we may se by the later Counsels, how much the Chirch
has now and then degenerate from the pureness of that golden age. And I
doubt not but that in these corrupter ages also, Counsels have had some
Bishops of the better sort. But in these the same happened which the
Senators themselves complained to be not well done in making of ordinances of
the senate at Rome. For while the sentences are numbered, not weyed, it is of
necessity that oftentimes the better part is ouercom of the greater. Truly
they brought forth many wicked sentences. Neither is it here needful to
gather the special examples, either because it should be to long, or because
other have done it so diligently that there can not much be added.

stock of it? Which thing I have before sufficiently made open. Howsoever it
be, we shall no otherwise be able to discern between contrary and disagreyng
Synodes, which were many, unless we try them all by that balance of all men
and angels, that is, by the word of the Lord. So we embrace the Synod of
Chalcedon, refusyng the second Synod of Ephesus, because in this latter one
the wickedness of Eutyches was confirmed, which the other former condemned.
This thing holy me^ have judged none otherwise but by the Scripture: whom we so
follow in iudgyng: that the word of God which gave light to them does also
now give light to us. Now let the Romanistes go and boast, as they are wont,
that the Holy ghost is fastened and bound to their Counsels.

Howbeit there is also somewhat which a man may well think to be

And Leo bishop of Rome sticks not to charge with ambition and they do in
deed confess it in word: yet when they thrust unto us the determination of al
councels in every matter whatsoever it be, for an oracle of the Holy ghost, they
do therein require more than they took at the beginning. In so doing what do
they affirm, but that Councils can not err: or if they err, yet it is not
lawful for us to see the truth, or not to soothe their errors? And I intend
nothing else, but that it may thereby be gathered that the Holy ghost so
governed the godly and holy Synodes, that in the mean time he suffered somewhat
to happen to them by the nature of men, lest we should to much trust to men.
This is a much better sentence, than that of Gregory Nazianzene, that he
never saw a good end of any Council. For he that affirms that al without
exception ended ill, does not leave them much authority. It is now nothing
needful to make mention severally of provincial Counsels: forasmuch as it
is easy to judge by the general, how much authority they ought to have to make
new articles of Faith and to receive what kind of doctrine soever it
pleases them.

Ios. i.vii.
Let not (says he) the volume of this law depart from thy mouth: but thou
shall study upon it days and nights. Thou shall neither bow to ye right hand
nor to ye left: then shall you direct thy way and understand it. They therefore
shall be to us spiritual rulers which shall not bow from ye law of the Lord,
neither to the one side nor to the other. But if the doctrine of al pastors
whatsoever they be, is to be received without any douting, to what purpose was it
yt we should so often and so earnestly be admonished not to harken to the speech
of false prophets. Hear not (says he by Hieremie) the words of the prophets
yt prophecy to you. For they teach you vanity, and not out of the mouth of
the Lord. Again, Beware you of false prophets, Hic. xxiii.xvi. Mat. vii.xv. i.
John. iiii.i. Mat. xv.x.
that come unto you in shepes clothing, but inwardly are ravening wolves. And
John should in vain exhort us, that we should prove the Spirits, whether they
be of God. From which judgment the very Angels are not exe^pted, much less
Satan with all his lies. What is to be said of this saying: if the blind lead
the blind, they shall both fall into the diche? Does it not sufficiently
declare, that it is of great importance what manner of prophets be heard, and
that not all are rashely to be heard? Wherefore there is no reason that they
should make us afraid with their titles, thereby to draw us into partakyng of
their blyndnesse: forasmuch as we see on the other side, that the Lord had
a singular care to fray us away from suffering our selves to be led with other
men's error, under what visor of name soever it lurketh. For if the answer of
Christ be true, then al blind guides, whether they be called fathers of ye
Chirch, or prelates, or bishops, can do nothing but draw their partners into
the same headlong downfall. Wherefore let no names of Councels, Pastors,
Bishops, (which may as well be falsely pretended as truly used) hinder us, but
that being taught by lessons both of words and examples, we may examine all
spirits of all men by the rule of the word of God, that we may prove whether
they be of God or no.

Forasmuch as we have proved that there is not given to the Chirch i. Cor
iii.xiiii.xxix.
the Chirches should first mete together, and examine the question propounded,
at last, after just discussing had, bring forth a determination taken out of
the Scripture, such as may both take away doutyng out of the people, and
stop the mouths of wicked and gredy men, that they may not be so hardy to
proceed any further. So when Arrius was risen, the Nicene Synod was gathered
together, which with the authority thereof both did break the wicked
endeavors of the ungodly man, and restored peace to the Chirches, which he had
vexed, and defended the eternal godhead of Christ, against his blasphemous
doctrine. When afterward Eunonius and Macedonius stirred up new troubles, their
madness was resisted with like remedy by the Synod of Constantinople. In the
Counsel at Ephesus the wickedness of Nestorius was banished. Finally this has been from the beginning the ordinary mean in the Chirch to preserve unity, so
often as Satan began to work any thing. But let us remember, that not in all
ages or in all places are found Athanasies, Basiles, Cyrilles, and such
defenders of true doctrine whom the Lord then raised up. But let us think
what happened at Ephesus in the second Synod, where the heresy of Eutyches
prevailed, the man of holy memory Flauianus was banished with certain other
godly men, and many such mischeues committed: even because Dioscorus a
seditious man and of a very naghtye nature, was there the chief, and not the
Spirit of the Lord. But there was not the Church. I grant. For this I
determine utterly that the truth does not therefore die in the Church,
although it be oppressed of one Council: but that the Lord meruailously
preserves it, that it may again in due time rise up, and get the ouerhande.
But I deny that this is perpetual, that that is a true and certain
exposition of Scripture which has been received by consentes of a Counsel.

But the Romanists shoot at an other mark, when they teach that the power to
expound the Scripture belongs to the Councels, yea and that without
appellation from them. For they abuse this color, to call it an exposition of
the Scripture what soever is decreed in the Councels. Of purgatory, of the
intercession of Saints, of auricular confession, and such other, there can
not be found one syllable in the Scriptures. But because all these things
have been stablished by the authority of the Chirch, that is to say (to speak
truly) received in opinion and use, therefore every one of them must be taken
for an exposition of Scripture. And not that only: But if a Council decree any
thing, though Scripture cry out against it, yet it shall bear the name of an
exposition thereof. Christ commands all to drink of the Cup, Mat. xxvi
xxvi.
which he reaches in the Supper. The Council of Constance forbade, that it
should not be given to the lay people, but willed that the priest only
should drink of it. That which so directly fights against the institution
of Christ, they will have to be taken for an exposition of it. Paul calls
the forbiddyng of marriage, i. Timo. iiii i. Heb. xiii.iiii.
the hypocrisy of deuels: and the Holy ghost in an other place pronounces,
that marriage is in all men holy and honorable. Where as they have afterward
forbidden prestes to marry, they require to have that taken for the true and
natural exposition of the Scripture, when nothing can be imagined more against
it: If any dare ones open his mouth to the contrary, he shall be judged an
heretic: because the determination of the Church is without appellation: and
to doubt of her exposition, that it is not true, is a heinous offense. Why
should I inueye against so great shamelessnesses? For the very showing of it is
an ouercomyng of it. As for that which they teach of the power to allow the
Scripture. I wittingly pass it over. For in such sort to make the Oracles of
God subject to the judgment of men, that they should therefore be of force
because they have pleased men, is a blasphemy unworthy to be rehearsed: and I
have before touched the same matter already. Yet I will ask them one thing: If
the authority of the Scripture be founded upon the allowance of the Church,
what Councels decree will they allege of that matter? I think they have none.
Why then did Arrius suffer himself to be overcome at Nice with testimonies
brought out of the Gospel of John? For after these men's saying, it was free
for him to have refused them, forasmuch as there had no allowance of a
general Council gone before. They allege the old roll, which is called
the Canon, which they say to have proceeded from the judgment of the Church.
But I ask them again, in what Council that Canon was set forth. Here they
must needs be dumme. Howbeit I desire further to know, what manner of canon
they think that was. For I se that the same was not very certainly agreed
among the old writers. And if that which Hierome says ought to be of force,
the books of Machabees, Tobie, Ecclesiasticus and such other shall be thrust
among the Apocrypha: which those Canons do in no wise suffer to be done.

The.x. Chapter. Of the power in making of laws: wherein the Pope and his have
used a most cruel tyranny and butcherie upon souls.
NOw follows the second part, which they will have to consist in making of
laws, out of which spring have flowed innumerable traditions of men, even so
many snares to strangle poor souls. For they have had no more conscience,
than had the Scribes and Pharisees, Mat. xxiii vi.
to lay burdens upon other men's sholders, which they themselves would not
touch with one finger. I have in an other place taught how cruel a butcherie
is that which they commau^de concerning auricular confession. In other laws
there appears not so great violence: but those which seem the most tolerable
of all, do tyrannously oppress consciences. I leave unspoken how they corrupt
ye worship of God, and do spoil God himself of his right, which is the only
lawmaker. This power is now to be entreated of, whether the Chirch may bind
consciences with her laws. In which discourse the order of policy is not
touched, but this only is intended, yt God be rightly worshipped according to
the rule which himself has prescribed, and yt the spiritual liberty, which
has regard unto God, may remain safe unto us. Use has made yt al those
decrees be called traditions of men, whatsouer they be yt have concerning the
worship of God proceeded from men beside his word. Against these do we strive,
not against the holy and profitable ordinances of ye Chirch which make for ye
preservation either of discipline or honesty or peace. But ye end of our
striving is, that ye immeasurable and barbarous Empire may be restrained, which
they usurp upon souls, that would be co^pted pastors of the Chirch, but in
very deed are most cruel butchers. For they say that the laws which they make
are spiritual, and perteining to the soul, and they affirm them to be
necessary to eternal life. But so (as I even now touched) the kingdom of
Christ is invaded, so the liberty by him given to the consciences of the
faithful is utterly oppressed and thrown abroad. I speak not now with how
great ungodliness they stablish the observing of their laws, while out of it
they teach men to seek both forgiveness of sins, and righteousness, and
salvation, while they set in it the whole sum of religion and godliness.
This one thing I earnestly hold, yt there ought no necessity to be laid upon
consciences in those things wherein they are made free by Christ, and unless
they be made free, as we have before taught, they ca^ not rest with God. They
must acknowledge one only king Christ their deliverer, and be governed by one
law of liberty, even ye holy word of ye Gospel, if they will keep still the
grace which they have ones obtained in Christ: they must be holden with no
bondage, and bound with no bonds.

These Solons do in deed feign that their constitutions are laws of great
warenesse Paul did deal in this behalf, i. Cor. vii.xxv.
that he durst not so much as in any one thing lay upon men any snare at al*
and that not without cause. Truly he foresaw with how great a wound
consciences should be stricken, if they should be charged with a necessity of
those things whereof the Lord had left them liberty. On ye other side y^
constitutions are almost innumerable, which these me^ have most grievously
stablished with thretening of eternal death, which they most severely require
as necessary to salvation. And among those there are many most hard to be
kept, but al of them (if ye whole multitude of them be laid together) are
impossible: so great is the heap. How the^ shall it be possible, yt they upon
who^ so great a weight of difficulty lies, should not be vexed in perplexity
with extreme anguish and terror? Therefore my purpose is here to impugn such
co^stitutions, as tend to this end, inwardly to bind souls before God, and
charge them with a religion, as though they taught them of things necessary
to salvation.

This question does therefore enco^ber ye most part of me^, because they To.
xiii.i.
but for consciences sake. Whereupon follows, ye consciences are also bound with
the politic laws. But if it were so, the^ al should fall that we have spoken
in ye last chap. and entende now to speak concerning the spiritual
government. For ye loosing of this knot, first it is good to learn what is
Conscience. The definition is to be gathered of ye proper deriuatio^ of ye
word. For, as when me^ do with mind and understanding conceive the knowledge of
things, they are thereby said scire to know, whereupon is derived ye name of
science knowledge: so when they have a feling of Gods judgment as a witness
adioined with them, which does not suffer them to hide their si^nes, but yt they
be brought accused to ye judgment seat of God, ye same feling is called
Conscience. For it is a certain mean between God and man: because it suffers
not man to suppress that which he knows, but pursues him so far til it
bring him to giltinesse. This is it yt Paul means when he teaches yt
Conscience does together witness with me^, To. ii.xv.
when their thoughts do accuse or acquit them in the judgment of God. A
simple knowledge might remain in man as enclosed. Therefore this feling which
presents man to ye judgment of God, is as it were a keeper joined to man, to
mark and watch al his secrets, yt nothing should remain buried in
darkness. Whereupon also comes ye old proverb, Conscience is a thousand
witnesses. i. Pet. iii.xxi.
For ye same reso^ also Peter has set the examination of a good conscience,
for quietness of mind, when we being persuaded of the grace of Christ, do
without fear present our selves to God. Heb. x.ii.
And the author of the Epistle to ye Hebrews, uses these words, to have no
more conscience of sin, instead of to be delivered or acquitted, that sin
may no more accuse us.

ii. Tim. i.v.
out of a pure conscience, and Faith not feigned. Afterward also in the same
chap* he shows, how much it differs from understanding, saying that some
had suffered shipwreck from the faith, because they had forsaken good
Conscience. For in these words he signifies, yt it is a lively affection to
worship God, and a sincere desire to live Godlily and holily. Sometime in deed
it is referred also to men, as in Luke, when ye same Paul testifies, Act.
xxiiii xvi.
yt he endeavored himself yt he might walk with a good conscience toward God
and men. But this was therefore said, because the fruits of good conscience do
flow, and come even to me^. But in speaking properly, it has respect to God
only, as I have already said. Hereupon comes yt a law is said to bind
conscience, which simply binds a man, without regard of me^, or not having
any consideration of them. As for example. God commands not only to keep the
mind chaste and pure from al lust, but also forbids al manner of filthiness
of words and outward wanto^nesse whatsoever it be. To ye keeping of this law
my conscience is subject, although there lived not one man in the world. So he
that beha^^th himself inte^perantly, does not only sin in this yt he gives
(...) example to his brethren, but he has his conscience bound with
giltinesse before God. In things yt are of themselves mean, there is an other
consideration. For we ought to abstain from them, if they bread any offe^se,
i. Cori. x.xxviii.
but ye conscience still being free. So Paul speaks of flesh consecrate to
idols. If any (says he) make dout, touch it not, for consciences sake: I say
for conscience, not thine own, but ye others. A faithful man should sin, which
being first warned should nevertheless eat of such flesh. But howsoever in
respect of his brother, it be necessary for him to abstain, as it is
prescribed of God, yet he cesseth not to keep still ye liberty of conscience.
We see how this law bynding the outward work, leaves the conscience unbound.

Now let us return to ye laws of me^. If they be made to this end, to To.
xiii.i
yt magistrates are to be honored because they are ordained of god. In ye mean
time he teaches not yt those laws yt are prescribed by the^, do belong to ye
inward government of the soul: whereas he each where extolleth both ye
worshipping of God and the spiritual rule of liui^g righteously, above al ye
ordinances of me^ whatsoever they be. In other thing also is worthy to be
noted, (which yet ha^geth upon the former) that the laws of men, whether they
be made by the magistrate or by the Chirch, although they be necessary to be
kept, (I speak of the good and righteous laws) yet therefore do not by
themselves bind conscience, because the whole necessity of keeping them is
referred to ye general end, but consists not in the things commanded. From
this sort do far differ both those yt prescribe a new form of ye worshipping
of God, and those yt appoint necessity in things yt be at liberty.



Iam. iiii.xii.
the^, to declare that he requires of us nothing more than obedience. For this
reason James says: he yt judges his brother judges the law: he that judges
the law, is not an obseruer of the law, but a judge. But there is one only
lawmaker, that can both save and destroy. We hear yt God does claim this one
thing as proper to himself, to rule us with the government and laws of his
word. And the same thing was spoken before of Esaias, Esa^e. xxxiii.xxii.
although somewhat more darkly: the Lord is our king, the lord is our lawmaker,
the Lord is our judge, he shall save us. Truly in both these places is showed,
that he that has power over the soul, has the judgment of life and death.
Yea James pronounces this plainly. Now, no man can take that upon him.
Therefore God must be acknowleged to be the only king of souls, to whom alone
belongs the power to save and destroy, as those words of Esaye express, and
to be the king, and judge, and lawmaker and Savior. Therefore Peter, when he
admonishes the Pastors of their duty, exhorts them so to feed the flock,
not as using a Lordship over the Clergy, by which word Clergy he signifies
the inheritance of God, i. Pe. v.ii
yt is to say the faithful people. This if we rightly weye, that it is not
lawful, that that should be transferred to man, which God makes his own
only: we shall understand that so all the power is cut of whatsoever it be that
they challenge, which advance themselves to command any thing in the Church
without the word of God.

Now, forasmuch as the whole cause hangs thereupon, that if God Col. i.vi.i
The first of these reasons Paul in ye Epistle to ye Colossians uses in
contending against the false Apostles yt attempted to oppress ye Chirches with
new burde^s. The second reason he more uses with the Galatia^s in ye like case.
This therefore he trauaileth to prove in ye Epistle to the Colossia^s, yt the
doctrine concerning the true worshipping of God is not to be sought at men's
hands: because the Lord has faithfully and fully instructed us how he ought to
be worshipped. To prove ye same in the first chap. he says yt in the Gospel is
contained al wisdom, whereby the man of God may be made perfect in Christ. In
ye beginning of the ii. chap. he says, yt all the treasures of wisdom and
understanding are hidden in Christ. Thereupon he afterward concludes let ye
faithful beware yt they be not by vain Philosophy led from the flock of
Christ, according to the constitutions of me^. But in the end of the chapter,
he does yet with greater boldness condemn al Ethelothreskias, yt is to say al
fained worshippings, which me^ devise to themselves, or receive of other, and
whatsoe^er precepts they dare of themselves give co^cerni^g ye worshippi^g of
god. We have therefore, yt al those ordinances are wicked, in observing whereof
the worshipping of God is fained to be. As for ye places in ye Galatians wherwt
he earnestly affirms ye consciences, which ought to be ruled of God only,
ought not to be enta^gled with snares, they are open enough, specially in the.v.
Chap. Therefore let it be sufficient to have but noted the^.

Col. ii.xx. (...). v.i.
Again it is not unknown, with how precise necessity they bind consciences to
keep whatsoever they command. Here when we cry out to ye contrary, we have al
one cause with Paul, which in no wise suffers faithful consciences to be
brought into bondage of men.

tha^ never to have conceived a true prayer in their heart? What is to make
void the commandment of God for the traditions of men, if this be not: when
commending the keeping of Gods commandments but coldly and as it were lightly
by the way, they do no less earnestly and busily exact ye obeying of their
own, than if they contained in them the whole pith of godliness* when
revenging ye transgressing of Gods law, with light penalties of satisfactions,
they punish the very least offense of one of their own decrees with no less
peine than with prisonmente, banishmente, fire or swerd? Being not so sharp
and hard to entreat against the despisers of God, they persecute the
despisers of themselves with unappeasable hatred to the extremity: and do so
instruct all those, whoes simplicity they hold captive, yt they would with
more contented mind se ye whole law of God overthrown, than one small title
(as they call it) in the commandments of the Church to be broken. First in
this point is grievous offense committed, that for small matters, and such as (if
it should be tried by Gods judgment) are at liberty, one man despises,
judges and casts away an other. But now, as though yt were not evil enough,
Ga. iiii.ix
those trifling elements of the world (as Paul calls them in his writing to
the Galatians) are weyed of more value tha^ the heavenly Oracles of God. And he
that is in a manner acquitted in adultery, is judged in meat: he that has
leave to use a harlot, is forbidden to have a wife. This profit verily is
gotten by that transgressing obedience, which is so much turned from God as it
declineth to men.

There be also other twoe not scle^der faults, which we disallow in the Colos.
ii.xxiii.
that it thinks the Chirch to be utterly deformed when they be taken away.
But this is it that Paul writes of, to have a resemblance of wisdom in
counterfeit, worshipping, in humility, and in this that they think that with
their sharpness they be able to tame their flesh. This is truly a most
wholesome admonition, such as ought never to slip away from us. Men's
traditions (says he) do deceive under the show of wisdom. whense have they
this color? because they are fained of men, therefore the wit of man does
therein acknowe his own, and acknowing it does more gladly embrace it, than
any thing were it never so good, that less agreed with his vanity. Again,
they have hereby an other commendatio^, because they seem to be fit
introductio^s to humility, for yt with their yoke they hold the minds of men
pressed down to the ground. Last of al, because they seem to tend to this end
to restrain the deintinesse of the flesh, and to subdue it with rigor of
abstine^ce, therefore they are thought to be wisely devised. But what says Paul
to these things? does he not shake of those visors, least ye simple should be
deceived with false prete^se? Because he judged this enough for confutation of
them, that he had said that they were the inventions of men, he passes over al
these things without confutation, as though he esteemed them for nothing. Yea,
because he knew that all feigned worshippinges in the Church were condemned,
and are so much more suspicious to the faithful as they more delight the wit of
man: because he knew that that fained image of outward humility does so
much differ from true humility, as it might easily be discerned: finally
because he knew that that childish introduction was no more esteemed than an
exercise of the body: therefore he willed that the very same things should be to
the faithful instead of a co^futation of men's traditions, by favor of which
they were commended among the ignorant.



Ad Ian. Episto. cxix.
Augustine complained that in his time, the commandments of God neglected,
al things were full of so many presumptions, that he was more grievously rebuked
that in his vtas had touched the ground with bare foot, tha^ he yt had buried
his wit with dronke^nesse. He complained that the Church, which the mercy of
God willed to be free, was so burdened, that the state of the Jews was much
more tolerable. If that holy man had happened to live in our age, with what
complaints would he have bewailed the bondage that now is? For both the number
is ten times greater, and every small tittle is a hundred times more rigerously
looked unto, than at that time. So is wont to be done: when these perverse
lawmakers have gotten the dominion, they make no end of bidding and
forbidding, til they come to extreme peevishness. Which thing Paul has also
very well declared in these words: If ye be dead to the world, Coloss. ii.xx.
why are ye holden as though ye were living, with traditions, as eat not,
taste not, handle not? For where as the Greek word aptesthai, signifies
both to eat and to touch, doutlesse in this place it is taken in the first
of these two significatio^s, least there should be a superfluous repetition.
Therefore he does here excellently well describe the procedynges of the false
Apostles. They begin at superstition, so that they do not only forbid to
eat, but also even sclenderly to chawe: when they have obtained this, they
then also forbid to taste. When this is also granted them, they reckon it not
lawful so much as to touch with a finger.

This tyranny in the ordinances of men we do at this day worthily Episto.
Cxviii. ad Ianuar.
with Sacraments very few in number, most excellent in signification, most
easy in obseruyng. How far the multitude and diversity of vsages wherewith
at this day we see the Church to be entangled, does differ from this
simplicity, it can not be sufficiently declared. I know with what crafty
shifte some subtle men do excuse this perverseness. They say that among us
there are many as rude as they were in the people of Israel: that such
introduction was ordained for their sakes, which although the stronger may
well want, yet they ought not to neglecte it, forasmuch as they see it to be
profitable for the weak brethren. I answer, that we are not ignorant, what we
owe to the weakness of our brethren: but on the other side we take exception
and say, that this is not the way whereby the weak may be provided for, that
they should be overwhelmed with great heaps of Ceremonies. The Lord did not in
vain put this difference between us and the old people, that his will was to
instruct them like children with signs and figures, but us more simply without
such outward furniture. As (says Paul) a child is ruled of his
scholemaister, Gal. iiii.i.
and kept under custody, according to the capacity of his age: so the Jews
are kept under the law. But we are like unto full grown men, which being
set at liberty from tutorshyp and government, have no more need of childishe
introductions. Truly the Lord did foresee what manner of common people there
should be in his Church, and how they should be ruled. Yet he did in this
manner as we have said, make difference between us and the Jews. Therefore it is
a foolish way, if we will provide for the ignorant, in raising up Iewishenesse
which is abrogate by Christ: Christ also touched in his own words this
difference of the old and new people, when he said to the woman of Samaria,
that the time was come wherein the true worshippers should worship God in
Spirit and truth. This verily had always ben don: but the new worshippers
differed from the old in this point, that under Moses the spiritual worshippyng
of God was shadowed and in a manner enta^gled with many Ceremonies, which being
abolished, he is now more simply worshipped. Therefore they that confound this
difference, do overthrow the order institute and stablished by Christ. Shall
there then (will thou say) no Ceremonies be given to the ruder sort to help
their unskillfulness? I say not so: for I verily think that this kind of
help is profitable for them. I do here travail only that such a mean may
be used, as may brightly set out Christ, and not darken him. Therefore there
are given us of God few Ceremonies, and those not laborsome, that they should
show Christ being present. The Jews had more given them, that they should be
images of him being absent. Absent I say he was, not in power, but in manner of
signifying. Therefore, that mean may be kept, it is necessary to keep that
fewness in number, easiness in observing, and dignity in signifieng, which
also consists in clerenesse. What need I to say that this has not ben done?
For the thing it self is in all men's eyes.

Hier. vii.xxii. Esa. lv.ii and. xxix.xiii
that whatsoever co^me^dation works have in them, they have it in respect of ye
obedience, which only the Lord does look upon, as he testifies by ye Prophet:
I gave not commandment of sacrifices and burnt offringes, but only yt ye
should with hearing, hear my voice. But of fained works he speaks in an other
place, saying: Ye weye your silver and not in bred, Again, they worship me in
vain with the precepts of men. Mat. xv.ix.
This therefore they can by no ways excuse, that they suffer the silly people
to seek in those outward trifles ye righteousness whereby they may stand
against God, and uphold themselves before the heavenly judgment seat.
Moreover, is not this a fault worthy to be inueyed against, that they show
forth Ceremonies not understood as it were a stage play, or a magical
enchau^tment* For it is certain that al Ceremonies are corrupt and hurtful,
unless men be by them directed to Christ. But the Ceremonies that are used
under the papacy, are severed from doctrine, that they may the more hold men
in signs without all signification. Finally (such a conning craftesman is the
belly) it appears that many of them have been invented by covetous sacrificing
prestes, to be snares to catch money. But what beginning soever they have,
they are all so given forth in common for filthy gain, that we must needs cut
of a great part of them, if we will bring to pass that there be not a
profane market, and full of sacrilege used in the Chirch.

Although I seem not to teach a continual doctrine concerning the Esa.
xx^^.xiii.
which despisyng so many warnyngs of God, do wilfully wrap them selves in
those deadly snares. But if, setting aside circumstances, you will have simply
showed what be the men's traditions of al ages, which it is mete to be rejected
of the Church, and to be disalowed of all the godly, that same shall be a sure
and plain definition which we have above set: that all laws without the
word of God are made by men to this end, either to prescribe a manner of
worshippyng God, or to bind consciences with religion, as though they gave
commandment of things necessary to salvation. If to the one or both of these
there be adjoined other faults; as, that with their multitude they darken the
brightness of the Gospel: that they nothing edify, but be rather
unprofitable and trifling occupations than true exercises of godliness^: that
they be laid abroad to filthiness and dishonest game: that they be to hard to
be kept: that they be defiled with euel superstitions: these shall be helyes
that we may the more easily find how much evil is in them.

I hear what they answer for them selves, that their traditions are Acts.
xv.xx. and. xxix.
when being assembled in one Council, they did by the decree of the Council
command the Gentiles to abstain from things offered to idols, from blood and
strangled. We have already in an other place declared, how falsely for boastyng
of themselves they lyingly usurp the title of the Church. So much as
concerning this present cause: if, pluckyng away all visors and deceitful
colors, we truly look upon that which we ought principally to care for, and
which chefely is for our behofe, that is, what manner of Chirch Christ will
have, that we may fashion and frame our selves to the rule thereof: it shall
easily be evident unto us, that it is not the Chirch, which passing the bounds
of the word of God, does outrage and run as riot in making of new laws.
For does not that law which was ones prescribed to the Church, Deuteronomy.
^^^.xxxii. Pro. xx^.vi.
remain eternal? What I command thee, that thou shalt keep that thou
may do it. Thou shalt not add any thing, nor take any thing from it. And
in an other place: Add not to the word of the Lord, nor minishe any thing:
least he peradventure reprove thee, and thou be found a liar. Sith they can
not deny that this was spoken to the Chirch, what do they else but report the
stubbornness of that Church, which they boast to have been so bold as after
such prohibitions nevertheless to add and myngle of her own with the
doctrine of God? But God forbid that we should assent to their lies, whereby
they burden the Chirch with so great a sclaunder: but let us understand, that
the name of the Chirch is falsely pretended, so often as this lust of men's
rashness is spoken of, which can not hold it self within the prescribed
bounds of God, but that it wyldly rangeth and runs out into her own
inventions. There is nothing entangled, nothing dark, nothing doutefull in
these words, in which the whole Church is forbidden to add to the word of
God, or to take any thing from it, when the worshippyng of God, and precepts
concerning salvation, are entreated of. But this (say they) was spoken of the
law only, after which followed the prophecies and the whole ministratio^ of the
Gospel. I grant in deed: and I add also, which are rather fulfillyngs of
the law, than additions or diminyshynges. But if the Lord suffered nothing to
be added to or taken from the ministry of Moses, which was (as I may so term
it) dark by reason of many doutefull enwrappyngs, till by his servants the
Prophets, and at length by his beloved Son, he ministered a cleerer doctrine:
why should we not think it much more severely forbidden us, that we should
add nothing to the law, the Prophets, the Psalms, and the Gospel? The
Lord is not gone out of kind from himself, which has long ago declared,
that he is with nothing so hyely offended, as when he is worshipped with the
inventions of men? Whereof came those notable sayings in the Prophets, which
ought to have continually sounded in our ears: I spoke no words to your
fathers, Hier. vii, xxii:
in the day that I brought them out of Egypt, concerning sacrifice and burnt
offryng. But this word I commanded them, saying: With hearing hear my voice:
and I will be your God, Hier: xi. i: Samu. xv.xxii.
and you shall be my people, and ye shall walk in all the way that I shall
command you. Again, I have with protesting protested unto your fathers,
Hear my voice. And other like sayengs: but this is notable above the rest.
Will God have burnt offrynges and sacrifices, and not rather that his voice be
obeyed? For obedience is better than sacrifice, and to hearken is better than
to offer the satte of rams. For, to resyst is as the sin of soothsayeng:
and not to obey is as the wickedness of Idolatry. Therefore whatsoever
inventions of men are in this behalf defended with the authority of the
Church, forasmuch as the same can not be excused from the crime of
ungodliness, it is easy to prove that it is falsely imputed to the Chirch.

to cry out of the authority of the Church, and in the mean time
dissemblyngly to hyde both what is commanded her by the Lord, and what
obedience she owes to the commandment of the Lord. But if we have a mind,
as it is mete we should have, to agree with the Chirch, this perteyneth rather
to the purpose, to have an eye unto and remember what is commanded by the Lord
both to us and the Chirch, that we should with one agreement obey him. For
there is no doubt but we shall very well agree with the Chirch, if we do in
all things show our selves obedient to the Lord. But now to father upon the
Apostles, the original of the traditions wherewith the Chirch has been hitherto
oppressed, was a point of mere deceit: forasmuch as the doctrine of the
Apostles trauaileth wholly to this end, that consciences should not be butdened
with new observations, nor the woorshippyng of God be defiled with our
inventions. Moreover if there be any faithfulness in histories and ancient
monumentes, the Apostles not only never knew, but also never heard of this that
they attribute unto them. Neither let them prate, that the most part of their
decrees were received in use and in men's behauiours, which never were put in
writing: even those things forsothe, which, while Christ was yet living, they
could not understand, after his ascendyng they learned by the revelation of
the Holy ghost. Of the exposition of that place we have else where already seen.
So much as is sufficient for this present cause: truly they make themselves
worthy to be laughed at, while they feign that those great mysteries, which so
long time were unknown to the Apostles, were partly observations either
Iewishe or Gentile (of which all the one sort had been long before publyshed
among the Jews, and all the other sort among the Gentiles) and partly foolysh
gesturynges and vain pety Ceremonies, which foolish sacrificyng prestes,
that can neither skill of swimmyng nor of letters, use to do very trimly: yea
such as children and fools do so aptely counterfaite that it may sent that
there be no fitter ministers of such holy mysteries. If there were no
histories at all: yet men that have their sound wit might consider by the
thing it self, that so great a heap of Ceremonies and observations did not
suddenly brust into ye Chirch, but by little and little crept in. For when those
holyer Bishops, which were next in time to the Apostles, had ordained some
things that belonged to order and discipline, afterward there followed men,
some after other, no discrete enoughe, and to curious and gredy: of which the
later that every one was, so he more striued with his predecessoures in
foolyshe envious counterfaytyng, not to give place in inuentyng of new
things. And because there was peril least their deuyses would shortly grow
out of use, by which they coueted to get praise among their posterity,
they were much more rygorous in exact calling upon the keeping of them. This
wrongful zeal has bredde us a great part of these Ceremonies which they
set out unto us for Apostolic. And this also the histories do testify.

Least in making a register of them we should be to tedious, we will to be
disallowed. But afterward there came those foolish counterfaiters, which with
now and then patchyng of pieces together, have made us this apparel of the pressed
which we se in the Mass, those ornaments of the altar, those gesturynges,
and the whole furniture of unprofitable things. But they object, that this in
old time was the persuasion, that those things which were with one consent
done in the universal Chirch, came from the Apostles themselves, whereof they
cite Augustine for witness. But I will bring a solution from no other where
than out of the words of Augustine himself. Those things (says he) that are
kept in the whole world, Episto. cxviii.
we may understand to have been ordained either of the Apostles themselves, or
of the general Counsels, whoes authority is most healthful in the Church:
as, that the Lords passion, and resurrection, and his ascendyng into heaven,
and the coming of the Holy ghost, are celebrate with yearly solemnity: and
whatsoever like thing be found, that is kept of the whole Chirch, which
way soever it be spread abroad. When he reckneth up so few examples, who
does not se that he meant to impute to authors worthy of credit and
reverence, the observations that then were used, even none but those simple,
rare, and sobre ones, with which it was profitable that the order of the Chirch
should be kept together? But how far does this differ from that which the
Romish masters would enforce men to grant, that there is no pety Ceremony
among them that ought not to be judged Apostolic.

Episto. cxviii. ad ^anu.
For, that which Augustine says, that certain Chirches in his time did
shun that solemn following of Christ's example in washyng of feet, least
that usage should seem to pertayne to Baptism, secretly shows that there
was then no kind of washyng that had any likeness with Baptism. Whatsoever
it be, I will not grant that this proceeded from an Apostolic Spirit, that
Baptism, when it is with a daily sign brought into remembrance, should after
a certain manner be repeted. And I pass not upon this, that the self same
Augustine in an other place ascribes other things also to the Apostles. For
sith he has nothing but conjectures, judgment ought not upon them to be
given of so great a matter. Finally admytte that we grant them also, that
those things which he rehearses came from the time of the Apostles. Yet there
is great difference between institutyng sum exercise of Godliness, which
the Faithful with a free conscience may use, or if the use of it shall not be
profitable for them, they may forbear it: and making a law that may snare
consciences with bondage. But now, from what author soever they proceeded, sith
we see that they are slidden into so great abuse, nothing withstandeth, but
that we may without offense of him abolish them: forasmuch as they were never
so commended, that they must be perpetually immouable,

Neither does it much help them, that to excuse their tyranny they

Like as if the faithful Pastors which govern Chirches not yet well that ye
offend not a weak brother. Ye can not eat things offered to images, strangled
and blood, but that the weak brethren shall be offended. Therefore we command
you in the word of the Lord; that ye eat not with offense. And that the
Apostles had respect to the same thing, Paul himself is a very good witness,
which writes thus, verily none otherwise than according to the meaning of the
Council: Concerning meats that are offered to Idols, we know that the Idol is
nothing. But some with conscience of the Idol, do eat it as offered to Idols,
and their conscience, forasmuch as it is weak, is defiled. i. Corin. xiii.^
See that your liberty be not made an offense to the weak. He that shall have
well weyed these things, shall not afterward be deceived with such a false
color as they make, that pretend the Apostles for defense on their tyranny,
as though the Apostles had begone with their decree to break the liberty of
the Church. But, that they may not be able to escape, but be driven even with
their own confession to allow this solution, let them answer me, by what
right they were so bold to abrogate the same decree. Because there was no more
peril of those offenses and dissencions, which the Apostles meant to provide
for, and they know that the law was to be weyed by the end thereof. Forasmuch
as therefore this law was made in respect of charity, there is nothing
prescribed in it, but so much as pertains to charity. When they confess
that the transgressyng of this law is nothing but a breakyng of charity, do
they not therwithall acknowledge, that it is not a forged addition to the law of
God, but a natural and simple appliance to the times and manners whereunto it
was directed?

Esa. xxix.xiii.
For wisdom shall perish from the wise men thereof, and understanding shall
depart from the elders. In an other place, Mat. xv.ix.
They worship me in vain teaching doctrines, the co^mau^dements of me^. And
truly whereas the children of Israel defiled themselves with many idolatries,
the cause of all that evil is ascribed to this unclean mixture, that
transgressing the commandments of God, they have forged new worshippinges.
And therefore the holy History rehearses that the new strangers that had been
transpla^ted by the king of Babilo^ to inhabit Samaria, were torn in pieces and
consumed of wild beasts, because they knew not the judgments or statutes of
the God of that land. Although they had nothing offended in the Ceremonies,
yet God would not have allowed a vain pomp: but in the mean time he cessed
not to take vengeance of the defyling of his worship, for that me^ did thrust
in devises strange from his word. Whereupon it is afterward said, yt they
being made afraid with that punishmente, received ye Ceremonies prescribed in
the law: but because they did not yet purely worship the true God, it is twice
repeted that they did fear him and did not fear him. Whereupon we gather, that
the part of reverence which is given to him, consists in this, while in
worshipping him we simply follow what he commands with mingling none of our
own inventions. And therefore the godly kings are oftentimes praised, ii. Ki.
xxiii
because they did according to all the commandments, and declined not to the
right hand nor to the left. I go yet further: although in some feigned
worshipping there do not openly appear ungodliness, yet it is severely
condemned of the Holy ghost, so so^e as men depart from the commandment of
God. ii. King. xvi.x.
The Altar of Achaz, the pattern whereof was brought out of Samaria, might
have seemed to increase the garnishment of the temple, whereas his devise was to
offer Sacrifices thereupon to God only, which he should do more honorably than
upon the first and old Altar: yet we see how the Spirit detesteth ye
boldness, for none other cause but for yt the inventions of me^ in the
worshipping of God are unclean corruptions. And how much more clearly the will
of God is opened unto us, so much the less excusable is our frowardness to
attempt any thing. And therefore worthily with this circumstance the crime of
Manasses is enforced, ii. Ki. xxi.iii.
for that he bilded a new altar in Jerusalem, of which God had pronounced I will
there set my name, because ye authority of God is now as it were of set
purpose refused.

Many do marvel why God so sharply threteneth y^ he will do things
ethelothreskian that is, Colos. ^i.iiii.
Wilworship inverted of me^ beside ye doctrine of God. This is verily true.
both our own wisdom, and al men's wisdom must be foolish unto us, yt we may
suffer him alone to be wise. Which way they keep not which do study with pety
observations feigned by the will of men to commend themselves unto him, and do
thrust unto him as it were against his will a transgressing obedience toward
him, which is in deed given to me^. As it has been done both in many ages
heretofore, and in the time within our own remembrance, and is also at this
day done in those places where the authority of the creature is more esteemed
tha^ of the creator: where religion (if yet the same be worthy to be called
religion) (...) defiled with more and more unsavory superstitions, than ever
was any Paynime wickedness. For what could the wit of men bread but al
things carnal and foolish and such as truly resemble their authors?

i. Samu. vii.xvii.
and although the same was done beside the law, yet it pleased God: the
solution is easy, that it was not a certain second altar to set against the
one only altar: but because the place was not yet appointed for the arc of
covenant, he appointed ye town where he dwelled for Sacrifices, as the most
convenient place. Truly the mind of the holy Prophet was not to make any
innovation in holy things, whereas God had so straightly forbidden any thing
to be added or minished. As for the example of Menoha, I say that it was an
extraordinary and singular case. (...). xiii.xix.
He being a private man offered sacrifice to God and not without the allowa^ce
of God: verily because he enterprised it not of a rash motion of his own mind,
but by a heavenly instinction. But how much the Lord abhors those things
that men devise of themselves to worship him withal, an other not inferior to
Gedeon is a notable example, Iud. viii.xxvii.
whoes Ephod turned to destruction not only to him and his family, but to the
whole people. Finally every new found invention, wherewith me^ covet to
worship God, is nothing else but a defiling of true holiness.

Mat xxiii iii. and. xvi.vi.
which the Scribes and Pharisees bound upon men? But why in an other place did
the same Christ will that men should beware of the leven of the Pharisees:
calling leven (as Matthew ye Evangelist expounds it) all their own doctrine
that they mingled with the pureness of the word of God? What would we have
more plain, tha^ that we be commanded to flee and beware of al their
doctrine? Whereby it is made most certain unto us, that in ye other place also
the Lord willed not, that the consciences of his should be vexed with ye
Pharisees own traditions. And the very words, if they be not wrested, sou^de
of no such thing. For the Lord purposing there to enuey sharply against the
manners of the Pharisees, did first simply instruct them yt heard him, yt
although they saw nothing in their life mete for them to follow, yet they should
not cesse to do those things which they taught in words, while they sat in
the chair of Moses, yt is, to declare the law. Therefore he meant nothing else
but to provide that the common people should not with the evil examples of ye
teachers be brought to despise ye doctrine. But forasmuch as many are nothing
at al moved with resons, but always require authority, I will allege Augustines
words, in which the very same thing is spoken. The Lords shepefolde has
gouernoures, some faithful, In Ioh. ^^act. xl^^^.
and some hirelinges. The governors that are faithful, are true Pastors: but
hear ye, yt the hireliges also are necessary: for many in ye Chirch following
earthly profits, do preach Christ, and by them the voice of Christ is heard:
and ye sheep do follow, not a hireling, but ye Pastor by the means of a
hireling. Hear ye yt hirelinges are showed by ye Lord himself. The Scribes
(says he) and the Pharisees sit in the chair of Moses. Do ye those things
that they say, but do not those things that they do. What other thing said
he, but hear the voice of ye Pastor by the hirelinges? For in sitting in the
chair they teach the law of God: therefore God teaches by the^. But if they
will teach their own hear it not, do it not. This says Augustine.

But whereas many unskillful men, when they hear that consciences i. Corin.
xiiii.xl.
so great variety in minds, so great disagremente in judgments and wits:
neither is there any policy steadfast enough, unless it be stablished by
certain laws, nor any orderly usage can be observed without a certain
appointed form. Therefore we are so far of from condemning the laws that are
profitable to this purpose, that we affirm yt when those be taken away,
Chirches are dissolved from their sinews, and utterly deformed and scattered
abroad. For this which Paul requires, that all things be done decently and
in order, can not be had, unless the order it self and comeliness be
stablished, with observations adjoined as with certain bonds. But this only
thing is always to be excepted in those observations, that they be not either
believed to be necessary to salvation, and so bynd consciences with religion,
or be applied to the worshipping of God, and so godliness be reposed in them.

We have therefore a very good and most faithful mark, which puts necessary
to salvation. For herein is nothing required but that charity should with
common dutiefull doing be nourished among us. But it is good yet to define more
plainly, what is comprehended under that comeliness which Paul commends,
and also what under order. The end of comeliness is, partly that when such
Ceremonies are used as may procure a reverence to holy things, we may by
such helps be stirred up to godliness: partly also that ye modesty and
gravity which ought to be seen in all honest doings may therein principally
appear. In order, this is the first point, that they which govern may know
the rule and law to rule well: and the people which are governed may be
accustomed to obeying of God, and to right discipline: Then, that ye state of
the Chirch being well framed, peace and quietness may be provided for.

i. Cor. xi.xxi. and. v.
that Profane bankettinges should not be myngled with the holy Supper of the
Lord: that women should not come abroad, but covered: and many other which we
have in common use: as this, that we pray kneling and bare hedded: that we
minister the Lords Sacraments not uncleanly, but with some dignity: that in
ye buryeng of the dead we use some honest show: and other things that are of
the same sort. Of the other kind are the hours appointed for public prayers,
i. Corin. xiiii.xxxiiii.
Sermons, and celebratio^s of mysteries: at Sermons, quietness and silence,
places appointed, singing together of Hymns, days prefixed for celebrating of
the Lords Supper, that Paul forbids that women should teach in the
Chirch, and such like. But specially those things that concern discipline,
as the teaching of the Catechism, the censures of the Chirch, excommunication,
fastinges, and such as may be reckened in the same number. So all the
constitutions of the Chirch, which we receive for holy and wholesome, we may
refer to two chief titles: for some perteine to rites and Ceremonies, and
the other to discipline and peace.

both grounded upon the authority of God, and taken out of the Scripture, yea
and altogether Gods own. Let us take for an example the kneling which is used
in time of common prayer. It is demanded, whether it be a tradition of man,
which every man may lawfully refuse or neglect. I say that it is so of men,
that it is also of God. It is of God, in respect that it is a part of that
comeliness, the care and keeping whereof is commended unto us by the Apostle: it
is of men, in respect that it specially betokens that which had in generaltie
rather been pointed to than declared. i. Corin. xiiii.xl.
By this one example we may judge, what is to be thought of that whole kind:
verily because the Lord has in his holy Oracles both faithfully contained and
clearly set fourth both the whole su^me of true righteousness, and all the
parts of the worshipping of his divine majesty, and whatsoever was necessary
to salvation: therefore in these things he is only to be heard as our
scholemaster. But because in outward discipline and Ceremonies his will was not
to prescribe each thing particularly what we ought to follow (because he foresaw
this to hang upon the state of times, and did not think one form to be fit
for all ages) herein we must flee to those general rules which he has given,
that thereby all those things should be tried which the necessity of the
Chirch shall require to be commanded for order and comlynesse. Finally,
Forasmuch as he has therefore taught nothing expressly, because these things
both are not necessary to salvation, and according to the manners of every
nation and age ought diversely to be applied to the edifieng of the Chirch:
therefore as the profit of the Chirch shall require, it shall be convenient as well
to change and abrogate those that be used, as to institute new. I grant in
deed, that we ought not rashly, nor often, nor for light causes to run to
innovation. But what may hurt or edify, charity shall best judge: which if we
will suffer to be the gouernesse, al shall be safe.

Now it is the duty of Christian people, to keep such things as have to the
contrary, but that he which by reason of disease can not bow his knees may pray
standing. Finally, it is better to bury a dead man spedely in time, than when
they lack a wynding shete, or when there be not men present to convey him, to
tarry till he rott unburied. But nevertheless in these things there is
somewhat which the manner and ordinances of the contree, and finally very
natural honesty and the rule of modesty apointeth to be done or avoided:
wherein if a man swerve any thing from them, by vnwarenesse, or forgetfulness,
there is no crime committed: but if upon contempt, such stubbornness is to be
disallowed. Likewise the days themselves, which they be, and the hours, and
how the places be bilded, and what Psalms be soong upon which day, it makes
no matter. But it is mete that there be both certain days, and appointed
hours, and a place fit to receive all, if there be regard had of the
preservation of peace. For how great an occasion of brawlynges should the
confusion of these things be, if i^ were lawful for every man, as he list,
to change those things that belong to common state: forasmuch as it will
never come to pass that one same thing shall please all men. if things be
left as it were in the midst to the choice of every man? If any man do carpe
against us. and will herein be more wise than he ought, let him se himself
by what reason he can defend his own preciseness to the Lord, i. Cor. xi.xvi.
As for us, this saying of Paul ought to satisfy us, that we have not an use
to contend, nor the Chirches of God.

old time were paraduenture ordained not without cause, and of themselves have
no notable ungodliness in them.

The.xi. Chapter. Of the jurisdiction of the Chirch, and the abuse thereof, such
as is seen in the Papacy.
NOw remains the third part of the power of the Chirch, yea and the chief
part in a well ordered state, which we have said to consiste in
jurisdiction. The whole jurisdiction of the Chirch pertains to the discipline
of manners* of which we shall entreat by and by. Forasmuch as no city, or
no town can stand without Magistrate and police: so the Church of God (as I
have already taught, but now I am compelled to repete it again) needs her
certain spiritual policy: but such as is utterly severed from the civil
policy, and does so nothing hinder or minish it, that it rather does much
help and further it. Therefore this power of jurisdiction shall in a sum be
nothing else but an order framed for the preservation of spiritual policy. To
this end from the beginning were ordained judicial orders in Chirches, which
might use examination of manners, correct vices, i. Cor. xii xxi. Romans xii.viii.
and exercise the office of the keys. This order Paul speaks of in the
Epistle to the Corinthians, when he names gouernementes. Again to the
Romans, when he says: let him that rules, rule in carfulness. For he
speaks not to the magistrates, (for at that time there were no Christian
magistrates) but to them that were joined with the Pastors for the spiritual
government of the Chirch. i. Tim. v.xvii.
Also in the Epistle to Timothee, he makes two sorts of Elders: some, that
labor in the word: other some, that do not use the preaching of the word, and
yet do rule well. By this later sort it is no doubt that he means them that
were appointed to look unto manners, and to the whole use of the keys. For this
power, of which we now speak, hangs wholly upon the keys which Christ gave
to the Church, in the xviii. Chap. of Matthew: where he commands, that they
should be sharply admonished in the name of the whole Chirch, that have
despised private monitio^s: but if they go forward in their obstinacy, he
teaches that they should be put out of the fellowship of the faithful. But
these monitions and corrections can not be without knowledge of the cause:
therefore there needs both some judgment and order. Wherefore unless we will
make void the promise of the keys, and take utterly away exco^municatio^,
solemn monitions, and all such things whatsoever they be: we must needs give
to the Chirch some jurisdiction. Let the reders mark that that place
entreats not of the general authority of doctrine, as in the.xvi. Chapter
of Mathewe, and the.xxi. of John: but that the power of the Sinagoge is for the
time to come transferred to the flock of Christ. Until that day the Jews had
their order of governing, which Christ stablisheth in his Chirch, and yt with
great penalty, so much as concerns the pure institution of it. For so it
behooved, forasmuch as otherwise the judgment of an unnoble and unregarded
congregation might be despised of rash and proud men. And that it should not
encomber the reders, that Christ does in the same words express things somewhat
differring one from the other, it shall be profitable to dissolve this dout.
There be therefore ^woo places, that speak of bynding and loosing. The one is
in ye xvi. Chapter of Matthew, where Christ, after that he had promised that he
would give to Peter ye keys of the kingdom of heaven, immediately adds, that
whatsoever he shall bind or loose in earth, shall be confirmed in heaven. In
which words he means none other thing, than he does by other words in John,
when sending his disciples to preach, John. xx.xxiii. Mat. xvi.xix.
after that he had breathed upon them he said: whose sins ye forgive, they
shall be forgeuen: and whoes ye retain, they shall be retained in heaven. I will
bring an exposition not subtle, not enforced, not wrested: but natural,
flowyng, and offering it self. This commandment of forgeuing and reteining
sins, and that promise of bynding and loosing made to Peter, ought to be
referred to no other thing but to the ministry of the word: which when the
Lord committed to the Apostles, he did therewith also arm them with this
office of bynding and loosing. For what is the sum of the Gospel, but that
we all being the bondseruantes of sin and of death, are loosed and made fre
by the redemption that is in Christ Jesus: and that they which do not receive
nor acknowledge Christ their deliverer and redemer, are damned and adjudged to
everlasting bonds? When the Lord delivered this message to his Apostles, to
be carried into al nations: to approve that it was his own and proceeding from
himself, he honored it with this noble testimony: and that to the singular
strengthening both of the Apostles themselves, and of all those to whom it
should come. It behooved that the Apostles should have a steadfast and sound
certainty of their preaching, which they should not only execute with
infinite labors, cares, troubles and dangers, but also at the last seal it
with their blood. That they might (I say) know the same to be not vain nor
void, but full of power and force: it behooved that in so great carfulness,
in so great hardness of things, and in so great dangers, they should be
persuaded that they did the business of God: that when all the world
withstode them and fought against them, they should know that God stood on
their side: that having not Christ the author of their doctrine present by
sight in earth, they should understand him to be in heaven, to confirm the
truth of the doctrine which he had delivered them. It behooved again that it
should also be most certainly proved by testimony to the hearers, that that
doctrine of the Gospel was not the word of the Apostles, but of God himself:
not a voice bred in earth, but come down from heaven. For these things, the
forgiveness of sins, the promise of everlasting life, the message of
salvation, can not be in the power of man. Therefore Christ has testified,
that in the preaching of the Gospel there is nothing of the Apostles, but the
only ministry: that it was he himself that spoke and promised all things by
their mouths as by instruments: and therefore that the forgiveness of sins
which they preached, was the true promise of God: and the damnation which they
pronounced, was the certain judgment of God. But this testifieng is given to
all ages, and remains in force, to certify and assure all men, that the word
of the Gospel, by what man soever it be preached, is ye very sentence of God,
published at the sovereign judgment seat, written in the book of life,
ratified, firm and fixed in heaven. Thus we see that in those places the power
of the keys is nothing but the preaching of the Gospel: and that it is not so
much a power as a ministry, if we have respect to me^. For Christ has not
given this power proprely to men, but to his own word, whereof he has made
men ministers.

The other place which we have said to be, concerning the power of Mat. xviii
xvii.
is in the.xviii. chapter of Matthew, where Christ says: If any brother hear
not the Chirch, let him be to thee as a heathen man or a publicane. Uerily I
say unto you: whatsoever ye bynd upon earth, shall be bound also in heaven:
whatsoever ye loose shall be loosed. This place is not altogether like the first,
but is a little otherwise to be understood. But I do not so make them
diverse, that they have not great affinity together. This first point is like
in both, that either of them is a general sentence: that in both there is
always all one power of bynding and loosyng, namely by the word of God, all one
commandment, all one promise. But herein they differ, that the first place
peculiarly belongs to preaching, which the Ministers of the word do execute:
this later place to the discipline of Excommunication, which is committed to
the Church. The Chirch byndeth, whom she excommunicateth: not that she
throws him into perpetual ruin and desperation, but because she condemns
his life and manners, and unless he repent, does already warn him of his
damnation. She loses whom she receives into communion: because she does
make him as it were partaker of the unity which she has in Christ Jesus.
Therefore that no man should obstinately despise the judgment of the Chirch, or
little regard that he is condemned by the consentyng voices of the faithful:
the Lord testifies that such judgment of the faithefull is nothing else
but a publishing of his own sentence: and that whatsoever they do in earth, is
confirmed in heaven. For they have the word of God, whereby they may condemn
the perverse: they have the word, whereby they may receive the repentant into
grace. And they can not err, nor dissent from the judgment of God: because
they judge not but after the law of God, which is not an uncertain or
earthly opinion, but the holy will of God, and a heavenly Oracle. Out of these
two places, which I think I have both brefely and familiarly and truly
expounded, those furious men without difference as they be carried with their
own gidddynesse, go about to stablishe sometime confession, sometime
excommunication, sometime jurisdiction, sometime the power to make laws,
sometime pardons. But the first place they allege to stablyshe the supremicie of
the Sea of Rome: they can so well skill to fit their keys to all locks and
doors, that a man may say they have practiced smithes craft all their life.

For whereas many think that those things endured but for a time, when the
Magistrates were yet strangers from the profession of our religion: they are
deceived in this, that they consider not, how great difference and what manner
of unlikeness there is of the Ecclesiastical and civil power. For the Chirch
has not the power of the swerd to punish or restrain, no empire to co^mau^d,
no prison, no other pains which ye Magistrate is wont to lay upon me^. Again,
it tends not to this end, yt he yt has sinned should be punished against his
will, but should with willi^g chastisement profess his repe^ta^ce. Therefore
there is a far diverse order: because neither does the Chirch take to it self
any thing which proprely belongs to the Magistrate, nor the magistrate can
execute that which the Chirch does. This shall be made plainer by an example. Is
any man drunk? In a well ordered city prison shall be his punishment. Has he
committed fornication? He shall have like, or rather greater punishment. So shall
both ye laws, and the magistrate, and the outward judgment be satisfied. But
it may be that he shall give no signification of repentance, but rather murmr
and grudge against it. Shall the Church in this case do nothing? But such can
not be received to the Supper, without doing wrong both to Christ and his
holy institution. And reason requires this, that he which offends the
Chirch with an evil example, should with solemn declaration of repentance
take away the offense which he has raised. The reason which they bring that
are of contrary opinion, is to cold. Christ say they committed these doings
to the Church, when there was no magistrate to execute them. But it happens
oftentimes that the magistrate is more negligent, yea sometime peradventure that
himself is to be chastised, which hapened to the Emperor Theodosius. There may
beside this as much be said the ye ministry of the word. Now therefore after
their sentence, let Pastors cesse to blame manifest wicked doings, let them
cesse to chide, to reprove, to rebuke: for there be Christian magistrates,
which ought to correct these things with ye laws and with the swerd. But as ye
Magistrate ought by punishyng, and by restraining with force, to purge ye
Chirch of offenses: so likewise the minister of the word for his part ought to
help the magistrate that there may not so many offend. So ought their workings
to be co^ioyned, that the one may be a help, not a hindrance to the other.

And truly if a man more nerely weye the words of Christ, he shall (says
Ambrose) for the Emperor than to be called the son of the Church? For a good
Emperor is within the Church, Episto. xxxii. ad Valent.
not above the Chirch, Therefore they, which to honor the Magistrate do spoil
the Church of this power, do not only with false exposition corrupt the
sentence of Christ, but also do not sclenderly condemn so many holy Bishops
which have been from the time of the Apostles, that they have by false pretense
usurped the honor and office of the Magistrate.

But on the other side it is good to see this, what was in old time the ii.
Cor. x.iiii.
There is (says he) power given to us, whereby we may throw down strong
holds, whereby we may make low all height that lifts up it self against
the knowledge of God, whereby we may subdue all thought, and may lead it
captive into the obedience of Christ, and we have in readiness a revenge
against all disobedience. As this is done by the preaching of the doctrine of
Christ: so, least the doctrine should be scorned, according to that which is
taught ought they to be iuged which profess themselves of the household of
faith. But that can not be done, unless there be joined with the ministry a
power to call them that are to be privately admonished, or to be more sharply
corrected, and also a power to exclude them from the Communion of the Supper,
which can not be received without profaning of so great a mystery. Therefore
when in an other place he says* that it belongs not to us to judge
strangers, i. Cor. ^^ xii.
he makes the children subject to the Censures of the Chirch, which may
chastise their faults: and he secretly signifies that there were then
judicial orders in force from which none of the faithful was free.

But such authority (as we have declared) was not in the power of Episto 14.
e^ ix. lib. ii.
Cyprian, when he makes mention by whom it was exercised in his time, uses to
join the whole Clergy with the Bishop. But in an other place also he shows,
yt the very clergy so governed, that in the mean time the people was not
excluded from the hearing of matters. For thus he writes: Sins the beginning of
my bishoprike I have determined to do nothing without the counsel of the
clergy and consent of the people. But this was the common and usual manner,
that the jurisdiction of the Chirch should be exercised by a Senate of Elders:
of whom (as I have said) there were two sorts: For some were ordained to
teaching, and other some were only judges of manners. By little and little this
institution grew out of kind from the first beginning of it: so that even in
the time of Ambrose only clerks were judges in ecclesiastical judgments.
In. v. capi. i. ad Tim.
Which thing he himself complains of in these words: The old Synagoge (says
he) and sins that time the Church has had Elders, without whoes counsel
nothing was done. Which by what negligence it is grown out of use, I know not,
unless peradventure by the slothfulness or rather the pride of the teachers,
while they alone would be thought to be somewhat. We see how much the holy man is
displeased, that any thing of the better state is decayed, when notwithstanding
they had yet continuyng an order that was at the least tolerable. What then
would he do if he saw these deformed ruins that show almost no sign of the
old byldyng? What bewaylyng would he use? First against law and right, the
Bishop has claimed to himself alone, that which was given to the whole
Chirch. For it is like as if the Consul, driuyng out the Senate, should take
the empire upon himself alone. But as he is above the rest in honor, so in the
whole assembly is more authority than in one man. Therefore it was to wicked
a deed, that one man, remouyng the common power to himself, has both opened
an entry to tyrannous lust, and has taken from the Chirch that which belonged
unto her, and has suppressed and put away the assembly ordained by the
Spirit of Christ.

most part chosen to this office. This is enough and to much, that when the
Romanists do boast that their jurisdiction is spiritual, it is easy to show
that there is nothing more contrary to the order institute of Christ, and that
it has no more likeness to the ancient custom than darkness has to light.

Although we have not spoken all things that might be alleged for Mat. xx.xxv.
Luc. xii.xxv.
when he said, The kings of the Gentiles bear rule over them: but you shall
not so. For he signifies not only that the office of Pastor is distinct from
the office of a Prince, but that they be things so severed, that they can not
mete together in one man. For whereas Moses did bear both the offices together:
First, that was done by a rare miracle: again, it was but for a time till
things were better set in order. But when a certain form was ones prescribed
of God, the civil government was left unto him, and he was commanded to
resign the priesthode to his brother. Ex. xviii.xvi.
And worthily. For it is above nature, that one man should suffice to bear both
burdens. And this has in all ages been diligently observed in the Church.
And there was never any of the Bishops, so long as the true form of the
Chirch endured, Homil. de Basil. tradend.
that ones thought of usurping the power of the swerd: so that this was a
common proverb in the time of Ambrose, that Emperors rather coueted the
prestehode, than prestes the empire. For this which he afterward says, was
emprinted in the minds of all men: that palaces perteined to the Emperor, and
Chirches to the pressed.

But sins that a way has been devised, whereby Bishops might hold to wrappe
themselves with judicial hearing of causes, with the gouernementes of cities
and provinces, and through large circuites to meddle in businesses so
vnperteining to them: which have so much work and business in their own
office, that if they were wholly and continually occupied in it, and were
withdrawn with no callinges away from it, yet they were scarcely able to
satisfy it? But (such is their waywardness) they stick not to bost, that by
this mean the Chirch does florishe according to her worthiness, and that they
them selves in the mean time are not to much drawn away from the duties of
their vocation. As touching the first point: if this be a comely ornament of
the holy office, that they be advanced to such height, that the highest
monarchs may stand in fear of them: then they have cause to quarrel with
Christ, which has in such sort grievously pinched their honor. For, at lest in
their opinion, what could have been spoken more dishonorably than these words:
The kings of the Gentiles and princes bear rule over them, Mat. xx.xxv. Lu.
xxii.xxv.
but you shall not so? And yet he laid no harder law upon his servants than
he first laid and received upon himself. Who (says he) has made me a judge
or diuider among you? We see that he plainly puts away from himself the
office of iudgyng, Lu. xii.xiiii,
which he would not do if it were a thing agreyng with his office: will not the
servants suffer themselves to be brought into that order, whereunto the Lord
has yielded himself subject? As for the other point, Act. vi.ii.
I would to God they could so prove it in experience as it is easy to speak
it. But forasmuch as the Apostles thought it not good, to leave the word of
God and minister at tables: thereby, because they will not be taught, they are
convinced, that it is not all one man's work to be both a good Bishop and a
good Prince. For if they (which according to the largeness of the gifts
wherewith they were endued, were able to satisfy more and greater cares than any
men that have been borne since them) have yet confessed yt they can not at ones
apply ye ministry both of the word and of tables, but yt they should faint
under the burden: how could these that be me^ of no valor in comparison of the
Apostles a hundred fold excel the industry of ye Apostles? Truly, to
attempt it was a point of most shamlesse and to presumptuous boldness: yet we
se that it has been attempted: but with what success, it is evidence. For it
could not otherwise come to pass, but that forsaking their own office they
should remove into other men's charge.

contentious lawyng, they did though against their wills take that encumbrance
upon them. These men have of voluntary arbitrementes, which were altogether
differyng from the noise of judicial courts, made an ordinary jurisdiction.
In a little while after when cities and contrees were troubled with diverse
hard distresses, they resorted to the protection of Bishops, to be sauegarded
by their faithful succor: the Bishops by marvelous sutteltie, of protectors
made them selves Lords. Yea and it can not be denied that they have gotten the
possession of a great part by violente seditious partakinges. As for the
Princes, that willingly gave jurisdiction to Bishops, they were by diverse
affections moved thereunto. But, admitting that their gentleness had some show
of godliness: yet with this their wrongful liberality they did not very well
provide for the profit of the Chirch, whoes ancient and true discipline they
have so corrupted, yea (to say truth) have utterly abolished. But, those
Bishops that have abused such goodness of princes to their own commodity,
have by showing of this one example enough and to much testified that they are
not Bishops. For if they had had any sparcle of an Apostolic spirit, ii. Cor.
they would without doubt have answered out of the mouth of Paul: The weapons
of our warfare are not carnal, but spiritual. But they being ravished with
blind gredinesse, have destroyed both them selves, their successoures, and the
Church.

At length the Bishop of Rome not contented with mean lordships, Lib. De
consid. 25.
he sometime pretends the gift of Constantine, sometime some other title.
First I answer with Bernarde: Admit that he do by any other reason
whatsoever, claim this unto him, yet he has it not by Apostolic right. For
Peter could not give that which he had not: but he gave to his successors
that which he had, the care of Chirches. But when the Lord and master says,
that he is not appointed judge between two, a servant and scholar ought not to
think scorn if he be not judge of all men. But Bernarde speaks of civil
iugementes: For he adds: Therefore your power is in crimes, not in
possessions: because for those and not for these ye have received the keys of
the kingdom of heaven. For which seems to thee the greater dignity to
forgive sins, or to divide lands? There is no comparison. These base and
earthly things have kings and princes of the earth their judges. Why do ye
invade the bounds of other? etc. Again. Thou art made a superior: (he
speaks to Pope Eugenius) but whereunto? Not to bear lordship, I think.
Therefore how much soever we think of our selves, let us remember that there
is a ministry laid upon us, not a lordshyp given us. Learn that thou have
need of a wedehoke, not of a scepter, that thou may do the work of a
Prophet. Again, it is plain: Lordship is forbidden to the Apostles. Go thou
therefore, and presume to usurp to thy self either being a lord, an
Apostleshippe: or being an Apostle, a lordship. And by and by after: the form
of an Apostleship is this, Lordshippe is forbidden them, ministry is bidden
them. Whereas these things are so spoken of a man, that it is euidente to all
men, that the very truth speaks them, yea where as the very thing it self
is manifest without all words: Co^cilliu^ Arclate^s.
yet the bishop of Rome was not ashamed in the Council at Orleaunce to decree,
that the supreme power of both the swerdes belong to him by the law of God.

As for the gift of Constantine, they that be but meanly practiced in Epist. v
lib. ii. Epi. 20. lib. iii. Epi. 61. lib. 2. Epis. 31. lib. 4. Episto. xxxiii^.
lib. iiii.
For so often as he speaks of the emperor, he calls him most noble Lord, and
himself his unworthy servant. Again in an other place: But let not our Lord
by the earthly power be the sooner angry with the prestes: but with excellent
consideration, for his sake whoes servants they be, let him so rule over them,
that he also give them due reverence. We see how in common subjection he would
be accounted as one of the people. For he there pleads not any other man's
cause, but his own. In an other place, I trust in the almighty God, that he
will give a long life to our godly lords, and will dispose us under your hand
according to his mercy. Neither have I therefore alleged these things, for
that it is my purpose thoroughly to discuss his question concerning the gift of
Constantine: but only that the Reders should see by the way how chyldishly the
Romanistes do lie, when they go about to challenge an erthly empire to their
Bishop. And so much the more foul is the shamelessness of Augustine Steuchus,
which in such a despeired cause has been so bold to selle his travail and
tongue to the Bishop of Rome. Ualla (as it was not hard for a man learned and of
a sharp wit) had strongly confuted that fable. And yet (as a man little
exercised in ecclesiastical matters) he had not said all that might have made
for that purpose. Steuchus burst in, and scattred stinkyng trifles to oppress
the clear light. And truly he does no less coldly handle the cause of his
master, that if some merry conceited fellow faynyng himself to do the same, would
in deed take Uallaes part. But verily it is a worthy cause, for which the
Pope should hyre such patrones for money: and no less worthy are those hired
losells to be deceived of their hope of gain, as it hapened to Eugubinus.

But if any man require to know the time, sins this fained empire prevailed,
that his successors might freely without punishment not only shake of the yoke,
but also bring Emperors in subjection to them. Hereunto was added that from
thense fourth there were many Emperors liker to Henry than to Julius Caesar:
who^ it was no hard thing to subdue, while they sat at home careless of all
things and slouthful, when they had most need with virtue and lawful means
to repress, the gredinesse of the Bishops. Thus we see with what color that
same goodly gift of Constantine is shadowed, whereby the Pope fayneth that the
Empire of the West was delivered unto him.

In the mean time the Popes cessed not, sometime with fraud, sometime Reg. lib.
4. ca. 88.
In ye old time when under Gregory ye kepers of the goods of the Chirch, did
take possession of the lands which they reckened to belong to ye Chirch, and
after the manner of seizing to ye use of the Prince did set tittles upon them
for token of claim. Gregory assembling a Council of Bishops. inueying sore
against that profane manner, asked whether they did not judge ye Clerk
accursed which did of his own will by writing of any title attempt to enter
upon any possession. They al pronounced, accursed. If to claim a piece to
ground by writing of a title be in a Clerk an offense worthy of accursing:
when whole two hundred years together Popes do practice nothing else but
battles, sheding of blood, destructions of armies, sackinges of some cities,
racing of other, overthrows of nations, wastinges of kingdoms, only they yt
might catch hold of other men's possessions: what cursinges can be enough to
punish such examples. Truly it is very plain that they seek nothing less that
ye glory of Christ. For if they of their own will do wholly resign all the
secular power yt they have, therein is no danger to the glory of God, no danger
to sound doctrine, no danger to the safety of the Chirch: but they are
carried blind and hedlong with only gredinesse of dominion: Ezechl.
xxxiiii.iiii
because they think nothing safe, unless they may bear rule with
rigorousnesse (as the Prophet says) and with power.

To jurisdiction is annexed immunitie, which ye Romish Clergy took to
themselves. For they think it against their dignity, if they answer in
personal causes before a temporal judge: and therein they think both ye liberty
and dignity of ye Chirch to consist, if they be exe^pt from common iugeme^tes
and laws. But ye old Bishops, which otherwise were most rigorous in defe^ding
ye right of ye Chirch, judged themselves and their order to be nothing hurt, if
they were subject to them. And ye godly Emperors, without gain saying of any
man, did always call Clerks to their judgment seats so often as need required.
For thus says Constantine in his Epistle to ye Nicomedians: If any of the
Bishops shall indiscreetly disorder himself, his boldness shall be restrained by
the execution of the minister of God, that is by my execution. And Valentinian
says: good Bishops do not speak against the power of the Emperor, but do
sincerely both keep the commandments of God the great king, and also obey
our laws, At that time all men were persuaded of this without controversy. But
ecclesiastical causes were referred to the judgment of the Bishop. As if any
Clerk had offended nothing against the laws: but only was accused by the
Canons: he was not cited to the common judgment seat, but in that cause had
the Bishop for his judge. Likewise if there were a question of Faith in
controversy, or such a matter as properly perteined to the Chirch, the judgment
thereof was committed to the Chirch. So is that to be understood, which
Ambrose writes to Ualentinian: Your father of honorable memory, i.31.
not only answered in word, but also decreed by laws, that in a cause of
Faith he ought to be judge that is neither unfit in office nor unlike in right.
Again: If we have regard to the Scriptures or old examples, who is there
that can deny that in a cause of Faith, in a cause (I say) of Faith, Bishops
are wont to judge of Christian Emperors, and not Emperors of Bishops?
Again: I would have come, O Emperor, to your consistory, if either the
Bishops or the people would have suffered me to go: saying, that the cause of
Faith ought to be debated in the Chirch before the people. He affirms verily
that a spiritual cause, that is to say the cause of religion, ought not to be
drawn into the temporal court where profane causes are pleaded. Worthily do
all men praise his constance in this behalf. And yet in a good cause he
proceeds but thus far, that if it come to violence and strong hand, Homel.
de basi^ lic. trad.
he says that he will give place. Willingly (says he) I will not forsake the
place committed unto me: but when I am enforced, I know not how to resist:
for our armure are prayers and tears. Let us note the singular modesty and
wisdom of the holy man, joined with stoutness of courage and boldness.
Iustina the Emperors mother, because she could not draw him to the Arrians
side, practiced to drive him from the government of the Church. And so should
it have come to pass, if he had come when he was called to the palace to
plead his cause. Therefore he denies the Emperor to be a competent judge of
so great a controversy. Which manner of doing both the necessity of that time,
and the continual nature of the matter required. For he judged that he ought
rather to dye, than that such an example should by his consent be given to
posterity: and yet if violence be offered, he thinks not of resistance. For
he denies it to be Bishiplike, to defend the Faith and right of the Chirch
with arms. But in other causes he shows himself ready to do whatsoever the
Emperor shall command him. If he demand tribute, (says he) we deny it
not: the lands of the Chirch do pay tribute. If he ask lands, he has power
to claim them, none of us resists. After the same manner also speaks
Gregory. I am not ignorant (says he) of the mind of our most noble
sovereign Lord, Lib. 3. Epi. 20.
that he uses not to entermeddle in causes perteining to prestes, least he
should in any thing be burdened with our sins. He does not generally exclude
the Emperor from iudgyng of Prestes: but he says that there be certain
causes, which he ought to leave to the judgment of the Chirch.

in ecclesiastical matters, so that it were done to preserve the order of the
Chirch, not to trouble it, to stablishe discipline, not to dissolve it. For
since the Chirch has not the power of compelling, nor ought to require it (I
speak of civil constrayning:) it is the office of Godly kings and Princes to
maintain religion with laws, proclemations, and judicial procedinges. Lib. 1^
Epi. 4^.
After this manner, when the Emperor Maurice had commanded certain Bishops yt
they should receive their fellow Bishops that were their neighbors and driven
out by the barbarous nations: Gregory confirms that commandment, Lib. 4.
Episto. xxxii. and xxxiiii.
and exhorts them to obey it. And when he himself is admonished by the same
Emperor to come to atonement with John the Bishop of Constantinople, he does in
deed render a reason why he ought not to be blamed: yet he does not bost of
immunitie from the secular court, Lib. vii, Episto. xxxix.
but rather promises that he will be obedient, so far as his conscience will
give him leave: and therewithal he says this, that Maurice did as became a
Godly Prince, when he gave such commandments to the Prestes.

The.xii. Chapter. Of the discipline of the Chirch, whereof the chief use is in
the censures and excommunication.
THe discipline of ye Chirch, ye entreating whereof we have differred unto this
place, is brefely to be declared, that we may at length pass over to the rest.
But that same for ye most part hangs upon the power of the keys and
spiritual jurisdiction. That this may be the more easily understood, let us
divide the Chirch into two principal degrees, that is to say the Clergy, and
the people. Clerks I call by the usual name those yt execute public
ministry in the Chirch. First we will speak of common discipline, to which
al ought to be subject: then we will come to the Clergy, which beside that
common discipline, have a several discipline by themselves. But because many
for hatred of discipline do abhor the very name thereof, let them hear this:
If no fellowship, yea no house though it have but a small householde, can be
kept in right state without discipline, the same is much more necessary in
the Chirch, whoes state ought to be most orderly of al. Therefore as the
doctrine of Christ which brings salvation is the soul of the Chirch, so
discipline is instead of sinews therein: whereby it is brought to pass, that
the members of the body hang together every one in his fyt place. Wherefore
whosoever do either desire to have discipline taken away, or hinder the
restoryng thereof, whether they do it of set purpose or by unadvisedness,
verily they seek the extreme dissipation of the Chirch. For what shall betide,
if what is lustful to be lawful to every man? But so would it be, if there
were not with the preaching of doctrine adio^ned private admonishmentes,
corrections, and such other helps which sustain doctrine and suffer it not
to be idle. Discipline therefore is as it were a bridle, wherewith they may be
holden back and tamed which coltishly resist against Christ: or as it were a
prick, wherewith they that are not willing enough may be stirred up: and
sometime, as a fatherly rod, wherewith they which have more grievously fallen may
be chastised mercifully and according to the mildness of the Spirit of
Christ. Since therefore we do now se at hand certain beginninges of a horrible
wastenesse in the Chirch, because there is no care nor order to keep the people
in awe, very necessity cries out yt there is need of remedy. But this is the
only remedy, which both Christ has commanded, and has always ben used among
the godly.

A^^. xx.xx and. xxvi.
and protests that he is clean from the blood of all men, because he has
not cessed with tears day and night to admonish every one. For doctrine does
then obtain force and authority when the minister not only does declare to
altogether what their duty is to Christ, but also has power and order to
require the keeping thereof of them whom he marketh to be either not obediente to
doctrine, or slothful. If any man do either stubbornely refuse, or in going
forward in his faults, do despise such admonishmentes: Mathe. xviii.xv. and
xvii.
when he has been the second time admonished with witnesses called to it,
Christ commands them to be called to the judgment of the Chirch, which is
y^ assembly of Elders: and that there they should be more grievously admonished
as it were by public authority, that if he reverence the Chirch, he may
submitt himself and obey. But if he be not hereby subdued, but do continue in
his wickedness, then he commands him, as a despiser of the Chirch, to be
putt away from the fellowship of the faithful.

Mathe. xviii.xv. i. Tim. v.xx.
that some sins be private, and some public or openly manifest. Of the first
sort Christ says to every private man, Reprove him between thee and him alone.
Of manifest sins Paul says in Timothee, Reprove him before all men, that
the rest may have fear. For Christ had said before, If thy brother have
offended against thee. Which words, (against thee) unless thou will be
contentious, thou canneste not otherwise understand than under thine own
secret knowledge, so that there be no more privy to it. But the same thing
which the Apostle teaches Timothee concerning the rebukyng of them openly
that sin openly, Gala. ii.xiiii.
he himself followed in Peter. For when Peter sinned even to publyke offense,
he did not admonyshe him apart by himself, but brought him fourth into ye sight
of the Chirch. Therefore this shall be the right order of doing, if in secret
faults we go forward according to those degrees that Christ has set: but in
manifest faults, we immediately proceed to the Chirches solemn rebuking, if
the offense be public.

Let this also be an other distinction: that of sins some be defaultes, i.
Cor. v.iiii.
but also punished him with excommunication, so sone as he was certified of his
wicked deed. Now therefore we begin better to se how the spiritual
jurisdiction of the Chirch, which punishes sins according to the word of the
Lord, is the best maintenance of health, and fundation of order, and bond of
unity. Therefore when the Chirch does banish out of her company manifest
adulterers, whoremongers, thieves, robbers, seditious persons, perjured men,
false witnesses, and such other, again obstinate men, which being orderly
admonished even of small faults do scorn God and his judgment: she takes
nothing upon her self without reason, but executes the jurisdiction given her
of the Lord. Moreover, that none should despise such judgment of the Chirch,
or lightly regard that he is condemned by the consenting voices of the
faithful: the Lord has testified, Mat. xvi.xix. and xviii.xviii. John. xx
xxiii.
that the same is nothing else but a pronouncing of his own sentence, and that
whatsoever they do in earth is confirmed in heaven. For they have the word of
the Lord, whereby they may condemn the froward: they have the word, whereby
they may receive the repentant into favor. They I say that trust that without
this bond of discipline Chirches may long stand, are deceived in opinion:
unless perhaps we may want that help which the Lord foresaw that it should
be necessary for us. And truly how great is the necessity thereof, shall be
better perceived by the manifold use of it.

There be three ends which the Chirch has respect unto in such Ephesians. v xxv.
The first is, that they should not, to the dishonor of God, be named among
Christians, that lead a filthy and sinful life, as though his holy Chirch
were a co^spiracie of noughtie and wicked men. For since the Chirch is the body
of Christ, it can not be defiled with such filthy and rotten members, Colos.
i.xxiiii.
but that some shame must come to the head. Therefore that there should not be
any such thing in the Chirch, whereby his holy name may be spotted with any
rep^oche, they are to be driven out of her householde, by whoes dishon^^e any
sclau^der might redounde to the name of Christians. And herein also is
consideration to be had of the Supper of the Lord, that it be not profaned with
giving it to alwithout choice. For it is most true, that he to whom the
distribution of it is committed, if he wittingly and willingly admit an
unworthy man whom he might lawfully put back, is as guilty of Sacrilege, Homi.
In Mathe. 3. Eze. iii.xviii. and. xxxiii.x.
as if he did give abroad the Lords body to dogs. Wherefore Chrysostom
grievously inueyeth against ye Prestes, which while they fear the power of
great men, dare debar no man. The blood (says he) shall be required at your
hands. If ye fear man, he shall laugh you to scorn: but if ye fear God, ye
shall be reverenced also among men. Let us not fear maces, nor purple, nor
crowns: we have here a greater power. I verily will rather deliver mine own
body to death, and suffer my blood to be shed, than I will be made partaker of
this defiling. Therefore least this most holy mystery be spotted with sclander,
in the distributing thereof choice is greatly requisite* which yet can not be
had but by the jurisdiction of the Chirch. The second end is, least (as it is
wont to come to pass) with the continual company of the evil, the good should
be corrupted. For (such is our ready inclination to go out of the way) there is
nothing easier than for us to be led by evil examples from the right course
of life. This use the Apostle touched, when he commanded the Corinthians to
put the incestuous man out of their company. A little leven (says he)
corrupts the whole lomp of doae. i. Cor. v.vi. ^. xi.
And he foresaw herein so great danger, that he forbade him even from all
fellowship. If any brother (says he) among you be named either a whoremonger,
or a covetous man, or a worshipper of Idols, or a dronkarde, or an evil
speaker, with such a one I grant you not leave so much as to eat. The
third end is, that they themselves confounded with shame may begin to
repent of their filthiness. So it is profitable for them also, to have their
own wickedness chastised, that with feling of the rod they may be awaked,
which otherwise by tender bearing with them would have become more obstinate.
The same thing does the Apostle mean when he says thus: If any do not obey
our doctrine, ii. These. iii.xiiii.
mark him, and keep no company with him, that he may be ashamed. Again in an
other place, when he writes that he has delivered the Corinthian to Satan,
that his Spirit might be saved in the day of the Lord: i. Cor. v.v Aug. de.
verb. aposto. hem. lviii.
that is (as I expound it) that he went into a damnation for a time, that he
might be saved for ever. But he therefore says that he delivers him to
Satan, because the devil is out of the Chirch, as Christ is in the Chirch. For
whereas some do referr it to a certain vexing of the flesh, I think that to
be very uncertain.

time to be deprived of the communion of the Supper, til he have given
assurance of his repentance. 1. Cor. v.v
For against the Corinthian Paul uses not only rebuking of words, but
drives him out of the Church, and blames the Corinthians that it had so long
borne him. The old and better Chirch kept this order, when rightful
government flourished. for if any man had done any wicked deed whereupon was
grown offense, first he was commanded to abstain from partaking of the holy
Supper, then both to humble himself before God, and to testify his repentance
before the Chirch. There were also certain solemn vsages, which were enjoined
to them that had fallen, to be tokens of their repentance. When they had so
done, Epi. ii. Lib. i. Lib. iii. Ep. xiiii. and. xxvi.
that the Chirch was satisfied, the^ by layeng of hands he was received into
favor. Which receiving is oftentimes called of Cipriane peace, who also
briefly describes this usage. They do penance (says he) in a certain full
time: then they come to confession, and by the laying on of hands of the
Bishop and the Clergy they receive power to come to the communion. Howbeit the
Bishop and his Clergy had so the ruling of reconciliation, that they did
therewithal require the consent of the people: as he shows in an other place.

From this discipline there was no man exempted, that even the Ambro. in lib.
i. Epi. iii. in. orat. habita in fune* Theodosii.
So when Theodosius was deprived by Ambrose of power to come to the communion
because of the slaughter committed at Thessalonica, he threw down all the
royal ornamente wherewith he was clothed: he openly in the Chirch bewailed his
sin, which had crept upon him by fraud of other men: he craved pardon with
groaning and tears. For great kings ought not to think this to be any
dishonor to them, if they humbly throw down themselves before Christ the king
of kings, neither ought it to displease them that they be judged by the
Chirch. For since in their court they hear nothing else but m^re flatteries, it
is more than necessary for them to be rebuked of the Lord by the mouth of the
Prestes. But rather they ought to wish, that the Prestes should not spare
them, that the Lord may spare them. In this place I omit to speak, by whom
this jurisdiction is to be exercised, because it is spoken of in an other
place. This only I add that that is ye lawful manner of proceeding in
excommunicating a man, which Paul shows: if the Elders do it not alone by
themselves, but with the Chirch knowing and allowing it: that is, in such sort
that the multitude of the people may not govern ye doing, but may mark it as
a witness and a keeper that nothing should be done of a few by wilful
affection. But the whole manner of doing, beside the calling upon ye name of
God, ought to have such gravity, as may resemble the presence of Christ: that
it may be undoubted that he there sits for ruler of his own judgment.

But this ought not to be passed over, that such severity becomes the ii.
Corin. ii.vii.
For we must always diligently beware (as Paul teaches) yt he which is
punished be not swallowed up of sorrow: for so should of a remedy be made a
destruction. But out of the end may better be gathered a rule of moderation.
For whereas this is required in excommunication that the sinner should be
brought to repentance, and evil examples taken away, least either the name of
Christ should be evil spoken of, or other me^ be provoked to follow them: if
we shall have an eye to these things, we shall be able easily to judge how far
severity ought to proceed and where it ought to end. Therefore when the sinner
gives a testimony of his repentance, and does by this testimony, as much as
in him lies, blott out the offense: he is not to be enforced any further: but
if he be enforced, rigorousnesse does then excede measure. In which behalf the
immesurable severity of the old fathers can not be excused, which both
disagreed from ye prescribed order of the Lord, and also was maruelously
dangerous. For when they charged a sinner with solemn penance, and deprivation
from the holy communion sometime for seven years, sometime four years, sometime
three years, sometime for their whole life: what other thing could follow thereof
but either great hypocrisy or most great desperatio^? Likewise whereas no man
that had fallen the second time was admitted to second penance but was cast
out of the Chirch even to the end of his life: that was neither profitable nor
agreing to reason. Therefore whosoever shall wey the matter with sound judgment,
shall here in perceive want of their discretion. Ad Cor. Ep. xxxi Lib. i.
Howbeit I do here rather disallow the public manner, tha^ accuse al them yt
used it, whereas it is certain yt many of them misliked it: but they did
therefore suffer it, because they could not amend it. Truly Cipriane
declares, how much beside his own will he was so rigorous. Our patience (says
he) and easiness and gentleness is ready to them that come. I wish al to
return into the Chirch: I wish al our fellow soldiars to be enclosed within
the tents of Christ and in ye houses of God the father. I forgive al things,
I dissemble many things: for zele and desire to gather brotherhode together, I
examine not with full judgment even those things yt are committed against God:
in pardoning defaultes more than I ought, I am my self almost in defaulte: I
do with ready and full love embrace them that return with repentance,
confessing their sins with humble and plain satisfaction. Chrysostom is
somewhat harder, and yet he says thus: If God be so kind, why will his Pressed
seem so rigorous? Moreover we know what gentleness Augustine used toward the
Donatistes, in so much yt he sticked not to receive into Bishoprike those that
had returned from schism, even immediately after their repentance. But because
a contrary order had grown in force, they were compelled to leave their own
judgment to follow it.

better of them in time to come than we see in time present, and let us not
therefore cesse to pray to God for them, and (to comprehend al in one word) let
us not condemn to death the person it self, which is in the hand and
judgment of God alone, but let us rather weye by the law of the Lord of what
sort every man's works be. Which rule while we follow, we rather stand to the
judgment of God than pronounce our own. Let us not take to our selves more
liberty in iudgyng, unless we will bind the power of God within bounds, and
appoint a law to his mercy, at whoes pleasure when he thinks it good, very
evil men are turned into very good, strangers are graffed and foreins are
chosen into the Chirch. And this the Lord does, thereby to mock out the
opinion of men, and rebate their rashenesse: which if it be not restrained,
presumes to take to it self power of iudgyng more than it ought.

For where as Christ promises that that shall be bound in heaven, Mathe.
xviii.xviii.
which they that be his shall bind in earth, he limitteth the power of
byndyng, to the Censure of the Chirch: by which they that are excommunicate
are not thrown into everlasting ruin and damnation: but hearing their lives
and manners to be condemned, they are also certified of their own everlasting
condemnation, unless they repent. For excommunication hearing differs from
accursyng, that accursyng taking away all pardon does condemn a man and
adiudge him to eternal destruction: excommunication rather reuengeth and
punishes manners. And though the same do also punish the man, yet it does so
punyshe him, that in forewarnyng him of his damnation to come, it does call him
back to salvation. If that be obtained, reconciliation and restoryng to the
communion is ready. But accursyng is either very seldom or never in use.
Therefore although ecclesiastical discipline, permits not to live
familiarly, or to have friendly conversation with them that be excommunicate:
yet we ought to endeavor by such means as we may, that returnyng to amendment,
they may return to the fellowship and unity of the Chirch: ii. These. iii.xv.
as the Apostle also teaches. Do not (says he) think them as enemies, but
correct them as brethren. Unless this ge^tlenesse be kept as well privately as
in common, there is danger least from discipline we forthwith fall to
butcherie.

This also is principally required to the moderation of discipline, whithe
Augustine entreats of in disputyng against the Donatistes: that neither
private men, if they see faults not diligently enough corrected by the
Council of Elders, should therefore by and by depart from the Chirch: nor the
Pastors themselves, if they can not according to their hearts desire purge all
things that need amendment, should therefore throw away the ministry, Lib.
ii. contra parm. capi. i.
or with unwonted rigorousnesse trouble the whole Chirch. For it is most true
which he writes: that he is free and discharged from curse, whosoever he be
that either by rebukyng amendeth what he can: or what he can not amend,
excludes, saving the bond of peace: or what he can not exclude, saving the
bond of peace, he does disalowe with equity, and bear with steadfastness. He
renders a reason thereof in an other place: Lib. iii. cap. i.
because all godly order and manner of ecclesiastical discipline ought always to
have respect unto the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace: which the
Apostle commands to be kept by our bearing one with an other: and when it is
not kept, the medicine of punishment begins to be not only superfluous,
but also hurtful, and therefore cesseth to be a medicine. He yt (says he) does
diligently think upon these things does neither in preseruyng of unity
neglecte the severity of discipline, Cap. 2.
nor does with immeasurablenesse of correction break the bond of fellowship.
He grants in deed that not only the Pastors ought to trauail to this point,
that there may remain no fault in the Chirch, Cap. 1.
but also yt every man ought to his power to endeavor thereunto: and he plainly
declares yt he which neglects to monish, rebuke, and correct the evil,
although he do not favor them, nor syn with them, yet is guilty before the
Lord. But if he be in such degree, that he may also sever them from the
partaking of sacraments, and does it not, now he sins not by an others
evil, but by his own. Only he wills it to be done, Mat. xiii.xxix.
with using of discretion, which ye Lord also requires, least while the ta^es
be in rootyng out, the corn be hurt. Hereupon he gathers out of Cyprian,
Let a man therefore mercyfully correct what he can: and what he can not, let
him patiently suffer, and with love groan and lament it.

ii. Cor. xi.xiiii.
So does Satan transform himself into an angel of light when by occasion as
it were of just severity he persuadeth unmerciful cruelty, coveting nothing
else but to corrupt and break the bond of peace and unity: which bond
remainyng taste, among Christians all his foes are made weak to hurt, his
trappes of treasons are broken, and his councels of overthrowing do vanishe
away.

remedy for it. He adds by and by after: These things (as I think) are
taken away not roughely, not hardly, not after an imperious manner, but more by
teaching than by commau^dyng, more by admonishing than by thretenyng. For so
must we deal with a multitude of sinners* but severity is to be exercised
upon the sins of few. Yet he does not mean that Bishops should therefore
wink or hold their peace at public faults, Lib. iii. contra parm. cx^ Pi.ii.
because they can not severely punish them: as he himself afterward
expounds it. But he wills that the measure of correction be so tempered,
that so far as may be, it may rather bring health than destruction to the
body. And therefore at length he concludes thus: Wherefore both this
commandment of the Apostle is in no wise to be neglected, i. Cor. v.vii. Ephesians.
iiii.ii.
to sever the evil, when it may be done without peril of breakyng of peace:
and this is also to be kept, that bearyng one with an other, we should endeavor
to preserve unity of the Spirit, in the bond of peace.

The part that remains of discipline, which proprely is not contained

Holy and true fasting has three ends. For we use it, either to make lean
and subdue the flesh, that it should not wax wanton, or that we may be better
disposed to prayers and holy meditations, or that it should be a testimony of
our humblyng before God, when we be wyllyng to confess our giltinesse before
him. The first end has not so often place in common fasting, because all men
have not like state of body, nor like health: therefore it rather agrees with
private fasting. The second end is common to both: for as well the whole
Chirch as every one of the faithful has need of such preparation to prayer.
The third also is likewise common. For it shall sometime befall that God shall
strike some nation with war, or pestilence, or with some calamity. In such
a common scourge the whole people must accuse themselves, and openly confess
their own giltinesse. But if the hand of the Lord do strike any private man, he
ought to do the same, either alone, or with his own family. That stands
chiefly in the affection of the mind. But when the mind is affected as it
ought to be, it is scarcely possible, but that it will break out into outward
testifyeng: and then chefely if it turn to common edifying, that altogether
in openly confessyng their sin should yield praise of righteousness to God,
and every one mutually exhort other with their example.

Acts. xiiii iii. Act. xiiii xxiii.
that they might the better commend to God their ministry which was of so
great importance, they joined fasting with prayer. So both they afterward,
when they made ministers over Chirches, were wont to pray with fasting. In this
kind of fasting they had regard to none other thing, but that they might be
made fresher and more vncombred to pray. Uerily this we find by experience,
that when the belly is full, the mind is not so lifted up to God, that it can
both with hartye and fervent affetion be carried to prayer, and continue in it.
So is that to be understood which Luke reherseth of Anne, that she served the
Lord in fastings and prayers. Luke ii.xxxvii.
For the does not set the worshyppyng of God in fasting: but signifies that
the holy woman did after that manner exercise her self to continuance of
prayer. Nehe. i.iiii. i. Cor. vii v.
Such was ye fasting of Nehemias when he did with earnestly bent zele pray to
God for the deliverance of his people. For this cause Paul says that the
faithful do well, if they absteyne for a time from their wedding bed, that
they may the more freely apply prayer and fasting. Where ioynyng fasting to
prayer instead of a help, he puts us in mind that it is of no value but so
far as it is referred to this end. Again when in the same place he gives a
rule to married folks, that they should mutually render good will one to an
other, it is plain that he does not speak of daily prayers, but of such
prayers as require a more earnest intentiuenesse.

men in time past with long hanging beard, with vncombed hear, with black
array, were wont humbly to abace them selves, to procure the mercy of the
judge: so when we are accused before the judgment seat of God, it behooves
both for his glory, and for common edificatio^, and also is profitable and
healthful for us, that we should in piteous array crave to escape his
severity. And that this was used among the people of Israel, it is easy to
gather by the words of Joel. Joel. ii.xxv.
For when he commands a trompet to be sounded, the congregation to be
gathered together, fasting to be appointed, and the rest that follow: he
speaks of things received in common custom. He had a little before said,
that examination is appointed of the wicked deeds of the people, and had
declared that the day of judgment was now at hand, and had summoned them being
accused to plead their cause: then he cries out that they should haste to
sack cloth and ashes, to weeping and fasting: that is, that they should also
with outward testifiengs throw themselves down before the Lord. Sack cloth
and ashes paraduenture did more agree with those times: but there is no dout
that the calling together, and weping and fasting and such like do likewise
perteyne also to our age, so often as the state of our things does so require.
For sith it is a holy exercise, both to humble men, and to confess
humility, why should we less use it than the old people did in like
necessity? i. Samn. vii.vi. ^t. xxxi.xiii. ii. Kin. i.xii.
We read that not only the people of Israel, which were informed and
instructed by the word of God, but also the Ninevites which had no doctrine but
the preaching of Jonas, fasted in token of sorrow. What cause is there therefore
why we should not do the same? Ion. iii.v.
But it is an outward ceremony, which was with the rest ended in Christ. Yea
rather even at this day it is, as it always has been, a very good help to the
faithful, and a profitable admonition, to stir up them selves, that they
should not with to great carelessness and sluggyshnesse more and more provoke
God when they are chastised with his scourges. Math. ix.xv: Luke. v.xxxiiii.
Therefore Christ when he excuses his apostles for that they fast not, does not
say that fasting is abrogate: but he appoints it to times of calamity, and
joins it with mournyng. The time shall come (says he) when the bridegroom
shall be taken away from them.

But that there should be no error in the name, let us define what fasting is.
For we do not here understand by it only abstine^ce and sparyng and not also
for pleasure.

Joel. ii.x.ii.
that is, that they should admonish the people, that God does not greatly esteem
fasting of it self, unless there be an inward affection of the heart, a true
myslykyng of sin and of himself, true humblyng, and true sorrow through the
fear of God: yea that fasting is profitable for no other cause, but for that
it is joined to these as an inferior help. For God abhors nothing more than
when men in setting signs and an outward show instead of innocence of heart,
Esase. ^viii.v.
do labor with false color to deceive themselves. Therefore Esaie most sharply
inueyeth against this hypocrisy, that the Jews thought that they had
satisfied God, when they had only fasted, howsoever they did norish
ungodliness and unclean thoughts in their heart. Is it (says he) such a
fasting which the Lord requires? and so forth as follows. Therefore the
hypocritical fasting is not only an unprofitable and superfluous werying, but
also a great abomination. An other evil nere unto this is chiefly to be taken
head of, that it be not taken for a meritorious work, or a form of
worshippyng God. For sith it is a thing of it self indifferent, and has no
value but by reason of those ends which it ought to have respect unto, it is a
most hurtful superstition, to confound it with the works commanded of God
and necessary of themselves without other respect. Lib. ii. de mor Manich cap.
xiii and lib xx. co^tra Faust.
Such was in old time the dotage of the Manichees: whom when Augustine
confuteth, he does plainly enough teach, that fasting is to be judged by no
other ends than those which I have spoken of, and is no otherwise allowed of
God, unless it be referred to the same. The third error is in deed not so
ungodly, yet it is perilous: to require the keeping of it more precisely and
rigorously as it were one of the chief duties, and so to advance it with
immeasurable praises, that men should think they have done some excellent thing
when they have fasted. In which behalf I dare not altogether excuse the old
fathers, but that they have sowed some seeds of superstition, and given
occasion to the tyranny which has risen sins. There are found in deed
sometimes in them sound and wise sentences of fasting, but afterward we now
and then mete with immeasurable praises of fasting which advance it among the
chief virtues.

And at that time the superstitious obseruyng of lent was each where Mathe.
^iii.ii.
and the pastors did commend it for a holy following of Christ: whereas it is
plain, that Christ did not fast to prescribe an example to other, but that in
so beginning the preaching of the Gospel, he might in very deed prove that it
was not a doctrine of men, but descended from heaven. And it is marvelous,
that so gross an error, which is confuted with so many and so evident resons,
could crepe into men of so sharp judgment. For Christ did not fast often (which
he must needs have done if he would have set forth a law of yearly fasting) but
only ones when he prepared himself to the publishyng of the Gospel. And he
fasted not after the manner of men, as it was mete that he should have done
if he would have provoked men to follow him: but rather he shows an example,
whereby he may rather draw men to wonder at him than stir them up to follow
him. Finally there is none other cause of this fasting, than of that which
Moses fasted when he received the law at ye hand of the Lord. Exodus
xxiiii.xviii. et xxxiiii.xxviii.
For since ye miracle was showed in Moses to stablishe the authority of the
law, it ought not to have been omitted in Christ, least the Gospel should seem
to give place to the law. But sins that time it never came in any man's mind
under color of following of Moses to require such a form of fasting in the
people of Israel. Neither did any of the holy Prophets and fathers follow it,
when yet they had mind and zeal enough to godly exercises. For, that which is
said of Helias, i. Kings. xix.vi.
that he passed forty days without meat and drink, tended to no other end
but that the people should know that he was stirred up to be a restorer of the
law from which almost all Israel had departed. Therefore it was a mere wrongful
zeal and full of supertitio^, that they did set forth fasting with the title
and color of following of Christ. Howbeit in the manner of fasting there was
then great diversity, as Cassiodorus rehearses out of Socrates in the nynth
book of his history. For the Romans (says he) had but three weeks, but in
these there was a continual fasting, except on the Sunday and Saturdaye. The
Slauonians and Grecians and six wekes: other had seven: but their fasting was
by divided times. And they disagreed no less in difference of meats. Some did
eat nothing but bread and water: some added herbs: some did not forbear
fish and fowls: sum had no difference in meats. Of this diversity
Augustine also makes mention in the latter Epistle to January.

Then followed worse times, and to the preposterous zele of the people was added
both ignorance and rudeness of the Bishops, and a Ad Nepotian.
Hierome tells, that even in his time were some that with such follies did
mock with God: which because they would not eat oil, caused most deyntie
meats from every place to be brought them: yea to oppress nature with
violence, they absteined from drinking of water, but caused sweet and costly
suppinges to be made for them, which they did not drink out of a cup, but out
of a shell. Which fault was then in a few, at this day it is a common fault
among all rich men, that they fast to no other end but that they may banquet
more sumptuously and deyntily. But I will not waste many words in a matter not
doutefull. Only this I say, that both in fasting and in all other parts of
discipline, the papists so have nothing right, nothing pure, nothing well
framed and orderlye, whereby they may have any occasion to be proud, as
though there were any thing remaining among them worthy of praise.

ordinances of their Elders, and were fallen from the rigorous kind of life,
to softness and deyntinesse, that yet they covered this shame, saying that
they diligently kept the ancient vsages. For when in ye time of Cirus
sobriety and temperance so far flourished that men neded not to wipe, yea and
it was accounted a shame: with posterity this continued a religious
observation, that no man should draw snott out at his nosethrilles, but it was
lawful to suck it up, and feed within even till they were rotten the stinking
humors which they had gathered by gluttonous eating. So by the old order it is
unlawful to bring winepots to the board: but to swill in wine that they need
to be carried away dronken, is tolerable. It was ordained to eat but ones in a
day: this these good successors have not abrogate, but they gave leave to
continue their surfettinges from midde day to midde night. The custom was
that men should make an end of their days journey fasting. But it was at
liberty and vsedly the custom, for avoiding of werinesse, to shorten their
journey to two hours. Whenever the Papists shall pretend their bastard
rules, to show themselves to be like to the holy fathers: this example shall
sufficiently reprove their fond counterfaiting that no painter can more lively
express it.

In one thing they be to rigorous and vnentreatable, that they give i. Tim.
iii.ii. and. i.vi. i. Timo* iiii.iii.
But what could be more vehemently spoken, than where he pronounces by the
Holy ghost, that there shall be in the last times wicked men that shall forbid
marriage: and he calls them not only deceivers, but deuells? This therefore
is a Prophecy, this is a holy Oracle of the Holy ghost, wherewith he willed to
arm the Church aforehande against dangers, that the forbidding of marriage is
the doctrine of deuells. But they think that they have gaily escaped when they
wrest this sentence to Montanus, the Tatrans, Eucratites and other old
heretics. They only (say they) condemned marriage: but we do not condemn
it, but debar the Clergy from it, for whom we think it not to be
convenient. As though albeit this prophecy was first fulfilled in those
aforesaid me^, it might not also be applied to these: or as though this
childish fond sutteltie were worth the hearing, that they say that they
forbid it not, because they forbid it not to all. For it is al one as if a
tyrant wo^ld affirm that it is not an unjust law, with injustice whereof one
part (...) of the city is oppressed.

Sirituis ad episcop. hispansaru^.
And, on Gods name, not contented with this general disprayse they call it in
their canons uncleanness and defiling of the flesh. Let every man think with
himself out of what workshop these things be come: Christ vouchesaueth so to
honor marriage that he wills it to be an image of his holy conioyning with the
Chirch. What could be spoken more honorably to set out the dignity of
marriage? With what face therefore shall that be called unclean or defiled
wherein shines a likeness of the spiritual grace of Christ?

Heb. xiii.iiii.
therefore they are vainly compared with them. Wherefore the Apostle does without
exception boldly pronounce, that marriage is honorable among all men, but that
for whoremongers and adulterers abides the judgment of God. And the Apostles
themselves did with their own example approve yt marriage is not unmeet for the
holiness of any office be it never so excellent. i. Corin. ix.v.
For Paul witnesses that they did not only keep wynes, but also carried them
about with them.

more in holiness. For if they pass not upon the Apostles, (as they are wont
sometime stoutely to despise them) what I beseech you will they do to all the old
fathers, whom it is certain to have not only suffered, but also allowed
marriage in the order of Bishops? They forsooth did nourish a filthy profaning
of holy things, forasmuch as so the mysteries of the Lord were not rightly
reverenced among them. It was moved in deed in the Nicene Sinode to have
unmarried life commanded: as there always want not some superstitious men,
Histo. tripart. Lib. ii. ca* xiiii.
which do ever inuente some new thing, to bring themselves in admiration. But
what was decreed? The sentence of Paphuntius was assented to, which pronounced
that a man's lyeng with his own wife is chastity. Therefore marriage remained
holy among them: neither did it turn them to any shame, nor was thought to
spott the ministry.

Then followed times, in which to superstitious observation of single

Therefore whensoever ye defe^ders of this new tirannie shall seek the pretense
necessary, which being of it self at liberty hangs upon the profit of the
Chirch. Yet I say not this for that I think that in any condition place is to
be given to those canons which lay the bond of unmarried life upon the order of
Prestes: but that the wiser sort may understand with what face our enemies do
sclaunder holy marriage in Prestes, by obiecting the name of antiquity. As
touching the fathers, whoes wrytinges remain, even they when they speak of
their own judgment, except Hierome, did not with so great spitefulness deface
the honestye of marriage. Homel de inue^t. crucis.
We shall be content with one commendation of Chrysostom: because he sith he
was a principal estemer of virginity, can not be thought to have been more
lavish than other in commendation of marriage. Thus he says: The first degree
of chastity is pure virginity: the second is faithful marriage. Therefore the
second kind of virginity is the chaste love of matrimony.

The.xiii. Chapter. Of vows, by rash promising whereof each man has miserably
entangled himself.
IT is verily a thing to be lamented, that the Chirch, for whom liberty was
purchased with the inestimable price of the blood of Christ, has been so
oppressed with cruel tyranny, and almost overwhelmed with a huge heap of
traditions: but in the mean time every man's private madness shows, that not
without most just cause there has been so much permitted of God to Satan and
his ministers. For they thought it not enough, neglecting the commandment of
Christ, to bear any burdens whatsoever were laid upon them by false
teachers, unless they did also each man procure to himself several burdens
of his own, and so with digging pittes for themselves should drown themselves
deper. This was done while they striued in devising of vows, by which there
might be added to the common bonds a greater and streighter byndig. Sith
therefore we have taught, that by their boldness which have borne rule under
the title of Pastors in the Chirch, the worshipping of God has been corrupted,
when they snared silly consciences with their unjust laws: here it shall not be
out of season to adioyne an other evil which is nere unto it, that it may
appear that the world according to ye perverseness of his own disposition,
has always, with such stoppes as it could, put away the helps whereby it should
have been brought to God. Now, that it may the better appear that very grievous
hurt has been brought in by vows, let the reders keep in mind the principles
above set. For first we have taught, that whatsoever may be required to the
framing of life godlily and holily, is comprehended in the law. Again we have
taught, that the Lord, that he might thereby the better call us away from
devising of new works, has enclosed the whole praise of righteousness in the
simple obedience of his will. If these things be true, it is easy to judge yt
al feigned worshippi^ges, which we inue^t to our selves to deserve the favor of
God, are not acceptable to him how much soever they please us. And truly the
Lord himself in many places does not only openly refuse them, but also
grievously abhorte them. Hereupo^ arises a dout of those vows which are made
beside the express word of God, what account is to be made of them, whether
they may rightly be vowed of Christian me^, and how far they bind them. For
the same which among men is called a promise, in respect of God is called a
vow. But to men we promise those things either which we think will be
pleasant unto them, or which we owe of duty. Therefore there ought to be a
much greater hedefull observation in vows which are directed to God himself,
with whom we ought to deal most earnestly. In this point superstition has
in all ages maruelously ranged, so that men without judgment, without choice,
did by and by vow unto God whatsoever came in their mind, or into their
mouth. Hereupon came those follies, yea monstrous absurdities of vows among
ye heathen, wherewith they did to insolently mock with their Gods. And I would
to God yt Christians also had not followed this their boldness. It ought not
in deed to have been so: but we se that in certain ages paste nothing has been
more usual than this wickedness, that the people each where despising the
law of God did wholly burn with mad gredinesse to vow whatsoever had pleased
them in their dream. I will not hatefully enforce, nor particularly rehearse
how hainously and how many ways herein men have offended: but I thought good
to say this by the way, that it may the better appear, that we do not move
question of a nedelesse matter, when we entreat of vows.

Now if we will not err in judging which vows be lawful, and which be
wrongful, it behooves to weye three things: that is to say, who it is to
whom the vow is made: who we be that make the vow: last of all, with what
mind we vow. The first point has respect to this, Colo. ii.xxiii.
that we should think that we have to do with God, whom our obedience so
much deliteth, that he pronounces all willworships to be accursed, how gay
and glorious soever they be in the eyes of me^. If all voluntary worshippes,
which we our selves devise without commandment, be abominable to God, it
follows that no worship can be acceptable to him but that which is allowed by
his word. Therefore let us not take so great liberty to our selves that we
dare vow to God that which has no testimony how it is esteemed of him. To.
xiiii.xxiii.
For whereas that which Paul teaches, that it is sin whatsoever is done
without Faith, extends to all doings, then verily it chefely has place when
thou directest thy thought the streighte way to God. But if we fall and err
even in the smallest things, (as Paul there disputes of the difference of
meats) where certainty of Faith shines not before us: how much more
modesty is to be used, when we attempt a thing of greatest weyghte? For
nothing ought to be more earnest unto us than the duties of religion. Let
this therefore be the first consideration in vows, that we never come to the
vowing of any thing, but that conscience have first certainly determined that
it attempteth nothing rashly. But it shall then be free from danger of
rashness, when it shall have God going before it, and as it were enforming it
by his word what is good or unprofitable to be done.

Arausium, that nothing is ryghtly vowed to God but that which we have received
of his hand, Council. Arausi. cap. xi. Romans xii.iii. i. Cor. xii.xi.
forasmuch as all things that are offered him are his mere gifts. But since
some things are by gods goodness given us, and other some things by his
equity denied us: let every man (as Paul commands) have respect to the
measure of grace given unto him. Therefore I do here mean nothing else, but
that vows must be tempered to ye measure which the Lord prescribes thee in
his giving: lest if ye attempt further tha^ he permits, thou throw thy self
down hedlong with taking to much upon thee. As for example. When those
murderers, Act. xxiii.xii.
of whom mention is made in Luke, vowed that they would taste of no meat till
Paul were slayen: although the devise had not ben wicked, yet the rashness it
self was not to be suffered, that they made the life and death of a man
subject to their power. So Iephthe suffered punishment for his folly, Iud.
x^.xxx.
when with hedlong heat he conceived an unadvised vow. In which kind unmaried
life has ye chief place of mad boldness. For sacrificing Prestes, monks, and
nonnes, forgettyng their own weakness, think themselves able to keep
unmarried life. But by what Oracle are they taught that they shall have
chastity throughout al their life, to ye very end whereof they vow it? They
hear the word of God concerning ye universal state of men, Gene. ii.xviii.
It is not good for man to be alone. They understand, and I would to God yt
they did not feel, yt sin remaining in us is not without most sharp
pricks. With what confidence dare they shake of ye general calling for all
their life long: whereas ye gift of continence is oftener granted for a
certain time as opportunity requires? In such stubbornness let them not look
for God to be their helper: but let them rather remember that which is said.
Thou shall not te^pt the Lord thy God. And this is to tempt God, to endeavor
against the nature put in us by him, and to despise his present gifts as
though they nothing belonged unto us. Which they not only do: but also marriage
it self, which God thought it not against his majesty to institute, which he
has pronounced honorable in all men, Heb xiii.iiii. Job.ii.ii.
which Christ our Lord has sanctified with his presence, which he vouchesaued
to honor with his first miracle, they dare call defyling, only to advance with
marvelous commendations a certain unmarried life of what sort soever it be.
As though they themselves did not show a clear example in their life, that
unmarried state is one thing, and virginity an other: which their life yet
they most shamelesly call Angelyke, doing herein verily to great injury to the
Angels of God to whom they compare whoremongers, adulterers, and somewhat else
much worse and filthier. And truly here need no arguments, when they are
openly confuted by the thing it self. For we plainly se, with how horrible
peines the Lord does commonly take vengeance of such arrogance, and contempt
of his gifts by to much trust in themselves. I spare for shame to speak of
the more secret faults, of which even this that is already perceived is to
much. It is out of controversy that we ought to vow nothing, that may hinder
us from serving of our vocation. As if a householder should vow, that he will
leave his wife and his children and take other charges in hand: or if he that
is filt to bear office, when he is chosen do vow that he will be a private
man. But what is meant by this, that our liberty should not be despised, has
some difficulty if it be not declared. Therefore thus in few words I
expound it. Since God has made us Lords of all things, and has so made them
subject unto us that we should use them all for our commodity: there is no
cause why we should hope that it shall be and acceptable work to God if we
yield our selves into bondage to the outward things which ought to be a help
unto us. I say this for this purpose, because many do hereby seek praise of
humility, if they snare themselves with many observations, from which God not
without cause willed us to be free and discharged. Therefore if we will escape
this danger, let us always remember that we ought not to depart from that order
which the Lord has ordained in the Christian Chirch.

Now I come to that which I did set in the third place: that it is much
material with what mind thou make a vow, if thou will Gene. xxviii.xx.
if the Lord did bring him home safe out of banishment into his contree. Again
in ye old Sacrifices of the peaceoffringes, which godly kings and capitaines,
when they took in hand righteous war, Psa. xxii.xxvii. and. lvi.xiii. and.
cxvi xiiii.xviii.
did vow that they would pay if they had obtained the victory. or at least
when they were oppressed with any great distress, if ye Lord had delivered
them. So are all those places in the Psalms to be understood which speak of
vows. Such vows may at this day also be in use among us, so often as the Lord
has delivered us either out of any calamity, or from a hard sickness, or
from any other hanger. For it is then not against the duty of a godly manne,
to consecrate to God his vowed oblation, as a solemn token of his
reknowleging, least he should seem unthankful toward his goodness. Of what
sort the second kind is, it shall suffice to show with one only familiar
example. If any by the vice of gluttony by fallen into any offense, nothing
withstandeth but that to chastise his intemperance he may for a tune forsake al
deinty meats, and may do the same with a vow adioined, that he may bind
himself with the streighter bond. Yet I do not so make a perpetual law to
them that have likewise offended: but I show what is lawful for them to do,
which shall think such a vow profitable for themselves. I do therefore so make
such a vow lawful, that in the mean time I leave it at liberty.



whereby we may safely weye of what sort every vow is. Neither yet think that
I so commend the very same vows which I affirm to be holy, that I would have
them to be daily. For though I dare teach no certain rule of the number or
time: yet if any man obey my counsel, he shall take upon him none but sobre
and for a time. For if thou oftentimes break forth into making of many vows,
all religiousnesse will with very continuance grow out of estimation with
thee, and thou shall come to a bendyng readiness to fall into superstition. If
thou bind thy self with a perpetual vow, either for great pain and
tediousness thou shall undo it, or being weried with long continuance thou
shall at one time or other be bold to break it.

Now also it is plain with how great superstition in this behalf the

To reckon up all the particular forms, is nothing to purpose. But many other
singular and excellent men in their time. And Augustine shows that this was
also used in his time, that monasteries yielded clerks to the Chirch. Epi. ^1.
For he speaks thus to the monks of the Isle of Caprarea: But you brethren
we exhort in the Lord, that ye keep your purpose and continue to the end: and
if at any time our mother the Church shall require your travail, do ye
neither with gredy pride take it upon you, nor with flateryng slothfulness
refuse it: but with a meke har^ obey to God. Neither prefer ye your own
quiet leisure above the necessities of the Chirch: to whom if no good men would
have ministered in her travail, you should not have found how you should have been borne. He speaks there of the ministry, by which the faithful are
spiritually borne again. Epi. 76.
Also to Aurelius: There is both occasion of falling given to themselves, and
most heinous wrong done to the order of the clergy, if forsakers of
monasteries be chosen to the soldiorship of the clergy: when even of those
that remain in the monastery, we use to take into the clergy none but the
most aproued and best. Unless parhappes as the common people say, he is an
evil pyner but a good fiddler: so it shall also be ieslyngly said of us, he is
an evil monk, but a good clerk. It is to much to be lamented, if we lift
up monks into such a ruinous pride, and think clerks worthy of so great
reproach, whereas sometime eue^ a good monk makes not a good clerk, if he have
sufficient continence, and yet want necessary learning. By these places it
appears, that godly men were wont with the discipline of monks to prepare
themselves to the government of the Church, that they might the fitter and
better instructed take so great an office upon them. Not that they all atteyned
to this end, or yet tended toward it, when for the most part they were
unlearned men: but such were chosen out as were mete for it.

But chiefly in two places he paynteth out unto us the form of the De mor.
eccles. cathel. cap. xxxi.
gathered into one most chaste and holy life, they spend their time together,
living in prayers, readynges, and disputations, not swellyng with pride, not
troublesome with stubbornness, not wa^ne with enuiousnesse. None possesses any
thing of his own, none is burdenous to any man. They get by woorkyng with
their hands those things wherewith both their body may be fed, and their
mind may not be hindered from God. Their work they deliver to them whom they
call deanes. Those Deanes despisyng all things with great carfulness make
account thereof to one whom they call Father. These Fathers not only most holy
in manners, but also most excellent in godly doctrine, hye in all things, do
with no pride provide for them whom they call children, with great authority
of them in commanding, and great willyngnesse of the other in obeying: They
come together at the very last time of yt day, every one from his dwelling,
while they be yet fasting to hear that Father: and there mete together to
every one of these Fathers at the least three thousand men, (he speaks
chefely of Egypt, and of the East) then they refreshe their body, so much as
suffiseth for life and healthfulnesse, every man restrainyng his desire, not to
take largely even of those things that they have present very spare and vile.
So they do not only abstain from flesh and wine, so much that they may be
able to tame their lusts, but from such things which do so much more
gredily provoke appetite of the belly and throat, how much they seem to
other, to be as it were cleaner, by color whereof the filthy desire of
exquisite meats, which is not in flesh, is wont to be fondly and fowly
defended. Whatsoever remains above necessary food (as there remains
oftentimes much of the works of their hands and pinching of their fare) is
with greater care distributed to the poor, than it was gotten by them that do
distribute it. For they do in no wise trauail that they may have abundance of
these things, but they by all means endeavor that that which they have
aboundyng may not remain with them. Afterward when he has rehearsed the
hardness, whereof he himself had seen examples both at Millain and else where:
among these things (says he) no man is enforced to hard things which he can
not bear: Ibide^. ca. xxxiii. Tit. ^. x^
no man is charged with that which he refuses: neither is he therefore
condemned of the rest, because he confesses himself to want strength in
following of them: for they remember how much charity is commended: they
remember that all things are clean to the clean. Therefore all their diligence
watches, not to the refusyng of kinds of meat as unclean, but to tame lust,
and to retain the love of brethren. They remember, i. Cor. vi.xiii.
meat for the belly, and the belly for meats. etc. Yet many strong do abstain
for the weakes sake. Many of them have no need to do thus: but because it
pleases them to sustain themselves with baser diet and nothing sumptuous.
Therefore they themselves, which being in health do forbear, if consideration
of their health compel, when they are sick do take without any fear. Many
drink no wine, and yet they thynk not themselves defiled with it: for they
most gently cause it to be given to the fainter, and to them that can not get
the health of their body without it: and some which foolishly refuse it, they
do brotherly admonish that they be not with vain superstition sooner made
weaker than holier. So they diligently exercise godliness: but they know that
the exercisyng of the body pertains but to a short time. Charity is
chefesly kept: to charity the diet, to charity the speech, to charity the
apparel, to charity the countenance is fitted. They mete and conspire into
one charity. To offend it is accounted as heinous as to offend God. If any
resist charity, he is cast out and shunned. If any offend charity, he is
not suffered to abide one day. Forasmuch as in these words, as in a painted
table, that holy man seems to have set out what manner of life monkerie was in
old time, although they were somewhat long, yet I was content to enterlace
them here: because I saw that I should have been somewhat longer if I had gathered
the same things out of diverse, how much soever I studied for brefenesse.

But my purpose here is not to go through this whole matter, but only what face
they have which allege antiquity to maynteyne the present monkrie. Augustine
when he depaynteth unto us a holy and true monkrie, would have to be absent
all rigorous exactyng of those things which by the word of the Lord are left
us at liberty. But there is nothing that is at this day more severely
required. For they count it a mischief that can never be purged, if any do
never so little swerve from the prescribed rule in color or fashion of garment,
in kind of meat, or in other triflyng and cold ceremonies. De opere monach.
Augustine stoutly mainteineth, that it is not lawful for monks to live idle
upon other men's. He denies that there was ever in his time any such example
of a well ordered monastery. Our men set the chief part of their holiness
in idleness. For if you take idleness from them, where shall be that
contemplative life whereby they bost that they excel all other men, and approach
nere unto Angels? Finally Augustine requires such a monkrie, as should be
nothing but an exercise and help to the duties of godliness which are
commended to all Christians. What? when he makes charity the chief, yea and
almost only rule thereof, do we think that he praises a conspiryng, whereby a
few men being bound together, are severed from the whole body of the
Church? But rather he wills them with their example to give light to other
to keep the unity of the Church. In both these points, there is so much
difference of the monkrie at this present, that a man can scarcely find any
thing more unlike, I will not say contrary. For our monks not contented with
that godliness, to the study of which alone Christ commands them that are
his continually to apply, do imagine I wot not what new godliness, by
meditation whereof they may be perfecter than other.

the same accounted unworthy? And how great wrong (I beseech you) is done to
God, when I wot not what new found thing is preferred above all the kinds of
life ordained by himself, and praised by his own testimony?

But go to, let them say that it is a sclau^der which I have before said, that
they are not contented with the rule prescribed of God. Yet though I hold my
peace, they themselves do more than enough accuse themselves. For they openly
teach, that they take upon them more burden than Christ laid upon his: Math.
v.xiiii.
because forsoothe they promise to keep the counsels of the Gospel concerning
loving their enemies, not coveting of revenge, not swearyng. etc. to which
things Christians are not generally bound. Herin what antiquity will they
show forth against us? This never came in any of the old fathers minds.
They all cry out with one voice that there was no one little word at all
uttered of Christ, which ought not necessarily to be obeyed. And without any
doutyng they do echewhere teach, that these very same things by name were
commandments, which these good expositors triflyngly say, that Christ did
but counsel. But forasmuch as we have before taught that this is a most
pestilent error, let it suffice here to have brefely noted that the monkrie
which is at this day, is grounded upon the same opinion, which all the godly
ought worthily to abhor: which is, that there should be imagined some
perfecter rule of life, than this common rule which is given of God to the
whole Chirch. Whatsoever is bilded upon this fundation, can not be but
abominable.

But they bring an other proof of their perfection, which they think Mat.
xix.xxi.
For the Lord said to the young man that asked him of the perfection of
righteousness, If thou will be perfect, sell all that thou have and give it to
the poor. Whether they do so or no, I do not yet dispute: but grant them yt
for this present. Therefore they boste that they be made perfect by forsakyng
all theirs. i Cor. xiii iii.
If the sum of perfection stand in this, what means Paul when he
teaches, that he which has distributed all his goods to the poor, unless
he have charity, is nothing? What manner of perfection is this, which if
charity be absent, is brought with man to nothing? Here they must needs
answer, that this is the chiefest in deed, but not the only work of
perfection. But here also Paul cries against them, Coloss. iii xiiii.
which sticks not to make charity the bond of perfection, without any such
forsakyng. If it be certain that between the master and the disciple is no
disagreement, and the one of them clearly denies the perfection of man to
consist in this that he should forsake all his goods, and again affirms,
that perfection is without it: we must see how that saying of Christ is to be
taken. If thou will be perfect, sell all that thou have. Now, it shall be no
dark sense, Luke. x.xxv.
if we wey (which we ought always to mark in all the preachynges of Christ)
to whom these words be directed. A young man asks, by what works he shall
enter into everlasting life. Christ, because he was asked of works, sends
him to the law, and rightfully: for it is the way of eternal life, if it be
considered in it self, and is no otherwise unable to bring salvation unto us
but by our own perverseness. By this answer Christ declared, that he
teaches no other rule to frame life by, than the same that had in old time
ben taught in the law of the Lord. So did he both give witness to the law
of God, that it was the doctrine of perfect righteousness: and therwithall
did mete with sclaunders, that he should not seem by any new rule of life to
stir the people to forsakyng of the law. The young man being in deed not of an
euel mind, but swelling with vain confidence, answered that he had from his
childhode kept all the commandments of the law. It is most certain that he
was an infinite space distant from that to which he bosted that he had
atteined. And if his bostyng had been true, he had wanted nothing to the highest
perfection. For we have before showed, that the law contains in it self
perfect righteousness: and the same appears hereby, that the keeping of it is
called the way of eternal salvation. That he might be taught to know how
little he had profited in that righteousness, which he had to boldly answered
that he had fulfilled, it was profitable to shake out a familiar fault of his.
When he abounded in richesse, he had his heart fastened upon them. Therefore
because he felt not this secret wound, Christ launced him. Go (says he)
sell all that thou haste. If he had been so good a keeper of the law as he
thought he was, he would not have gone away sorrowful when he heard this word.
For who so loves God with all his heart, whatsoever disagreeth with the love of
him, he not only takes it for dong, but abhors as bringyng destruction.
Therefore whereas Christ commands the covetous richeman to leave all that he
has, it is all one, as if he should command the ambitious man to forsake all
honors, the voluptuous man all delites, and the unchaste man all the
instruments of lust. So consciences that are touched with no felyng of
general admonition, must be called back to the particular felyng of their own
evil. Therefore they do in vain draw this special case to general
exposition, as though Christ did set the perfection of man in forsaking of
goods: whereas he mente nothing else by this saying, than to drive the young man
that stood to much in his own conceit, to feel his own sore, that he
might understand that he was yet a great way distant from perfect obedience of
the law, which otherwise he did falsely take upon him. I grant that this place
has been euel understood of some of the Fathers, and that thereupon grew this
couetyng of wilful poverty, whereby they only were thought to be blessed,
which forsakyng all earthly things, did dedicate themselves naked to Christ.
But I trust that all the good and not contentious men will be satisfied with
this my exposition, so that they shall no more doubt of the meaning of Christ.
Howbeit the Fathers thought nothing less, than to stablishe such a
perfection, as has sins ben framed by the cowled Sophisters, thereby to raise
up a double Christianity. For that doctrine full of sacrilege was not yet
borne, which compares the profession of monkrie to Baptism, yea and openly
affirms, that it is a form of second Baptism. Who can doubt that the
Fathers with all their heart abhorred this blasphemy? Now as touching that
last thing, which Augustine says to have been among the old Monks, that
is, that they applied themselves whollye to Charity: what need I to show in
words that it is most far from this new profession? The thing it self
speaks, that all they that go into Monasteries, depart from the Church.
For why? Do not they sever themselves from the lawful fellowship of the
faithful, in taking to themselves a peculiar ministry and private
ministration of Sacraments? What is it to dissolve the Communion of the
Church, if this be not it? And (that I may follow the comparison which I
began to make, and may ones conclude it) what have they in this behalf like
to the old monks? They although they dwelt severally from other men, yet had
not a several Chirch: they did partake of the sacraments together with other:
they appeared at solemn assemblies: there they were a part of the people.
These men, in erectyng to themselves a private altar, what have they else done
but broken the bond of unity? For they have both excommunicate themselves
from the whole body of the Chirch, and have despised the ordinary ministry,
whereby the Lord willed to have peace and charity kept among his. Therefore how
many ministeries there be at this day. I say that there be so many assemblies
of schismatikes, which troublyng the order of the Chirch, are cut of from the
lawful fellowship of the faithful. And that this departing should not be
secret, they have given to themselves diverse names of sects. Neither were they
ashamed to bost of that, which Paul does so detest that he can not
sufficiently amplify the haynousnesse of it. Unless parhappe we think that
Christ was divided of the Corynthians, when one gloried of one teacher, and an
other of an other: and that now it is done without any injury to Christ, that
instead of christians we hear some called Benedictines, some Franciscanes,
some Dominicanes: and that they are so called, that they themselves when they
couete to be severally known from the common sort of Christians, do with great
pride take these titles to them for the profession of their religion.

These differences which I have hitherto rehearsed between the old monks and
the monks of our age, are not differences in manners, but in the profession it
self. Therefore let the readers remember that I have rather spoken of monkrie
than of monks, and have touched those faults, not which stick in the life of
a few of them, but which can not be severed from their very order of living it
self. But what difference is in their manners, what need I particularly to
declare? This is certain, that there is no degree of men more defiled with all
filthiness of vices: no where more are factio^s, hatredes, affections of
parties, ambitions whoter than among them. In deed in a few monasteries they
live chastely, if it be to be called chastity where lust is so far kept down
that it be not openly evil spoken of: yet a man shall scarcely find every
tenth monastery which is not rather a stews than a holy house of chastity.
But what honest sparyng is in their diet? Swine be none otherwise satted in
sties. But least they should complain that I handle them to vngen^ly, I go
no further. Howbeit in those few things which I have touched, whosoever
knows the thing it self will confess that there is nothing spoken
accuserlike. Augustine, when according to his testimony monks excelled in so
great chastity, yet complains that there were many vagabundes, which with
evil crafts and deceites wiped simple men from their money, which with
carrying about the relics of martyrs did use filthy merchandisynges, yea and
in steed of the relics of martyrs did show forth ye bones of any other dead
men, and which with many such wicked doings sclandred the order. As he
reports that he saw no better men than them which have profited in
monasteries, so he lamenteth that he has seen no worse men than those that
disprofited in monasteries. What would he say if at this day he saw all
monasteries to swell, and in a manner to burst with so many and so despeired
vices? I speak nothing but that which is well known to all men. Yet does not
this dispraise perteine to all without any exception at all. For as there was
never rule and discipline of living holyly so stablished in monasteries, but
that there remained some draues much unlike the rest: so I do not say that
monks ar at this day so run out of kind from that holy antiquity, but that
they have yet some good men in their ^locke. But they lie hydden a few and
scattered in that huge multitude of naughty and wicked men: and they are not
only despised, but also lewdly rayled at, and sometime cruelly handeled of
other, which (as the Milesians proverb is) think that there ought to be no
place for any honest man among them.



To. xiiii.xxiii. Deu^er. xxxi.xvii. Psalm. cvi; xxxvii;
is sin. Moreover when they bind the^ selves to many perverse and wicked
worshippings, which ye monkry at this day co^teineth in it. I affirm yt they
be not consecrate to God, but to ye devil. For why was it lawful for ye
Prophet to say, yt the Israelites offered their children to devils and not to
God: only for this yt they had corrupted ye true worshipping of God with
profane Ceremonies: and shall it not be lawful for us to say the same of
monks, which with their cowle do put upon themselves a snare of a thousand
wicked superstitions? Now what sorts of vows are there? They promise to God
perpetual virginity, as though they had bargained with God before, that he
should deliver them from need of marriage. There is no cause why they should
allege, that they do not make this vow but trusting upon the grace of God. For
sith he pronounces that he gives it not to all men, Mat. xix.xi.
it is not in us to conceive a confidence of a special gift. Let them that
have it, use it. If at any time they feel themselves to be troubled of their
flesh, let them flee to his help by whoes only power they may resist. If
they prevail not, let them not despise the remedy that is offered them. For
they by the certain word of God are called to marriage, to whom power of
co^tinence is denied. i. Cor. vii.ix.
Continence I call, not whereby the body is only kept clean from whoredom,
but whereby the mind keeps chastity undefiled. For Paul commands not
only outward wantonness, but also the burning of the mind, to be avoided.
This (say they) has from furthest time of memory ben observed, that they
which would dedicate themselves wholly to the Lord, should bind themselves
to the vow of continence. I grant in deed that this manner has also ben of
ancient time received: but I do not grant that that age was so free from all
fault, that whatsoever was then done must be taken for a rule. And by little
and little this unappeasable severity crept in, Epi. ^^.
that after a vow made there was no room for repentance. Which is evident by
Cypriane. If virgins have of Faith dedicate themselves to God, let them
continue shamefastly, and chastely without any faining. So being strong and
steadfast let them look for the reward of virginity. But if they will not or
can not continue, it is better that they should marrye than with their
delights fall into the fire. What reproaches would they now spare to tear him
withal, that would with such equity temper the vow of continence? Therefore
they are departed far from that aunciente manner, which will not only admit
no moderation or pardon if any be found unable to perform his vow: but they
do without all shame pronounce that he sins more greuouslye if he remedy
the intemperance of the flesh with taking a wife, than if he defile both his
body and soul with whoredom.

But they still enforce the matter, and go about to show that such a i. Tim,
^* xii.
because Paul says that the widows which having ben ones received into the
Public ministry did marrye, denied their first Faith. But I do not deny to
them, that the widows, which bound themselves and their services to the
Chirch, did therewithal take upon them the bond of continual unmarried life:
not because they reposed any religion therein as it afterward began to be used:
but because they could not bear that office but being at their own liberty
and loose from yoke of marriage. But if, when they had ones given their Faith,
they looked back to new marriages, what was this else but to shake of the
calling of God* Therefore it is no marvel that with such desires he says
that they wax wanton against Christ. Afterward to amplify the matter he
says, that they do so not perform that which they have promised to the
Chirch, that they do also break and make void their first Faith given in
Baptism: in which this is comprehended, that every man should answer his
calling. Unless parhappe you had rather understand it thus, that having as it
were lost all shame they did from thense fourth cast away all care of
honesty, did give fourth themselves to all wantonness and unchastity, and
did in licentious and dissolute life resemble nothing less than Christian
women: which sense I like very well. Therefore we answer, that those widows
which were then received to Public ministere, did lay upon themselves a
bond to continue unmarried: if they afterward married, we easily perceive that
that happened to them which Paul speaks of, that casting away shame they
became more wanton than besemed Christian women. That so they not only sinned,
in breaking their Faith given to the Chirch, but swarued from the common law of
godly women. But first I deny that they did profess unmarried life for any
other reason, but because marriage agreed not with that ministry which they
took in hand: and I deny that they did bind themselves at al to single life,
but so far as the necessity of their vocation did bear. Again I do not
grant that they were so bound, but that it was then also better for them to
mary, than either to be troubled with the prickinges of the flesh, or to fall
into any vnclennese. Thirdly I say that that age is appointed of Paul, which
is commonly out of danger: specially sith he commands them only to be
chose^, which contented with one marriage have already showed a token of their
co^tine^ce. And we do for no other reso^ disallow yt vow of unmarried life, but
because it is both wrongfully taken for a service of God, and it is rashly
vowed of them to who^ power of continence is not given.

But how was it lawful to draw this place of Paul to Nonnes? For superstitions,
(as the matter is now a days) they seem to be made to this purpose, that they
which vow them should mock both God and me^. But least we should seem to
maliciously to shake up every small parcel, we will be content with that
general confutation which is above set.

What manner of vows be lawful and acceptable to God, I think To. xiiii
xxiii.
is sin. Whereby Paul means, that the work which is taken in hand with
douting, is therefore faulty, because Faith is the root of al good works, by
which we are assured that they be acceptable to God. Therefore if it be lawful
for a Christian man to go about nothing without this assuredness: if by
fault of ignorance they have taken any thing in hand, why should they not
afterward give it over when they be delivered from errors. Sith vows
unadvisedly made are such, they do not only nothing bind, but are necessarily
to be undone. Yea what if they are not only nothing esteemed, but also are
abominable in ye sight of God, as is above showed? It is nedelesse to
discourse any longer of a matter not needful. This one argument seems to me
to be enough to pacify godly consciences and deliver them from all dout: that
whatsoever works do not flow out of the pure fountain and be not directed
to the lawful end, are refused of God: and so refused that he no less
forbids us to go forewarde in them, than to begin them. For hereupon
follows, that those vows which proceed of error and superstition, are both of
no value before God, and to be forsaken of us.

Moreover he yt shall know this solution, shall have wherewith he Gal. iii.iii
I say yt they are therewithal free by the grace of Christ. For if the cross
of Christ have so great effectualnesse, that it loses us from the curse of
the law of God, wherwt we were holde^ bond how much more shall it deliver us
from foreign bonds, which are nothing but the snaring nets of Satan? To
whomsoever therefore Christ shines with the light of his Gospel, it is no
doubt that he loses them from all snares which they had put upon themselves
by superstition. Howbeit they want not yet an other defense, if they were not
fit to live unmarried. For if an impossible vow be a sure destruction of the
soul, whom the Lord would have saved and not destroyed: it follows that we
ought not to continue therein. But how impossible is the vow of contine^ce to
them that are not endued with a singular gift, we have already taught, and
experience speaks it though I hold my peace. For neither is it unknown with
how great filthiness almost all monasteries do swarm. And if any of them seem
honester, and more shamefast than the rest: yet they are not therefore chaste
because they suppress and keep in the fault of unchastity. So verily God does
with horrible examples take vengeance on the boldness of men, which
forgetting their own weakness, do against nature covet that which is denied
them, and despising the remedies which the Lord had given them at hand, do
trust that they can with stubbornness and obstinatie overcome the disease of
incontinence. For what else shall we call it but stubbornness, when one being
warned that he needs marriage, and that the same is given him of the Lord for a
remedy, does not only despise it, but also binds himself with an oath to
the despising of it?

The.xiiii. Chapter. Of Sacraments,
BYside the preaching of the Gospel, an other help of like sort is in the
Sacraments: of which to have some certain doctrine taught, is much behouefull
for us, whereby we may learn both to what end they were ordained, and what is
now the use of them. First it is mete to consider what is a Sacrament. It
seems to me that this shall be a plain and propre definition, if we say that it
is an outward sign, wherewith ye Lord seals to our consciences the promises
of his good will toward us, to sustain the weakness of our Faith: and we
again on our behalues do testify our godliness toward him as well before
him and the Angels as before me^. We may also with more brefenesse define it
otherwise: as to call it a testimony of Gods favor toward us confirmed by an
outward sign, with a mutual testifieng of our godliness toward him.
Whether soever you choose of these definitions, it differs nothing in sense
from that definition of Augustine, which teaches that a Sacrament is a visible
sign of a holy thig, or a visible form of invisible grace: but it does better
and more certainly express ye thing it self. For whereas in that brefenesse
there is some darkness, wherein many of ye vnskilfuller sort are deceived, I
thought good in more words to give a fuller sentence, that there should remain
no dout.

Greek word Mysterion mystery, specially when divine matters were entreated
of, Ephesians. i.ix. and.iii.ii.
he translated it Sacrament. So to the Ephesians, That he might make known
unto us the Sacrament of his will. Again, if yet ye have heard the
distribution of the grace of God, which is given to me in you, because
according to revelation the Sacrament was made known to me. Colos. i.xxvi. i.
Tim. iii xvi.
To the Colossians, The mystery which has been hidden from ages and
generations, but now is manifested to his Saints, to whom the Lord would make
known the richesse of this Sacrament. etc. Again to Timothee, A great
Sacrament of godliness: God is openly showed in the flesh. He would not say a
secret, least he should seem to say somewhat under the greatness of the
things. Therefore he has put Sacrament instead of Secret, but of a holy
thing. In that signification it is sometime found among the ecclesiastical
writers. And it is well enough known, that those which in Latin are called
Sacraments, in Greek are Mysteries: which expressing of one thing in two
several words ends all the contention. And hereby it came to pass that it
was drawn to those signs which had a reverend representation of hie and
spiritual things. Epi. v. ad. Marcel.
Which Augustine also notes in one place. It were long (says he) to dispute
of ye diversity of signs, which when they perteine to divine things, are
called Sacraments.

Now of this definition which we have set, we understand that a Sacrament
Homel. 60. ad populum.
Now because we have souls put within bodies, he gives spiritual things
under visible things. Not because there are such gifts planted in the
natures of the things which are set fourth to us in the Sacraments: but
because they were signed by God to this signification.

And this is it which they commonly say, yt a Sacrament consists of the the
Pope, was not without a great profaning of the mysteries. For they thought it
enough, if the Pressed, while the people stood amasedly gazing at it without
understanding, did mumble up the form of consecration. Yea they of set purpose
provided this, yt no whit of doctrine should thereof come to the people: for
they spoke all things in Latin before unlearned men. Afterward superstition
brake out so far, that they believed that the consecration was not formally
made, unless it were with a hoarse whispering sound which few might hear.
But Augustine teaches far otherwise of the Sacramental word. Let the word
(says he) be added to the element, Hom. in Ioh. xiii
and there shall be made a Sacrament. For whense comes this so great strength to
the water, to touch the body and wash the soul, but by the word making it?
not because it is spoken, but because it is believed. For in the very word it
self the sound which passes is one thing, and the power which abides is an
other. This is the word of Faith which we preach, To. x.viii. Act. xv.ix. i.
Pet. iii.xxi.
says the Apostle. Whereupon in the Acts of the Apostles it is said, by Faith
cleansing their hearts. And Peter the Apostle says. So Baptism also saves
us: not the putting away of the filthiness of the flesh, but the examination
of a good conscience. This is the word of Faith which we preach: by which
without dout, that it may be able to cleanse, Baptism also is hallowed. You se
how it riquireth preaching, whereupon Faith may grow. And we need not to
travail much in proof hereof, forasmuch as it is clear what Christ did, what
he commanded us to do, what the Apostles followed, what the purer Chirch
observed. Yea even from the beginning of the world it is known, that so often as
God offered any sign to the holy Fathers, there was added an inseperable knot
of doctrine, without which our senses should be made amassed with bare
beholding. Therefore when we hear mention made of the Sacramental word, let us
understand the promise, which being with a loud voice preached of the minister
may lead the people thither as it were by the hand, whether ye sign tends
and directs us.

Neither are some to be heard which trauail to fight against this, with a To.
iiii.xi
which Paul himself used, calling Circumcision a seal, where he purposely
trauaileth to prove, that Circumcision was not righteousness to Abraham, but a
sealyng of that couenaunte, by faith whereof he had already ben justified
before. And what, I beseech you, is there that may much offend any man, if we
teach that the promise is sealed with Sacraments, when of the promises
themselves it is euidente that one is confirmed with an other? For as every one
is manifester, so is it more fit to uphold faith. But ye Sacraments do both
bring most clear promises, and have this peculiar more than the word, that
they lively represent them to us as it were painted out in a table. Neither
ought yt distinction any thing to move us, which is wont to be objected,
between Sacraments and seals of patentes: that whereas both consist of carnal
elements of this world, those can not suffice or be mete to seal the promises
of God, which are spiritual and everlasting, as these are wont to be hanged
to, for sealing of the grauntes of Princes concerning fading and frail
things. For a faithful man, when the Sacraments are pr^sente before his
eyes, sticks not in that fleshly sight, but by those degrees of proportion,
which I have spoken of, he rises up with godly consideration to the hie
mysteries which lie hidden in the Sacraments.

And since the Lord calls his promises, Gene. vi.xviii. and. ix.ix. and.
xvii.xxii.
couenantes: and his Sacraments, seals, of couenantes: a similitude may well
be brought from the couenantes of men. What can a sow killed work, if words
were not used, yea unless they went before? For sowes are many times killed
without any more inward or hier, mystery. What can the giving of a man's
right hand do, sith oftentimes hands are matched with enmity? But when
words have gone before, by such signs the laws of leagues are stablished,
although they were first conceived, made, and decreed in words. Therefore
Sacraments are exercises which make the credit of the word of God certaynet
unto us: and because we are carnal, they are delivered under carnal things:
that so they should instruct us according to the capacity of our dullness,
and guide us by the hand as scholemaisters guide children. In John. Homel. 89.
Libr. 19. con. fau.
For this reason Augustine calls a Sacrament, a visible word: because it
represents the promises of God as it were painted in a table, and sets
them before our sight conningly expressed and as in an image. Other
similitudes also may be brought, whereby Sacraments may be more plainly set
out, as if we call them pillars of our Faith. For as a bylding stands and
rests upon the fundation: yet by setting under of pillars, it is more surely
stablished: so* Faith rests upon the word of God, as upon a fundation: but
when Sacraments are added, it stays yet more soundly upon them as upon
pillars. Or if we call them loking glasses, in which we may behold the
richesse of the grace of God, which he gives us. For (as we have already said)
he does in them manifestlye show himself to us, so much as is given to our
dullness to know, and does more expressly testify his good will and love
toward us tha^ by his word.

Neither do they reason fittly enough to the purpose, when they labor multitude
laugheth at and scorneth that authentike seal, howsoever they know that it
proceeded from the Prince to seal his will withal: some regard it not, as a
thing not perteining to them: some also abhor it: so that considering this so
egal relation of both, that same similitude which I have above used, ought more
and more to be liked. Therefore it is certain that the Lord does offer unto
us mercy and a pledge of his grace both in his holy word and in the
Sacraments: but the same is not received but of them which receive the word
and Sacraments with sure Faith: like as Christ is offered of the Father unto
salvation, to all, yet his is not acknowleged and received of all. Augustine in
one place minding to declare the same, said that the effectualnesse of the
word is showed fourth in the Sacrament: not because it is spoken, but because
it is believed. Therefore Paul, when he speaks to the faithful, so
entreats of Sacraments that he includes the communion of Christ in them,
as when he says: all ye that are Baptized, Gala iii.xxvii. i. Cor. xii.xii.
have put on Christ. Again, we are all one body and one Spirit, which are
Baptized in Christ. But when he speaks of the wrongful use of Sacraments,
he gives no more to it than to cold and void figures. Whereby he signifies,
that howsoever the wicked and hipocrites with their perverseness do either
oppress or darken or hinder the effect of the grace of God in the Sacraments,
yet that withstandeth not but that where and so often as it pleases God, both
they may bring a true testimony of the communicating of Christ, and the
Spirit of God himself may deliver and perform that which they promise. We
determine therefore that Sacraments are truly called testimonies of the grace
of God, and as it were certain seals of the good will which he bears toward
us: which by sealing it unto us, do by this mean sustain, nourishe,
confirm, and increase our faith. As for the reasons which some are wont to
object against this sentence, they are to tryfling and weak. They say that if
our Faith be good, it can not be made better: for they say that it is no Faith,
but which without shaking, steadfastly, and without withdrawing, rests upon
the mercy of God. Luk* xvii.v.
It had been better for such to pray with the Apostles that the Lord would
increase their Faith, than carelessly to pretend such a perfection of Faith,
which never any of the sons of men has obtained, nor any shall obtain in
this life. Let them answer, what manner of Faith they think that he had which
said: Mark. ix xxiiii.
I believe Lord, help my vnbeleuingnesse. For even that Faith, howsoever it
was but a begone Faith, was a good Faith, and might be made better when
vnbeleuingnesse were taken away. But they are confuted by no certainer argument
than by their own conscience. For if they confess themselves sinners, (which
whether they will or no, they can not deny) they must needs impute the same
to the imperfection of their Faith.

Act. viii.xxxvii.
if he believed with all his heart. What place here has the confirmation of
Baptism, where Faith fylleth the whole heart? Again I ask them whether they
do not feel a good part of their heart void of Faith: whether they do not
daily acknowledge new increases. The heathen manne gloryed that he waxed old
with learning. Therefore we Christians be thrice miserable, if we wax old
with profityng nothing, whoes faith ought to go forward by all degrees of
ages, till it grow into a perfect man. Therefore in this place to believe with
all the heart, Ephesians. iiii.xiii.
is not perfectely to believe Christ, but only from the heart and with a
sincere mind to embrace him: not to be full with him, but with fervent
affection to hunger, and thirste, and syghe toward him. This is the manner of
the Scripture, to say that that is done with the whole heart, which it
means to be done syncerely and heartily. Psalm. cxix x. et. cxi.i. and.
cxxxviii i. Psalm. xii.iii.
Of this sorce are these sayenges: I have in all my heart sought thee: I will
confess to thee in all my heart, and such other. As on the other side, where
he rebukes guilefull and deceitful men, he uses to reproach them with heart
and heart. Then they say further, that if faith be increased by Sacraments, the
Holy ghost is given in vain, whoes strength and work it is to begin,
mainteyn, and make perfect faith. To whom in deed I grant, that faith is the
propre and whole work of the Holy ghost, by whom being enlightened we know God
and the treasures of his goodness, and without whoes light our mind is so
blind, that it can see nothing, so senseless, that it can smell nothing of
spiritual things. But for one benefit of God which they set forth, we
consider three. For first the Lord teaches and instructs us with his word:
then he strengthens us with sacraments: last of all he shines into our
minds with the light of his holy Spirit, and opens an entry for the
word and Sacraments into our hearts, which otherwise should but strike our
ears, and be present before our eyes, and nothing move the inward parts.

Wherefore as touching the confirmation and increase of Faith, I made and fit
to hear. But if it be true, which ought at ones to be determined among us,
that what the sight works in our eyes to seeing of the light, what the hearing
works in our ears to the perceiuyng of a voice, the same is the work of the
Holy ghost in our hearts, both to the conceiuyng, and susteinyng, and
cherishing and stablishing of faith: then both these things do likewise
follow: that the Sacraments do nothing at all profit without the power of the
Holy ghost: and that nothing withstandeth but that in hearts already taught of
that scholemaister, they may make faith both stronger and more increased. Only
this difference there is, that the power of hearing and seeing is naturally set
in our ears and eyes: but Christ beside the measure of nature does by special
grace work the same in our minds.



Which propretie the Lord taught that there was in his outewarde Mat.
xiii.iiii. Luc. viii xv.
when in the parable he called it sede. For as sede, if it fall upon a desert
and untilled piece of ground, will do nothing but die: but if it be thrown
upon arable land well manured and tylled, it will bring forth her fruit with
very good increase: so the word of God, if it light upon a stiff neck, it
will grow barrein as that which is sown upon sand: but if it light upon a
soul manured with the hand of the heavenly Spirit, it will be most
fruitful. But if there be like reason of sede and of the word: as we say
that out of sede corn both springs and increases, and grows up to
ripeness: why may we not say that Faith takes out of the word of God both
beginning, increase, and perfection. Paul very well expresses both these
things in sundry places. For when he goes about to put the Corynthians in
remembrance how effectually God used his travail, i. Cor. ii.iiii. i. Cor.
iii.vi.
he glories that he has the ministry of the Spirit, as though the power of
the Holy ghost were with an inseparable knot joined with his preaching, to
enlighten and thoroughly move the mind. But in an other place when he myndeth
to admonish them, i. Cor. iii.vi.
of what force the word of God is of it self being preached by man, he
compares the ministers themselves to husbandemen, which when they have
bestowed their labor and travail in tillyng the earth, have no more to do. But
what should tillyng, and sowing, and wateryng profit, unless that which is
sown should receive liuetynesse by heavenly benefit? Therefore he concludes,
that both he that planteth and he that waters are nothing: but that all
things are to be ascribed to God, which alone gives the increase. Therefore
the Apostles do in their preaching utter the power of the Spirit, so far as
God uses the instruments ordained by himself to the setting forth of his
spiritual grace. Yet we must keep still that distinction, that we remember,
what man is able to do by himself, and what is propre to God.

Sacraments are so confirmations of our Faith, that many times Genes. xxxiii.
When he spoyleth and thrusts away Adam from the gift of immortality, he
says: Let him not eat of the fruit of life, least he live for ever. What
says he? Could that fruit restore to Adam his uncorruption, from which he
was now fallen. No. But this is all one as if he had said: Least he should
enjoy a vain confidence if he keep still the sign of my promise, let that be
shaken away from him which might bring him some hope of immortality. After
this manner when the Apostle exhorts the Ephesians to remember that they were
foreign gestes of the testamentes, Ephe. ii.xii.
strangers from the fellowship of Israel, without God, without Christ, he
says, that they were not partakers of Circumcision. Whereby he does (by figure
of transnomination) signify that they were excluded from the promise it self,
which had not received the sign of the promise. To their other objection, that
the glory of God is conveyed to creatures, to whom so much power is
ascribed, and that thereby it is so far diminished, we have in redynesse to
answer that we set no power in creatures. Only this we say, that God uses
means and instruments, which he himself sees to be expedient: that all
things may serve his glory, forasmuch as he is Lord and judge of all.
Therefore as by bread and other nourishementes he feeds our body: as by the
sun he enlightneth the world: as by fire he warmeth: yet neither bread, nor
the sun, nor fire, are any thing but so far as by those instruments he
does distribute his blessings unto us: so spiritually he nourishes Faith by
the Sacraments, whose only office is to set his promises before our eyes to
be looked upon, yea to be pledges unto us of them. And as it is our duty to
fasten none of our affiance in other creatures, which by the liberality and
bountifulness of God are ordained to our uses, and by the ministry whereof he
gives us his gifts, nor to have them in admiration and praise them as causes
of our good: so neither ought our confidence to stick fast in the Sacraments,
nor the glory of God to be removed unto them: but leauyng all things, both
our Faith and confession ought to rise up to him the author both of the
sacraments and of all things.

should testify our confession before men. According to this later
consideration those similitudes have place. But in the mean time let that
first point remain: because otherwise (as we have already proved) the
mysteries should be but cold, unless they were helps to our faith, and
additions to doctrine ordained to the same use and end.

Again we must be warned, that as these men do weaken the force, and utterly
overthrow the use of Sacraments: so on the contrary side there be some,
which feign to Sacraments, I wot note what secret virtues, which are no
where red to be putt in them by God. By which error the simple and unskillful
are dangerously deceived, while they are both taught to seek the gifts of God
where they can not be found, and are by little and little drawn away from
God, to embrace mere vanity instead of his verity. For the Sophistical
schools have taught with great consent, that the Sacraments of the new law,
that is to say those which are now in use in the Christian Chirch, do justify
and give grace, so that we do not lay a stop of deadly sin. It can not be
expressed how pernicious and pestilent this opinion is, and so much the more,
because in many ages heretofore, to the great loss of the Chirch it has
prevailed in a great part of the world: Truly it is utterly deuelishe. For
when it promises righteousness without Faith, it drives souls hedlong into
destruction: then because it fetches the cause of righteousness from the
Sacraments, it byndeth the miserable minds of men already of their own
accord to much bendyng to the earth, with this superstition that they rather
rest in the sight of a bodily thing than of God himself. Which two things I
would to God we had not so proved in experience, so little need they any long
proof. But what is a Sacrament taken without Faith, but the most certain
destruction of the Chirch? For whereas nothing is to be looked for thereof without
the promise, and the promise does no less threaten wrath to the unfaithful,
than it offreth grace to the faithful: he is deceived that thinks that there
is any more given to him by the Sacraments, than that which being offered by the
word of God, he receives by Faith. Whereupon an other thing also is gathered,
that the affiance of salvation hangs not upon the partakyng of the Sacrament,
as though Justification consisted therein: which we know to be reposed in
Christ only, and to be communicated unto us no less by the preaching of the
Gospel, than by the sealyng of the Sacrament: and that without that it can
not wholly stand. Lib. iiii. de qu^st. ver ^^sta. Lib. v de bap^ co^tra Dona
ca. xxiiii.
So true is that which Augustine also writes, that invisible sanctification
may be without a visible sign, and agayn^ that a visible sign may be without
true sanctification. For (as he also writes in an other place,) men do put on
Christ sometime until the receyuyng of a sacrament, sometime even until the
sanctification of life. And that first point may be common both to good and to
evil: but this other is propre to the good and godly.

Herupon comes that distinction if it be well understood, which that which
belongs to the other. He speaks of the separation, when he writes that the
Sacraments do work in the only elect that which they figure. De bapt. paruu.
In psalm. lxxvii.
Again, when he writes thus of the Jews: When the sacraments were common to
all, the gra^^^as not common, which is the power of the Sacraments. So no^^^
also the washing of regeneration is common to all: but the grace it self,
whereby the members of Christ are regenerate with their head, is not common to
all. Again in an other place of the Supper of the Lord, In Ioha^. homel.
xxv.ii.
We also at this day receive visible meat. But the Sacrament is one thing,
and the power of the Sacrament an other thing. What is this, that many receive
of the altar and dye, and in receyuyng do die? For the Lords morsel was
poison to Judas: not because he received an evil thing, but because he being
evil received a good thing euelly. A little after, The sacrament of this
thing, that is of the unity of the body and blood of Christ, is somewhere
prepared on the Lords table daily, somewhere by certain distances of days:
and thereof is received unto life to some, and unto destruction to some. But the
thing it self whereof it is a Sacrament, is received unto life to all me^, but
unto destruction tomo man, whosoever is partaker of it. And a little before he
had said, He shall not dye which eats: but he which pertains to the power
of the sacrament, not to ye visible Sacrament: which eats within, not
without: which eats with heart, not he which presses with toothe. Thus you
hear every where, that a Sacrament is so severed from his own truth by the
unworthiness of the receiver, that there remains nothing but a vain and
unprofitable figure. But that thou may have not a sign void of truth: but
the thing with the sign, thou must conceive by Faith the word which is
there enclosed. So how much thou shall by the Sacraments profit in
communicatyng of Christ, so much profit shalt thou take of them.

Lib. i. sent. did. i.
whereof they be parts. Therefore biddyng all causes farewell which man's wit
does feign to it self, we ought to stay in this one cause. Therefore how much
we be by their ministry helped to the nourishyng, confirmyng, and encreasyng
of the true knowledge of Christ in us, and to the possessyng of him more fully,
and to the enioyeng of his richesse, so much effectualnesse they have with us.
But that is don when we do with true faith receive that which is there offered.
Do the wicked then (will thou say) bring to pass by their unthankfulness,
that the ordinance of God be void and turn to nothing? I answer that that
which I have said, is not so to be taken, as though to force and truth of the
Sacrament did hang upon the state or will of him that receives it. For that
which God has ordained remains steadfast and keeps still his nature,
howsoever men do vary. But since it is one thing to offer, an other to
receive: nothing withstandeth but that the sign hallowed by the word of God
may be in deed that which it is called, and keep his own force: and yet that
there come thereby no profit to an evil doer and wicked man. But Augustine
does in few words well assoyle this question. Homi. in Johan. xxvi.
If (says he) thou receauest carnally, it ceasseth not to be spiritual: but
it is not to thee. But as Augustine has in the aforesaid places showed that a
Sacrament is a thing nothing worth, if it be severed from the truth thereof: so
in an other place he gives warnyng that even in the very conioynyng needs a
distinction, least we stick to much in the outward sign. As (says he) to
follow the letter, Lib. iii. de doctri Christi. cap. ix.
and to take the signs instead of the things, is a point of a servile
weakness: so to expound the signs unprofitably is a point of evil
wandryng error. He names two faults which are here to be avoided: The one
when we so take the signs as though they were given in vain, and when with
abacyng or diminyshyng their secret significations by our enuiousnesse, we
bring to pass that they bring us no profit at all. The other, when in not
raisyng our minds beyond the visible sign, we give away to the Sacrament
the praise of all those good things which are not given us but of Christ
only, and that by the Holy ghost, which makes us partakers of Christ
himself: and in deed by the help of the outward Signs: which if they
allure us to Christ, when they be wrested an other way, the whole profit of
them is unworthily overthrown.

Wherefore let this remain certain, that there is no other office of the
Sacraments that of the word of God: which is to offer and set least the
ministration which he has ordained of the Sacraments should be fruitless and
vain: yet we affirm that the inward grace of the Spirit, as it is severed
from the outward ministry, so ought to be severally weyed and considered.
God therefore truly performs in deed what soever he promises and figureth in
signs: neither do the signs want their effect, that the author of them may be
proved true and faithful. The question here is only whether God works by his
own and by inward power (as they call it) or do resign his office to outward
signs. But we affirm, that whatsoever instruments he use, his original
workyng is nothing hindered thereby. When this is taught concerning the
Sacraments, both their dignity is honorably set out, and their use is
plainly showed, and their profitablenesse is abundantly reported, and the best
mean in all these things is retained, that neither any thing be given to them
which ought not, nor again any thing be taken from them which is not convenient
to be taken from them. In the mean time that fained devise is taken away,
whereby the cause of justification and power of the Holy ghost is enclosed in
elements as in vessels or wagons: and that principal force which has been
omitted of other is expressly set out. Here also it is to be noted, that God
inwardly works that which the minister figureth and testifies by outward
doing: least that be drawn to a mortal man, which God claims to himself
alone. The same thing also does Augustine wisely touch. How (says he) does
both Moses sanctify, Question. vet. testa. lib iii ca. lxxxiiii.
and God? Not Moses for God: but Moses with visible Sacraments by his
ministry, but God with invisible grace by his holy Spirit: where also is the
whole fruit of visible Sacraments. For without this sanctification of invisible
grace, what do those visible Sacraments profit?

Gens. ii.xvii. and. iii.iii. Gene. ix.xiii.
so long as they did eat of the fruit thereof. And when he did set the heavenly
boaw for a monument to Noe and his posterity, that he would no more from
thensefoorth destroy the earth with ouerflowyng of water. These Adam and Noe
had for Sacraments. Not that the tree did give them immortality, which it
could not give to it self: nor that the Boaw (which is but a strikyng back of
a sunbeame upon the clouds against it) was of force to hold in the waters: but
because they had a mark graven in them by the word of God, that they should be
examples and seals of his testaments. And the tree was a tree before, and the
boaw a boawe. When they were written upon with the word of God, then a new
form was put into them, that they should begin to be that which they were not
before. That no man should think these things spoken without cause, the boawe
it self is at this day also a witness of that covenant, which God made with
Noe: which boaw so often as we behold, we read this promise of God written in
it, that the earth shall never be destroyed with ouerflowyng of waters.
Therefore if any fond Philosopher, to scorn the simplicity of our Faith, do
affirm that such variety of colors does naturally arise of reflected beams
and a cloud set against them: let us grant it in deed, but let us laugh to
scorn his senseless folly, which does not acknowledge God the Lord and
governor of nature: which at his ewne will uses all the elements to the
service of his own glory. If he had emprinted such tokens in the sun, ye
sterres, the earth, stones, and such like, they should all have been
Sacraments to us. Why are not uncoined and coined silver both of one value,
since they are both one metal? even because the one has nothing but nature:
when it is stryken with a common mark, it is made money, and receives a new
valuation. And shall not God be able to mark his creatures with his word,
that they may be made Sacraments, which before were naked elements? Gene.
xv.xvii. Judge. vi.xxxvii.ii. King. xx.ix. Esaias. xxxvii^.vii
Of the second kind these were examples, when he showed to Abraham a light in
a smoking oven: when he watered the flece with dew, the earth remaining dry:
again he watered the earth, the flece being untouched, to promise victory to
Gedeon: when he drew the shadow of the dial.ix. lines backward, to promise
safety to Ezethias. These things, when they were done to relieve and
stablishe the weakness of their Faith, were then also Sacraments.

But our present purpose is, to discourse peculiarly of those Sacraments,
Lib. ix. contra. faust. Manich. cap. 11,
For (to use the words of Augustine) men can be congeled together into no name
of religion either true or false, unless they be bound together with some
fellowship of visible signs and Sacraments. Sith therefore the most good
Father foresawe this necessity, he did from the beginning ordeine certain
exercises of godliness for his servants, which afterward Satan: by turning
them to wicked and superstitious worshippinges, has many ways depraved and
corrupted. Hereupon came those solemn professions of the Gentiles into their
holy orders, and other bastard vsages: which although they were full of error
and superstition, yet they also were therewith a proof that men could not in
profession of religion be without such outward signs. But because they
neither were grounded upon the word of God, nor were referred to that truth
whereunto all signs ought to be directed, they are unworthy to be rehearsed
where mention is made of the holy signs which are ordained of God and have
not swarued from their fundation, that is, that they should be helps of true
godliness. They consist not of bare signs, as were the boaw and the tree, but
upon Ceremonies: or rather the signs that be here given are Ceremonies. But as
it is above said, that they be on ye Lords behalf testimonies of grace and
salvation: so they be again on our behalf marks of profession, by which we
openly swear to the name of God, for our parts bynding our Faith unto him.
Therefore Chrysostom in one place fittly calls them couena^tinges whereby God
byndeth himself in league with us, and we be bound to pureness and holiness
of life, because here is made a mutual form of couenanting between God and
us. For as the Lord therein promises that he will cancel and blot out
whatsoever giltinesse and penalty we have gathered by offending, and does
reconcile us to himself in his only begotten Son: so we again on our
behalfes do by this profession bind our selves unto him to the following of
Godliness and innocence: so that a man may rightly say that such Sacraments
are Ceremonies, by which God will exercise his people first to the nourishing,
stirring up, and stre^gthening of Faith inwardly, then to the testifieng of
religion before men.

Ge. xvii.x Leuit. Mathe. xxviii.xix. and. xxvi.xxvi.
and Sacrifices, and other Ceremonies were added out of the law of Moses. These
were the Sacraments of the Jews until the coming of Christ: at which
coming, those being abrogate, two Sacraments were ordained, which now the
Christian Chirch uses, Baptism, and the Supper of the Lord. I speak of those
that were ordained for the use of the whole Chirch. For as for the layeng on of
hands, whereby the ministers of the Chirch are entered into their office, as I
do not unwillingly suffer it to be called a Sacrament, so I do not reckon it
among the ordinary Sacraments. As for the rest which are commonly called
Sacraments, what they are to be accounted, we shall se by and by. Howbeit the
old Sacraments also had respect to the same mark, whereunto ours do tend,
that is to direct and in a manner lead by the hand to Christ: or rather as
images to represent him, and show him fourth to be known. For whereas we have
already taught, 1. Cor. i.xx
that they are certain seals wherewith the promises of God are sealed: and
where it is most certain, that there was never offered any promise of God to
men but in Christ: that they may teach us of some promise of God, they must
needs show Christ. Whereunto pertains that heavenly pattern of the tabernacle
and of the worshipping in the law, which was given to Moses in ye mount. One
only difference there is, that those did shadow out Christ being promised,
when he was yet looked for: these do testify him already given and delivered.

Genesis xxii.xxviii.
and token of remembrance, whereby they should confirm themselves in the
promise given to Abraham, concerning that blessed sede in whom all the nations
of the earth were to be blessed, from whom they had their own blessing to be
looked for. Now that healthful sede (as we are taught of Paul) was Chirst,
Gala. iii.xvi. To. iiii.xi
in whom alone they hoped that they should recover that which they had lost
in Adam. Wherefore Circumcision was to them the same thing which Paul says
that it was to Abraham, namely the seal of the righteousness of Faith: that
is to say, the seal whereby they should be more certainly assured, that
their Faith, wherewith they looked for that sede, should be accounted to them
of GOD for righteousness. But we shall upon a better occasion in an other
place gooe through with the comparison of Circumcision and Baptism.
Baptisinges and purifienges did set before their eyes their own
uncleanness, filthinesses and pollution, wherewith they were defiled in their
own nature: Heb. ix.i.
but they promised an other washing, whereby al their filthinesses should be
wiped and washed away. i. Ioh, i.vii Reave, i, v
And this washing was Christ, with whoes blood we being washed do bring his
cleanness into the sight of God, that it may hyde all our defilinges. Their
Sacrifices did accuse them of their own wickedness, and therewithal did
teach, that it was necessary that there should be some satisfaction which
should be paid to the judgment of God. That therefore there should be some
one chief Bishop, a mediator between God and men, Heb, iiii, xiiii, and, v, v,
and, ix ^i, Phili, ii, viii. Romans v.xix.
which should satisfy God by sheding of blood, and by offering of a Sacrifice
which should suffice for the forgiveness of sins. This chief Pressed was
Christ: he himself shed his own blood: he himself was the Sacrifice: for he
offered himself obediente to his Father unto death: by which obedience he took
away the disobedience of man, which had provoked the displeasure of God.

As for our Sacraments, they do so much more clearly present i. John. v xi.
that is to say that he might cleanse and redeem. Of which thing the Spirit
of God also is a witness. Yea there are three witnesses in one, Water, Blood,
and Spirit. In water and blood we have a testimony of cleansing and redeming:
but the Spirit the principal witness brings unto us assured credit of
such wytnessing. This hie mystery has notably well ben showed us in the
cross of Christ, Ioh. xix.x^x.iii. Homil. in John. xx.
when water and blood slowed out of his holy side: which side for that cause
Augustine rightfully called the fountain of our Sacraments: of which yet we
must entreat somewhat more at large. There is no doubt but that more plentiful
grace also of the Spirit does here show fourth it self if you compare time
with time. For that pertains to the glory of the kingdom of Christ, as we
gather out of many places, but specially out of the.vii. Chapter of John. In
which sense we must take that saying of Paul, Colos. ii.xvii.
that under the law were shadows, but in Chirst is the body. Neither is it
his meaning to spoil of their effect the testimonies of grace, in which Gods
will was in the old time to prove himself to the Fathers a true speaker, even
as at this day he does to us in Baptism and in the holy Supper. But only his
purpose was by way of comparison to magnify that which was given us, least
any should think it maruaylous, that the Ceremonies of the law were
abolished by the coming of Christ.

But that same schole doctrine (as I may also brefely touch this by these do
presently give it. For the Apostle speaks no less honorably of those than of
these, when he teaches that the Fathers did eat the same spiritual meat
which we eat, (...). x.iii
and expounds that same meat to be Christ. Who dare make that an empty
sign, which delivered to the Jews a true communion of Christ? And the
ground of the cause which the Apostle there handles, does plainly fight on
our side. For, that no man trusting upon a cold knowledge of Christ, and
empty title of Christianity, and outward tokens, should presume to despise
the judgment of God: he shows fourth examples of Gods severity to be seen
in the Jews: that we should know that the same peynes which they have
suffered, hang over us, if we follow the same faults. Now that the comparison
might be fit, it behooved that he should show that there is no vnegalnesse
between us and them in those good things whereof he die forbid us to boste
falslye. Therefore first he makes us egall in the Sacraments, and leaves to
us not so much as any small piece of prerogative, that might encourage us to
hope of escaping unpunished. Neither verily is it lawful to give any more to
our Baptism, ^o. iiii.xi
tha^ he in an other place gives to circumcision, when he calls it the seal
of the righteousness of Faith. Whatsoever therefore is at this day given us in
our Sacraments, the same thing the Jews in old time received in theirs, that
is to say Christ with his spiritual richesse. What power our Sacraments have,
the same they also felt in theirs: that is to say, that they were to them
seals of Gods good will toward them, into the hope of eternal salvation. If
they had been apt expositors of the Epistle to the Hebrews, they would not have
so ben blinded. But when they red there, He. x.x.i,
that sins were not cleansed by the Ceremonies of the law, yea that the old
shadows had no auayling force to righteousness: they neglecting the
comparison which is there handeled, while they took hold of this one thing,
that the law of it self nothing profited the folowers of it, though simply ye
the figures were void of truth. But the Apostles meaning is to bring the
ceremonial law to nothing, until it come to Christ, upon whom alone hangs all the effectualnesse of it.

i. Gor, x, v
where he shows that God regards not the outward washing whereby we enter
into profession of religion, unless the mind within be both cleansed and
continue in cleanness to the end: again of Peter, when he testifies that
the truth of Baptism stands not in the outward washing, i. Pet. iii.xxi.
Col. ii.xi.
but in a good witnessing, of conscience. But he seems also in an other place
utterly to despise the circumcision made with hand, when he compares it with
the circumcision of Christ. I answer that even in this place nothing is
abated of the dignity of it. Paul there ^isputeth against them, which
required it as necessary when it was now abrogate. Therefore he warns the
faithful, that leaving the old shadows they should stand fast in the truth.
These masters (says he) instantly call upon you, that your bodies may be
circumcised. But ye are spiritually circumcised according to ye soul and body.
Ye have therefore the deliverance of the thing in deed, which is much better
tha^ the shadow. A man might take exception to ye contrary and say, yt the
figure is not therefore to be despised because they had ye thing in deed:
forasmuch as yt putting of of the old man of which he there spoke, was also
among ye Fathers, to who^ yet outward Circumcision had not ben superfluous. He
preuenteth this objection, when he by and by adds, yt the Colossians were
buried with Christ by Baptism. Whereby he signifies yt at this day Baptism is
ye same to Christians, which circu^cisio^ was to ye old people: and therefore
that circu^cisio^ can not be enioined to Christians without wrong done to Christ.

But that which follows and which I eue^ now alleged, is harder to John.
vi.xxvii.
he applies his speech to their gross opinion, and says yt he ministers
better meat, which may feed souls to hope of immortality. But if you require
a plainer solution, the sum of all tends to this: First, that all that
furniture of Ceremonies, which was in the law of Moses, is a vanishing thing
and of no value, unless it be directed to Christ. Secondly, that they so had
respect to Christ, that when he at length was manifestly showed in the
flesh, they had their fulfilling. Finally, that it behooved that they should
be taken away by his coming, even as a shadow vanishes away in the clear
light of the sun. But because I do yet differ longer discourse of yt matter
unto that place where I have purposed to compare Baptism with circumcision,
therefore I do now more sparingly touch it.

In proem enarr ps. lxxiii. quest. super numer. cap xxxiii. Libro. 9. ca. xiiii.
but ours do give salvation. When they marked not yt these and such other
forms of speaking were spoken: they also published their excessive doctrines,
but in a clean contrary sense from the writing of the old Fathers. For
Augustine meant no other thing in that place, than as ye same Augustine writes
in an other place, That the Sacraments of the law of Moses did foretell of
Christ, but ours do tell of him present. And against Faustus. That those were
promises of things to be fulfilled, these were tokens of things fulfilled: as
if he should say, that those figured him when he was looked for, but ours do as
it were show him present which has been already delivered. Moreover he
speaks of the manner of signifying, as also he shows in an other place.
Lib. co^. lit. petil. capitu. xxxvii. Homil. In John. xxvl.
The law (says he) and the Prophets had Sacraments, foretelling of a thing
to come: but the Sacraments of our time do testify that that is already
come, which those did declare to be to come. But what he thought of the thing
and effectuallnesse, he expounds in many places: as when he says, that the
Sacraments of the Jews were in signs, diverse: but in ye thing signified,
egal with ours: diverse in visible form, but egall in spiritual power. Again:
In diverse signs is all one Faith: so in diverse signs, as in diverse
words: because words change their soundes by times: and truly words are
nothing but signs. The Fathers did drink the same spiritual drink, for they
drunk not the same bodily drink. Se ye therefore, Faith remaining one, the
signs varied. To them the rock was Christ: to us that is Christ which is set
upon the altar. And they drunk for a great Sacrament, the water flowing out of
the rock: what we drink, the faithful know. If thou consider the visible
form, they drunk an other thing: if an vnderstable signification, they drunk
the same spiritual drink. In an other place, in the mystery the same is
their meat and drink which is ours: In psalm. lxxvii. Lib. ix. con. fau. cap.
xiii.
but the same in signification, not in form: because the self same Christ was
figured to them in the rock, and showed to us in the flesh. Howbeit in this
behalf also we grant that there is some difference. For both Sacraments do
testify that the fatherly good will of God and ye graces of the Holy ghost are
offered us in Christ: but our Sacraments testify it more clearly and
brightly. In both is a delivering of Christ: but in these more plenteous and
fuller, namely as that difference of the old and new Testament bears, of
which we have entreated before. de doct. Christ. Lib. 3. Epi. ad. ^^na.
And this is it that the same Augustine meant (whom we more often allege as the
best and faithfullest witness of all the old writers) where he teaches, that
when Christ was reveled, Sacraments were ordained both in number fewer, in
signification hier, in force more excellent. Of this thing also it is
expediente that the reders be brefely warned, that whatsoever the Sophisters
have triflingly taught concerning the work wrought, is not only false, but
disagreeth with the nature of y^ Sacraments, which God has ordained, yt the
faithful being void and nedy of al good things should bring nothing thither
but beggerie. Whereupon follows that in receiving them, these men do nothing
whereby they may deserve praise: or that in this doing (which in their respect
is merely passive) no work can be ascribed unto them.

The.xv. Chapter. Of Baptism.
Baptism is a sign of the entering wherewith we are received into the fellowship
of ye Chirch, that being graffed into Christ we may be reckned among the
children of God. Now, it was given us of God to this end. (which I have taught
to be common to all the mysteries) first, that it should serve to our Faith with
him, and to our confession before men. We will orderly declare the manner of both
purposes. Baptism brings three things to our Faith, which also must be
severally entreated of. This is the first which the Lord sets out unto us,
that it should be a token and proof of our cleansing: or (to express my mind
better) it is like to a certain sealed charter, whereby he confirms unto us,
that al our sins are so defased, cancelled, and blotted out, that they may
never come in his sight, not be rehearsed, not be imputed. For he wills yt al
they yt believe should be Baptized into forgiveness of sins. Therefore they
which thought that Baptism is nothing else but a mark and token, whereby we
profess our religion before men, as soldiars bear the conufance of their
captain for a mark of their profession, wey not that which was the chief
thing in Baptism. That is this, yt we should receive it with this promise,
Mar. xvi.xvi.
that whosoever believe and are Baptized, shall be saved.

In this sense is that to be understood which Paul writes, that the Ephe.
v.xxvi. Tit. iii.v. i. Pet. jij.xxii.
and cleansed with washing of water in the word of life. And in an other
place, that we are saved according to his mercy by the washing of regeneration
and of the renewing of the Holy ghost. And that which Peter writes, that
Baptism saves us. For Paul's will was not to signify, that our washing and
salvation is perfectly made by water, or that water conteyneth in it self the
power of cleanse, regenerate, and renew. Neither did Peter mean the cause of
salvation, but only ye knowledge and certainty of such gifts to be received in
this Sacrament: which is evidently enough expressed in the words themselves.
For Paul knitteth together the word of life, and Baptism of water: as if he
had said, yt by ye Gospel the message of washing and sanctifieng is brought us,
yt by Baptism such message is sealed. And Peter immediately adioyneth, yt that
Baptism is not the putting away of ye filthiness of the flesh, but a good
conscience before God, which is of Faith. Yea Baptism promises us no other
cleansing, but by the sprinkling of the blood of Christ: which is figured by
water, for ye likeness of cleansing and washing, Who therefore can say yt we
be cleansed by this water, which certainly testifies that the blood of Christ
is our true and only washing? So that from no where else can be fetched a
surer reason to confute their blind error which referr al things to ye power
of the water, tha^ from the signification of Baptism it self: which does
withdraw us as well from that visible element which is set before our eyes, as
from all other means, that it may bind our minds to Christ alone.

Romans iii.xxv.
that Christ was made to us a propitiator, unto ye forgiveness of faults
going before. Wherein he denies not that therein is obtained perpetual and
continual forgiveness of sins eue^ unto death: but he means that it was
given of the Father, only to poor sinners. which wounded with the searing
iron of conscience, to sighe to the Physician. To these the mercy of God is
offered. They which by escaping of punishment do hunt for matter and liberty to
sin, do nothing but provoke to themselves the wrath and judgment of God.

Baptism it self were not a Sacrament of repentance. But if repentance be
commended to us for our whole life, the force also of Baptism ought to be
extended to the same bounds. Wherefore it is also no doubt but that all the
godly throughout all their life long, so often as they be vexed with knowledge in
conscience of their own sins, dare call back themselves to the remembrance
of Baptism, yt thereby they may confirm themselves in the affiance of that
only and continual washing which we have in the blood of Christ.

It brings also an other fruit, because it shows us our mortificatio^ Romans
vi.iii.
and new life in him. For (as the Apostle says) we are baptized into his
death, being buried together with him into death, that we may walk in newness
of life. By which words he does not only exhort us to the following of him (as
though he did say, that we are by Baptism put in mind, that after a certain
example of the death of Christ, we should die to our lusts: and after the
example of his resurrection, we should be raised up to righteousness) but he
fetches the matter much deper: that is to say, that by Baptism Christ has
made us partakers of his death, that we may be graffed into it. And as the
graffe receives substance and nourishment of the root into which it is
graffed: so they that receive Baptism with such faith as they ought, do truly
feel the effectualnesse of the death of Christ in the mortifiyng of their
flesh: and therwithall also they feel the effect of his resurrection in the
quicknyng of the Spirit. Herupon he gathers matter of exhortation: that if we
be Christians, we ought to be dead to sin, and to live to righteousness.
This self same argument he uses in an other place: Coloss. ii.xii. Tit. iii.v.
that we be circumcised, and have put of the old man, sins that we be buried
in Christ by Baptism. And in this sense, in the same place which we have
before alleged, he called it the washyng of regeneration and of renewing.
Therefore first free forgiveness of sins and imputation of righteousness is
promised us, and then the grace of the Holy ghost, which may reform us into
newness of life.

Last of all our Faith receives also this profit of Baptism, that it Math.
iii.xiii.
but that we are so united to Christ himself that we are partakers of all his
good things. For therefore he has dedicated and hallowed Baptism in his own
body, that he might have it common with us, Gala. iii.xvii.
as a most strong bond of the unity and fellowship which he vouchsaued to
enter into with us: so that Paul proves thereby that we be the children of God,
because we have put on Christ in Baptism. So we see that the fulfillyng of
Baptism is in Christ, Acts. viii.xvi. and. xix.v.
whom also for this reason we call the propre object of Baptism. Therefore it
is no marvel if it be reported that the Apostles baptized into his name,
which yet were commanded to baptize into the name of the Father also and of the
Holy ghost. For whatsoever gifts of God are set forth in Baptism, are found
in Christ alone. And yet it can not be, but that he which baptiseth into
Christ, Mathe. xxviii.xix.
do therwithall call upon the name of the Father and of the Holy ghost. For we
are therefore cleansed with his blood, because the merciful Father, according to
his incomparable kyndnesse, willing to receive us into favor, has set him a
mediator in the midst, to procure to us favor with him. But regeneration we
so only obtain by his death and resurrection, if being sanctified by the
Spirit we be endued with a new and spiritual nature. Wherefore both of our
cleansyng and regeneration: we obtain and after a certain manner distinctly
perceive the cause in the Father, Math. iii.vi. Luc. iii.xvi. John. iii.xxiii.
and. iiii i.
the matter in the Son, and the effect in the Holy ghost. So John first
baptized, so afterward the Apostles, with the baptism of repentance into the
forgiveness of sins: meaning by this word repentance, such regeneration:
and by forgiveness of sins washyng.

Acts. ii.xxviii.
For the diverse hands wherewith it is ministered, make not the Baptism diverse:
but the same doctrine shows it to be the same Baptism. John and the Apostles
agreed into one doctrine: both baptized into repentance, both into the
forgiveness of sins, both into the name of Christ, from whom was both
repentance and forgiveness of sins. John. i.xxix.
John said that he was the lamb of God, by whom the sins of the world
should be taken away: where he made him the Sacrifice acceptable to the
Father, the propitiator of righteousness, the author of salvation. What could
the Apostles add to this confession? Wherefore let it trouble no man, that the
old writers labor to sever the one from the other, whoes voice we ought not
so much to esteem that it may shake the certainty of the Scripture. For who
will rather harke^ to Chrysostom denyeng that forgiveness of sins was
comprehended in the Baptism of John, Homil. in. Mathe. xiiii. Luke. iii.iii.
Lib v de Baptis. cont. Do not ca. x. Luke. iii xvi. Acts. xix.iiii.
than to Luke contrarywyse affirming that John preached the Baptism of
repentance into the forgiveness of sins? Neither is that suttletie of
Augustine to be received, that in the Baptism of John, sins were forgeuen in
hope, but in the Baptism of Christ they are forgeuen in deed. For where as the
Evangelist plainly testifies, that John in his Baptism promised the
forgiveness of sins: what need we to abate this title of commendation, when
no necessity compels us unto it? But if any man seek for a difference out
of the word of God, he shall find none other but this, that John baptized into
him that was to come, the Apostles into him that had already presented himself.

Act. viii.xiiii.
the Spirit was not given to the Samaritans above the common measure of the
Faithful before the ascension, although they were baptized into the name of
Jesus, till Peter and John were sent unto them to lay their hands upon them.
This only thing, as I think, deceived the old writers, that they said that the
Baptism of John was but a preparation to the baptism of Christ, because they
red, that they were baptized again of Paul, which had ones received the
baptism of John. But how much they were herein deceived, shall else where be
plainly declared in place fit for it. Math. iii.xi.
What is it therefore that John said, that he baptized in deed with water, but
that Christ should come which should baptize with the Holy ghost, and with
fire? This may in few words be assoiled. For he meant not to put difference
between the one Baptism and the other, but he compared his own person with the
person of Christ, saying that himself was a minister of water, but that Christ
was the geuer of the Holy ghost, and should declare this power by visible
miracle the same day that he should send the Holy ghost, Act. ii.iii.
to the Apostles under fyry tongues. What could the Apostles boast of more than
this? What more could they also that baptize at this day? For they be only
ministers of the outward sign, and Christ is the author of the inward grace:
as the same old writers themselves do every where teach, and specially
Augustine, whose principal stay against the Donatistes is this, that what a one
soever he be, that baptizeth, yet only Christ is ruler of it.

These things which we have spoken both of mortification and of i. Cori.
x.ii. Exo. xiiii xxi.
are shadowed out in the people of Israel, whom for the same cause the Apostle
says to have been baptized in the cloud and in the sea. Mortifiyng was
figured, when the Lord deliueryng them out of the hand of Pharao and from
cruel bondage, made for them a way thorough the red sea, and drowned Pharao
himself, and the Egyptia^s their enemies, that followed them hard at their
backs, and were even in their necks to overtake them. For after the same
manner also he promises to us in Baptism, and by a sign given shows us,
that we are by his power brought forth and delivered out of the thraldom of
Egypt, yt is to say, out of the bondage of sin: that our Pharao is drowned,
that is to say the deuell, although even so also he ceasseth not to exercise
and weary us. But as that Egyptian was not thrown down into the bottom of
the sea, but being overthrown on the shore, did yet with terrible sight make
the Israelites afraid, but could not hurt them: so this our enemy yet in
deed threateneth, shows his weapons, is felt, but can not overcome. In the
Cloud was a sign of cleansyng. For as then the Lord covered them with a
cloud cast over them, and gave them refreshyng cold, Number. ix* xiiii.
least they should faint and pine away with to cruel burning of the sun: so
in Baptism we acknowledge our selves covered and defended with the blood of
Christ, least the severity of God, which is in deed an intolerable flame,
should lie upon us. But although this mystery was then dark and known to
few: yet because there is none other way to obtain salvation, but in those two
graces, God would not take away the sign of them both from the old Fathers,
whom he had adopted to be heirs.

Now it is clear, how false that is which some have lately taught, and Galat.
ii.xix.
and then also brings forth works in us, which the Scripture calls the
works of the flesh. Therefore these two points are severally to be marked,
namely that we being in all parts of our nature defiled and corrupted are
already for such corruption only, holde^ worthily condemned and convicted
before God, to whom nothing is acceptable but righteousness, innocence and
clennesse. Yea and very infantes themselves bring their own damnation with
them from their mothers womb. Who, although they have not yet brought forth
the fruits of their iniquity, yet have the sede thereof enclosed within them.
Yea their whole nature is a certain sede of sin, therefore it can not but be
hateful and abominable to God. The faithful are certified by Baptism that
this damnation is taken away, and driven from them: forasmuch (as we have
already said) the Lord does by this sign promise us that full and perfect
forgiveness is granted both of the fault which should have been imputed to
us, and of the peine which we should have suffered for the fault: they take
hold also of righteousness, but such as the people of God may obtain in
this life, that is to say by imputation only: because the Lord of his own
mercy takes them for righteous and innocent.



should not be acceptable to God by the deservings of works: he adds, that
all they that are clothed with the righteousness of Christ, are therewith
regenerate in Spirit, and that of this regeneration we have an earnest in
baptism. Romans vi.xiii.
Hereuppon he exhorts the faithful, that they suffer not sin to have
dominion in their members. Now because he knew that there is always some
weakness in the faithful: that they should not therefore be discouraged, he
adioyneth a comfort, that they are not under the law. Because again it might
seem, that Christians might grow insolent, because they are not under the yoke
of the law, he entreats what manner of abrogating that is, and therwithal what
is the use of the law: which question he had now the second time differred:
The sum is, that we be delivered from the rigor of the law, that we should
cleave to Christ: but that the office of the law is, that we being convinced
of our perverseness, should confess our own weakness and misery. Now
forasmuch as that perverseness of nature does not so easily appear in a
profane man, which follows his own lusts without fear of God: he sets
an example in a man regenerate, namely in him self. He says therefore that he
has a continual wrastlyng with the remnantes of his flesh, and that he is
holden bound with miserable bondage, that he can not consecrate himself wholly
to the obedience of the law of God. Therefore he is compelled with gronyng to
cry out: Unhappie am I. Who shall deliver me out of this body subject to
death? Romans vii.xxiiii.
If the children of God be holden captive in prison so long as they live, they
must need be much carefully grieved with thinkyng upon their own peril,
unless this fear be met withal. Therefore he adioyneth to this use a
comfort, that there is no more damnation to them that are in Christ Jesus. Where
he teaches, that they whom the Lord has ones received into favor, Romans viii.
engraffed into the communion of his Christ, has by Baptism admitted into the
fellowship of his Chirch, while they continue in the faith of Christ, although
they be besieged of sin, yea and carry sin about within them, yet are
acquitted from giltinesse and condemnation. If this be the simple and natural
exposition of Paul, there is no cause why we should seem to teach any* new
unwonted thing.

But baptism so serves our confession before men. For it is a mark, whereby
we openly profess that we would be accounted among the people of God: whereby we
testify that we agree with all Christians into the worshippyng of one God and
into one religion: finally whereby we openly affirm our faith: that not only
our hearts should breathe out the praise of God, but also our tongue, and all
the members of our body should sound it out with such vtterances as they be
able. For so, as we ought, all our things are employed to the service of the
glory of God, whereof nothing ought to be void, and other may by our example
be stirred up to the same endeavors. Hereunto Paul had respect, when he asked
the Corinthians, i. Cor. i.ii
whether they had not ben baptized into ye name of Christ: meaning verily, that
even in this yt they were baptized into his name, they auowed themselves unto
him, swore to his name, and bound their faith to him before men, that they
could no more confess any other, but Christ alone, unless they would forsake
the confession which they had made in Baptism.



Acts. x.xlviii.
seking not by baptism a larger forgiveness, but a more certain exercising
of Faith, yea an encreasce of confidence by a pledge. Paraduenture some man
will object: why therefore did Ananias say to Paul, Act. ix.xvii.
that he should wash away his sins by Baptism, if sins be not washed
away by the power of Baptism it self? I answer: We are said to receive, to
obtain, to get that which so far as concerns the felyng of our faith,
is given us of the Lord, whether he do then first testify it, or being
testified does more and certainlier confirm it. This therefore only was the
meaning of Ananias: that thou may be assured, Paul that thy sins are
forgeuen thee, be baptized. For the Lord does in Baptism promise
forgiveness of sins: receive this, and be out of care. Howbeit I mean not to
diminishe the force of baptism, but that the thing and the truth is present
with the sign, so far as God works by outward means. But of this
sacrament, as of all other, we obtain nothing but so much as we receive by
Faith. If we want faith, it shall be for a witness of our vntha^kfulnesse,
whereby we may be declared guilty before God, because we have not believed the
promise there given. But so far as it is a sign of our confession, we ought
by it to testify that our affiance is in the mercy of God, and our cleanness
is in the forgiveness of sins, which is gotten us by Jesus Christ: i. Cor.
xii.xiii.
and that by it we enter into the Church of Christ, that we may with one
consent of Faith and charity live of one mind with all the faithful. This
last point did Paul mean, when he says that we are all baptized in one
Spirit, that we may be one body.

to be weyed according to his hand of whom it is ministered, but as of the
very hands of God, from whom without dout it proceeded: herupon we may gather,
that nothing is added to it nor taken from it by the worthiness of him by
whoes hand it is delivered. And even as among men, if a letter be sent, so
that the hand and the seal be well known, it makes no matter who or what
manner of man be ye carrier: so it ought to suffice to acknowe the hand and
seal of our Lord in his Sacraments, by what carrier soever they be brought.
Hereby the error of the Donatistes is very well confuted, which measured the
force and value of the Sacrament by the worthiness of the minister. Such at
this day are our Catabaptistes, which deny that we be rightly baptized,
because we were baptized by wicked men and idolatrers in the popish kingdom:
therefore they furiously call upon us to be baptized again. Against whoes follies
we shall be armed with a reason strong enough, if we think that we were
professed by baptism not into the name of any man, Math. xxviii.xix.
but into the name of the Father, the Son, and the Holy ghost, and that
therefore it is not the Baptism of man, but of God, of whomsoever it be
ministered. Although they were never so much ignorant or despisers of God and
all godliness, which baptized us: yet they did not baptize us into the
fellowship of their own ignorance or sacrilege, but into the faith of Jesus
Christ: because they called not upon their own name, but the name of God, nor
baptized us into any other name. Now if it were the Baptism of God, it has
verily enclosed in it a promise of the forgiveness of sins, the mortifiyng
of the flesh, the spiritual quickening, and the partaking of Christ. So it
nothing hindered the Jews, to have been circumcised of unclean prestes and
apostataes: neither was the sign therefore void, that it neded to be done of
new: but it was sufficient to return to the natural beginning. Where they
obiecte that Baptism ought to be celebrate in the assembly of the godly, that
proves not, that that which is faulty in part, should destroy the whole
force thereof. For when we teach what ought to be done that Baptism may be
pure, and void of all defilyng, we do not abolyshe the ordinance of God,
although idolatrers corrupt it. For when in old time Circumcision was
corrupted with many superstitions, yet it ceased not to be taken for a sign
of grace: neither did Josias and Ezechias, when they gathered out of all Israel
them that had departed from God, call them to a second Circumcision.

Now where as they ask us, what faith of ours has yet followed Baptism in
certain years paste, that they might thereby prove Romans iii.iii.
although all men be lost, yet Christ remains salvation. We confess
therefore that Baptism, for that time profited us nothing at all: forasmuch
as in it the promise offered us, without which Baptism is nothing, lay
nothing regarded. Now sith by the grace of God, we have begone to wax
wyser, we accuse our own blyndnesse and hardness of heart, which have so long
ben unthankful to his so great goodness. But we believe that the promise it
self is not vanished away: but rather thus we consider, God by Baptism
promises the forgiveness of sins, and sith he has promised it, will
undoubtedly perform it to all that believe it. That promise was offered us in
Baptism: by faith therefore let us embrace it. It has in deed long ben buried
from us because of infidelity: now therefore let us receive it by faith.
Wherefore where the Lord calls the Iewishe people to repentance, he gives
them no commandment of a second circumcision, which being (as we have said)
circumcised with a wicked and ungodly hand, lived a certain time entangled
with the same wickedness. But he earnestly calls upon the only turnyng of
the heart. Because, how soever the covenant was broken of them, yet the sign
of the covenant, by the ordinance of the Lord, remained always steadfast and
inviolable. Therefore with the only condition of repentance they were restored
into the couenante which the Lord had ones made with them in Circumcision:
which yet being received by the hand of a leaguebreaker priest, so much as
in them lay, they had defiled again, and the effect whereof they had quenched.

Act. xix.iii.
For if by our own confession, the Baptism of John was altogether the same
that ours is now: even as they having been before peruersely instructed, when
they were taught the true Faith, they were again baptized into it: so that
Baptism, which was without true Doctrine, is to be taken for nothing, and we
ought to be newely baptized again into the true religion, wherewith we are
now first instructed. Some think, that there was sum wrongfully
affectioned manne to John, which had entered them with their first Baptism
rather to a vain superstition. Of which thing they seem to gather a
conjecture hereupon, because they confessed themselves to be utterly ignorant
of the Holy ghost: whereas John verily would never have sent away from
himself scholars so untaught. But neither is it lykely that the Jews,
although they had not ben baptized at all, were destitute of all knowledge of
the Holy ghost, which is famouslye spoken of by so many testimonies of the
Scripture. Where as therefore they answer that they know not whether there be
a Holy ghost, it is to be understood as if they had said that they have not
yet heard, whether the graces of the Spirit, of which Paul asked them, were
given to the Disciples of Christ. But I grant that that was the true Baptism
of John, and all one and the self same with the Baptism of Christ: but I deny
that they were baptized again. What then mean these words, they were
baptized in the name of Jesus? Some do expound it, that they were but
instructed of Paul with true Doctrine. But I had rather understand it more
symply, to be the Baptism of the Holy ghost, that is to say, that the
visible graces of the Spirit were given them by the layeng on of hands:
which to be expressed by the name of Baptism, is no new thing. Act. i.v.
As on the day of Pentecoste it is said, that the Apostles remembered the
words of the Lord, concerning the Baptism of fire and of the Spirit. And
Peter says that the same came to his remembrance, when he saw those graces
poured out upon Cornelius, and his household and kindred. Acts. xi.xvi.
Neither is that contrary which is after adjoined, When he had laid his hands
on them, the Holy ghost came down upon them. For Luke does not tell of two
diverse things: but follows the manner of telling commonly used among the
Hebrews, which do first propounde the sum of the matter, and then do set it
out more at large. Which every man may perceive by the very framing together
of the words. For he says, When they had heard these things, they were
Baptized in the name of Jesus. And when Paul had laid his hands upon them,
the Holy ghost came down upon them. In this later sentence is described, what
manner of Baptism that was. If ignorance do so corrupt a former Baptism, that
it must be amended with a second Baptism: the Apostles should have been
rebaptised first of al, which in whole three years after their Baptism, had
scarcely tasted any small parcel of purer doctrine. And now among us what
rivers might suffice to renew so many washinges, as there be ignorances by the
mercy of ye Lord daily amended in us?

The force, dignity, profit, and end of ye mystery, if I be not deceived
ought by this time to be plain enough. So much as concerns ye outward
sign, I would to God the natural institution of Christ had prevailed
diversity of contrees. Howbeit the very word of Baptizing signifies to
dippe, and it is certain that the manner of dipping was used of the old Chirch.

Lib. co^tra. epist parm. ii. Cap. xiii. Cap. c
when he says: Although a lay man compelled by necessity do give Baptism, I
can not tell whether a man may godlily say that it ought to be iterate. For if
it be done when no necessity compels, it is the usurping of an other man's
office: but if necessity enforces, it is either none or a venial sin.
Moreover of women it was decreed without any exception in the Council at
Carthage, that they should not presume to Baptize at all. But there is danger,
least if he which is sick should die without Baptism, he should be deprived
of the grace of regeneration. Not so. God pronou^ceth that he adopteth our
infantes to be his own, before they be borne, when he promises that he will be
a God to us and to our sede after us. In this word is contained their
salvation. Neither shall any man dare to be so reprocheful against God, to deny
that his promise is of it self sufficient to work the effect thereof. How much
harm that doctrine being evil expounded, that Baptism is of necessity to
salvation, has brought in, few do mark: and therefore they take less head
to themself. For where this opinion is grown in force, that all are lost to
whom it has not happened to be washed with water, our state is worse than the
state of the old people, as though the grace of God were now more narrowly
streigthened than it was under the law. For Christ shall be thought to be come,
not to fulfill the promises, but to abolishe them: forasmuch as the promise
which then was of it self effectual enough to give health before ye eighth
day, now should not be of force without help of the sign.

But how the custom was before that Augustine was borne, first is Marcion,
Lib. co^tra. He^es, i,
that he gave women liberty to Baptize. Neither am I ignorant of their answer
which think otherwise, that is, that common use much differs from
extraordinary remedy, when extreme necessity enforces: but when he
pronouncing yt it is a mockery to give women liberty to Baptize, excepteth
nothing, it sufficiently appears that he condemns this corruption, so that
it is by no color excusable. Also in the third book, where teaching that it
was not permytted even to the holy mother of Christ, he adds no restraynte.

The example of Sephora is unseasonably alleged. Exo. iiii.xxv.
For whereas the Angel of God was appeased, after that she taking a stone,
circumcised her son, thereupon it is wrongfully gathered that her doing was
allowed of God. Otherwise it ought to be said, yt the worshipping which the
nations that were brought out of Assyria raised up, pleased God. But by other
strong reasons it is proved, that that which a foolish woman did, is wrongfully
drawn to an example of imitation. If I should say yt it was a certain singular
case, which ought not to be made an example, and specially yt sith it is no
where red that in old time there was given to the Prestes a special
commandment to circumcise, the order of Circumcision and Baptism is unlike:
this should be strong enough to confute them. Math. xxviii.xix.
For the words of Christ are plain: Go ye, teach all nations, and Baptize.
When he ordained the self same men publishers of the Gospel, and ministers of
Baptism: and none (as the Apostle witnesses) does take honor upon himself in
the Chirch, Heb. v.iiii. To. xiiii.xxiii.
but he that is called as Aaron: whosoever without lawful calling Baptiseth,
he rusheth into an other man's office. Even in the smallest things, as in meat
and drink, whatsoever we enterprise with a doutefull consience, Paul openly
cries out to be sin. Therefore in women's Baptising is much more grievously
sin, where it is evident yt they break the rule appointed by Christ:
forasmuch as we know that it is unlawful to pluck in sonder those things
that God conioyneth. But al this I pass over. Only I would have the reders to
note, that Sephoraes purpose was nothing less, than to do any service to God.
Seeing her son to be in danger, she grudged, and murmured, and not without
stomachyng threw the foreskinne upon the ground, she so taunted her
husband, that she was also angrye with God. Finally it is plain that all this
came of a furiousness of mind, because she murmured against God and her
husband, for that she was compelled to shed the blood of her son. Moreover
if she had in all other things behaved her self well, yet herein is an
inexcusable rash presumption that she circumcised her son, her husband
being present, not any private manne, but Moses the principal Prophet of
God, than whom there never rose any greater in Israel: which was no more
lawful for her to do, than at this day it is for women in the syghte of the
Bishop. But this controversy shall by and by be easily taken away by this
principle, that infantes are not debarred from the kingdom of heaven, whom it
happens to depart out of this present life before that it be granted them
to be dipped in water. But it is already proved, that no small wrong is done to
the covenant of God, if we do not rest in it, as though it were weak of it
self: whereas ye effect thereof hangs neither upon Baptism, nor upon any
additio^s. There is afterward added to it a Sacrament like a seal, not yt it
brings effectualnesse to the promise of God as to a thing weak of it self,
but only confirms it to us. Whereupon follows, that the children of the
faithful are not therefore Baptized, that they may then first be made the
children of God, which before were strangers from the Chirch, but rather that
they be therefore received by a solemn sign into the Chirch, because by the
benefit of the promise they did already belong to the body of Christ.
Therefore if in omitting the sign there be neither slothfulness, nor
contempt, nor negligence, we are free from all danger. It is therefore much
more holy, to give this reverence to the ordinance of God, that we seek
Sacraments from no where else, than where the Lord has left them. When we
may not have them of the Chirch, the grace of God is not so bound to them, but
that we may obtain them by Faith out of the word of the Lord.

The.xvi. Chapter. That the Baptism of infantes does very well agree with the
institution of Christ and the nature of the sign.
BUt forasmuch as in this age, certain phrentike Spirits have raised up sore
troubles in the Chirch for the Baptism of infantes, and do not yet cesse to
turmoyle: I can not choose but I must join here an addition to restrain their
furiousness. If paraduenture it shall seem to some man to be very much to long,
let him (I beseech him) weye with himself, yt we ought so much to esteem the
pureness of doctrine in a most great matter, together with the peace of the
Chirch, that nothing ought to be lothesomly received, which may avail to
procure them both. Beside that, I so study to frame this discourse, that it
shall be of no small importance to the clerer declaration of the mystery of
Baptism. They assail the Baptism of infantes with an argument in deed
favorable in show, saying that it is grounded upon no institution of Christ,
but that it was brought in only by the boldness of men, and perverse
curiousness, and then afterward with fond easiness rashly received in use.
For a Sacrament, unless it rest upon a certain fundation of the word of God,
hangs but by a thread. But what if, when the matter is well considered, it
shall appear that the Lords holy ordinance is falsely and unjustly charged
with such a sclaunder? Let us therefore search out the first beginning of it.
And if it shall appear, that it was devised by the only rashness of men, then
bydding it farewell, let us measure the true observation of Baptism by the
only will of God. But if it shall be proved that it is not destitute of his
certain authority. we must beware, least in pinching the holy ordinances of
God, we be also sclaunderous against the author himself.

learn of what value Baptism is, to what end it tends, finally what it is:
let him not stay his thought upon the elemente and bodily syghte: but rather
let him raise it up to the promises of God, which are therein offered us, and to
the inward secrets which are therein represented unto us. He that knows
these things, has atteined the sound truth of Baptism, and the whole
substance thereof, as I may so call it: and thereby also he shall be taught, what
is the reason, and what is the use of the outward sprinkling. Again he that
contemptuously passing over these, shall have his mind wholly fastened and
bound to the visible Ceremony, shall understand neither the force nor
property of Baptism: nor yet so much as this, what the water means, or what
use it has. Which sentence is proved with so many and so clear testimonies of
Scripture, that we need not at this present to tarry long about it. Therefore
it remains now, that we seek out of the promises given in Baptism, what is
the force and nature of it. The Scripture shows, that the clensing of sins,
which we obtain of the blood of Christ, is here first showed: then the
mortifieng of the flesh, which stands upon the partaking of his death, by
which the faithful are regenerate into newness of life, yea and into the
fellowship of Christ. To this sum may be referred whatsoever is taught in the
Scriptures concerning Baptism: saving that beside this it is a sign to
testify religion before men.

But forasmuch as before the institution of Baptism, the people of Ge. xvii.x
he tells him before, that he would be God to him and to his sede: adding,
that with him is the flowyng store and suffisance of all things, that Abraham
should account that his hand should be to him a spryng of all good things.
In which words the promise of eternal life is contained: as Christ expounds
it, Mat. xxii.xxxii. Luke. xx.xxxviii. Ephesians. ii.xii.
bringing an argument from hense to prove the immortality of the faithful,
and the resurrection. For God (says he) is not the God of the dead, but of the
living. Wherefore Paul also showing to the Ephesians from what destruction the
Lord had delivered them, gathers by this that they had not ben admitted into
the couenante of circumcision, that they were without Christ, without God,
without hope, strangers from the testamentes of the promise: all which things
the couenante it self contained. But the first access to God, the first
entry to immortal life, is the forgiveness of sins. Whereupon is gathered,
that this forgiveness answers to the promise of Baptism concerning our
clensing. Afterward the Lord takes couenante of Abraham, that he should
walk before him in pureness and innocence of heart: which belongs to
mortifieng or regeneration. And that no man should doubt, that circumcision is
a sign of mortifieng, Deu. ^, xvi.
Moses in an other place does more plainly declare it, when he exhorts the
people of Israel, to circumcise the uncircumcised skin of the heart, because
they were severally chosen to be the people of GOD out of all the nations of
the earth. As God, Deuteronomy. xxx.vi.
where he adopteth the posterity of Abraham to his people, commands them to
be circumcised: so Moses pronounces that ye hearts ought to be circumcised,
declaring verily what is the truth of this circumcision. Then that no man
should endeavor toward it by his own strength, he teaches yt they need the
grace of God. Al these things are so often repeted of the Prophets, yt I need
not to heap into this place many testimonies, which do each where offer
themselves. We have proved therefore, that in circumcision a spiritual promise
was uttered to the Fathers, such as in Baptism is given: forasmuch as it
figured to them the forgiveness of sins, and the mortifieng of the flesh.
Moreover as we have taught that Christ is the fundation of Baptism, in whom
both these things remain: so it is evident that he is also of circumcision.
For he is promised to Abraham, and in him the blessing of all nations. To the
sealing of which grace, the sign of circumcision is added.

To. xii.iii
To this relation and comparison, the Apostles rule leads us by the hand,
whereby we are commanded to examine all exposition of Scripture by the
proportion of Faith. And truly the truth does in this behalf almost offer it
self to be felt. For as circumcision, because it was a certain token to the
Jews, whereby they were certified that they were chosen to be the people and
householde of God, and they again on their behalues professed that they yielded
themselves to God, was their first entry into the Chirch: so now also we by
Baptism enter into profession of God, that we may be reckned among his people,
and mutually swear to his name. Whereby it appears out of controversy, that
Baptism is come into ye place of circumcision, that it may have the same
office with us.

Now if we list to search out, whether Baptism be lawfully communicate of a
seal to seal the promise of the covenant. But if the covenant remain
unbroken and steadfast, it does at this day no less belong to the children of
Christians, than under the old testament it perteined to the infantes of the
Jews. But if they be partakers of the thing signified, why shall they be
debarred from the sign? if they have the truth, why shall they be put back
from the figure? Although the outward sign cleave fast together with the
word in the Sacrament, so that they can not be plucked in sonder: yet if they
be severally considered, whether of them, I pray you, shall we esteem of more
value? Truly sith we se that the sign serves the word, we must say that it
is under it, and must set it in the inferior place. Since therefore the word of
Baptism is extended to infantes: why shall the sign, that is to say the
addition in hanging to the word, be debarred from them? This one reason, if
there were no more, were abundantly enough to confute all them that will speak
to ye contrary. That which is objected, that there was a day certainly set for
circumcision, is altogether but a shift. We grant that we be not now bound
to certain days, like the Jews: but when the Lord, howsoever he certainly
appoints no day, yet declares that he is pleased that infantes should with a
solemn formal usage be received into his covenant: what seek we more?

Howbeit the Scripture opens unto us yet a certainer knowledge i. Cor. vii
xiiii.
because being made heirs of the same covenant they were made differing from
the children of the ungodly: for the same reason even yet also the children of
Christians are accounted holy, yea although they be the issue but of one parent
faithful: and (as the Apostle witnesses, they differ from the unclean sede
of idolatrers. Now when the Lord immediately after the covenant made with
Abraham, commanded the same to be sealed in infantes with an outward
Sacrament: Genesis xvii.xii.
what cause will Christians allege, why they should not at this day testify
and seal the same in their children? Neither let any man obiecte against me,
that the Lord commanded his couenante to be confirmed with no other sign
than of circumcision, which is long ago taken away. For we have in readiness
to answer, that for the time of the old testamente he ordained circumcision
to confirm his covenant: but circumcision being taken away, yet always
remains the same manner of confirming which we have common with the Jews.
Wherefore we must always diligently consider what is common to both, and what
they have several from us. The covenant is common, the cause of confirming it
is common. Only the manner of confirming is diverse, because circumcision was
that to them, in place whereof Baptism has succeeded among us. Otherwise if
the testimony, whereby the Jews were assured of the salvation of their sede,
be taken away from us, it should be brought to pass by the coming of
Christ, that the grace of God should be darker and less approved by
testimonies to us, than it was before to the Jews. If that can not be said
without extreme sclaunder of Christ, by whom the infinite goodness of the Father
has more clearly and liberally than ever heretofore ben poured fourth upon the
earth, and declared to men: we must needs grant, that it is at the least not
more pinchingly to be suppressed, nor to be set fourth with less testimony,
than it was under the dark shadows of the law.

Math. ix.xiii.
But (will some man say) what like thing has Baptism with this embracing of
Christ. For neither is it reported that he Baptized them, but that he received
them, embraced them, and wished them well. Therefore if we lift to follow his
example, let us help infantes with prayer, but not Baptize them. But let us
weye the doings of Christ somewhat more hedefully, than such kind of men
do. For neither is this to be lightly passed over, that Christ commands
infantes to be brought unto him, adding a reason why, because of such is the
kingdom of heaven. And afterward he witnesses his will with deed, when
embracing them he commends them to his Father with his prayer and blessing.
If it be mete that infantes be brought to Christ, why is it not also mete that
they be received to Baptism, the sign of our communion and fellowship with
Christ? If the kingdom of heaven be theirs, why shall the sign be denied
them, whereby there is as it were an entry opened into the Chirch, that being
admitted into it they may be adno^bred among the hetres of the heavenly
kingdom? How vninst shall we be, if we drive away them whom Christ calls
unto him? if we spoil them, whom he garnisheth with his gifts? if we shutt
out them who^ he willingly receives? But if we will examine how much that
which Christ there did, differs from Baptism, yet of how much greater
price shall we have Baptism, (whereby we testify that infantes are contained
in the covenant of God) than receiving, embracing, layeng on of hands, and
prayer, whereby Christ himself being present declares that they both are
his, and are sanctified of him? By the other cauillations, whereby they labor
to mock out this place, they do nothing but bewraye their own ignorance. For
they gather an argument of this which Christ says. Let little ones come to me,
that they were in age good bigg ones which were allredy able to go. But they
are called of the Evangelists, brephe, and paidia, by which words the Greeks
do signify babes yet hanging on the breasts. Therefore this word (to come)
is simply set for (to have access.) Lo what snares they are compelled to
make, which are grown hard against the truth. Now where they say, that the
kingdom of heaven is not given to them, but to such as be like them, because
it is said to be of such, not of them: that is no sounder than the rest. For
if that be granted, what manner of reason shall the reason of Christ be, whereby
he means to show, that infantes in age are not strangers from him? When he
commands that infantes be suffered to have access unto him, nothing is
plainer than that very infancy in deed is there spoken of. And that this
should not seem an absurdity, he by and by adds: of such is the kingdom of
heaven. But if it must needs be that infantes be comprehended herein, it must
be plain that by this word (Such) are meant very infantes themselves, and
such as be like them.

Now there is no man that sees not, that Baptism of infantes was Acts.
xvi.xv. and. xxxii
yet because again they are not excluded, so often as mention happens to be
made of the baptisyng of any householde: who, unless he be mad, can reason
thereupon that they were not baptized? If such arguments were of any force,
women should be forbidden to partake of the Lords supper, whom we read not
to have been received unto it in the time of the Apostles. But here we be
content with the rule of faith. For when we consider, what the institution of
the S^pper requires, thereby also we may easily judge to whom the use thereof
ought to be communicated. Which we observe also in Baptism. For when we mark,
to what end it was ordained, we evidently espy, that it belongs no less to
infants, than to elder folks. Therefore they can not be deprived of it, but
that the will of the author must be manifestly defrauded. But whereas they
spread abroad among the simple people, that there passed a long roawe of years
after the resurrection of Christ, in which the Baptism of infantes was
unknowen: therein they most fowly do lie. For there is no writer so old, that
does not certainly refer the beginning thereof to the time of the Apostles.

Now remains that we breefely show, what fruit comes of matter to
aduau^ce his glory, and ouerspreadeth godly hearts with singular gladness,
because they are therwithall more earnestly moved to love again so godly a
Father, whom they see to have care of their posterity for their sakes. Neither
do I regard, if any man take exception, and say that the promise ought to
suffice to confirm the salvation of our children: forasmuch as it has
pleased God otherwise, who as he knows our weakness, willed in this behalf
so much to bear tenderly with it. Therefore let them that embrace the promise
of Gods mercy to be extended to their children, think that it is their duty
to offer them to the Church to be signed with the sign of mercy, and thereby
to encourage themselves to a more assured confidence, because they do with
present eye behold the covenant of the Lord graven in the bodies of their
children. Again, the children receive some commodity of their Baptism, that
being engraffed into the body of the Church they be somewhat the more
commended to the other me^bres. Then when they are grown to riper age, they be
thereby not sclenderly stirred up to earnest endeavor to worship God, of whom
they have been received into his children by a solemn sign of adoption, before
that they could by age acknowe him for their Father. Genesis xvii xiiii.
Finally that same condemnation ought greatly to make us afraid, that God
will take vengeance of it, if any man despise to mark his son with the sign
of the covenant, because by such contempt the grace offered is refused and as
it were forsworn.



Truly if circumcision was a literal sign, there is no otherwise to Coloss.
ii.xi.
For he says that we are circumcised in Christ, with a circumcision not made
with hand, puttyng away the body of sin that dwelled in our flesh: which he
calls the circumcision of Christ. Afterward for declaration of that saying,
he adioineth, that we be buried with Christ by Baptism. What means he by
these words, but that the fulfillyng and truth of Baptism, is also the truth
and fulfillyng of circumcision, because they figure both one thing? For he
trauaileth to show, that Baptism is the same to Christians, which
circumcision had been before to the Jews. But forasmuch as we have now
evidently declared, that the promises of both the signs, and the mysteries
that are represented in them, do agree together, we will for this present tarry
no longer upon them. Only I will put the faithful in mind, that though I
hold my peace, they should weye with themselves whether it be taken for an
earthly and literal sign, under which nothing is contained but spiritual
and heavenly. But, that they should not sell their smokes to the simple, we
will by the way confute one objection wherewith they color this most shameless
lie. It is most certain that the principal promises, wherein was contained the
covenant which in the Old testamente God stablished with the Israelites, were
spriritual, and tended to eternal life: and then again, that they were
received of the fathers spirituallye, as it was mete, that they might thereof
receive affiance of the life to come, whereunto they lo^ged with the whole
affection of their heart. But in the mean time we deny not, but that he
witnessed his good will toward them with earthly and carnal benefits: by
which also we say that the same promise of spiritual things was confirmed. As
when he promised everlasting blessedness to his servant Abraham, Genesis xv i.
and. xviii.
that he might set before his eyes a manifest token of his favor, he adds an
other promise concerning the possession of the land of Chanaan. After this
manner we ought to understand all the earthly promises that are given to the
Iewiche nation, that the spiritual promise, as the head, whereunto they are
directed, should always have the chief place. But sith I have more largely
entreated of these things in the difference of the new and old testament,
therefore now I do the more slightly knitte it up.

In the namyng of the children they find this diversity, that in the Gal.
iiii.xxviii. Romans iiii xii.
We grant in deed that the carnal seed of Abraham did for a time hold the
place of the spiritual sede which is by faith graffed into him. For we be
called his children howsoever there is no natural kindred between him and us.
But if they mean, as they plainly show that they do, that there was never
spiritual blessing promised to the carnal sede of Abraham, herein they are
much deceived. Wherefore we must level to a better mark, whereunto we are
directed by the most certain guidyng of the Scripture. The Lord therefore
promised to Abraham, that he should have a seed, wherein all nations of the
earth shall be blessed: and therwithall assures him, that he would be a God
to him and his sede. Whosoever do by Faith receive Christ the author of
blessyng, are heirs of this promise, and therefore are called the children of
Abraham.

Mat. viii.xi. Exo. xix.v.
Isaac, and Jacob: yet he had many ages before extended that same so great
mercy to the Jews. And because, passing over all other, he had chosen out
that only nation, in which he would restrain his grace for a time, called them
his peculiar possession, and his purchased people. For testifiyng of such
liberality, Circumcision was given by the sign whereof ye Jews might be
taught yt God is to them the author of salvation: by which knowledge their
minds were raised into hope of eternal life. For what shall he want, who^ God
has ons received into his charge? Wherefore the Apostle meaning to prove that
the Gentiles were the children of Abraham as well as the Jews, speaks in
this manner: Romans iiii.x.
Abraham (says he) was justified by faith in uncircumcision. Afterward he
received the sign of circumcision, the seal of the righteousness of faith,
that he should be the father of all the faithful, both of uncircumcision and
of circumcision, not of them that glory of only circumcision, but of them that
follow the f^^th which our father Abraham had in uncircumcision. Do not we see
that both sorts are made egall in dignity* For, during the time appointed by
the decree of God, he was the father of circumcision. When, the wall being
plucked down (as the Apostle writes in an other place) by which the Jews were
severed from the Gentiles, Ephesians. ii.xiiii.
the entry was made open to them also into the kingdom of God, he was made
their father, and that without the sign of circumcision, because they have
Baptism instead of circumcision. But where he expressly by name denies, that
Abraham is father to them which are of circumcision only, that same was spoken
to abate the pride of certain, which omittyng the care of godliness, did bost
themselves of only Ceremonies. After which manner at this day also their vanity
may be confuted which seek in Baptism nothing but water.

yea how it nothing avails of it self, he brings forth Ismael and Esau
for example prove it: whom being refused, as if they were strangers, although
they were according to the flesh the natural ofspryng of Abraham, the
blessing rested in Isaac and Jacob. Whereupon is gathered that which he
afterward affirms, that salvation hangs of the mercy of God, which he
extends to whom it pleases him: and that there is no cause why the Jews
should stand in their own conceit, or boast upon ye name of the covenant,
unless they keep the law of ye covenant, that is to say, do obey the word.
Again when he has thrown them down from vain confidence of their kindred,
yet because on the other side he saw, that the covenant which was ones made of
God with the posterity of Abraham, could in no wise be made void, in the xi.
chapter, he argues that the carnal kindred is not to be spoiled of his due
dignity: by the beneficial mean whereof he teaches that the Jews are the
first and natural heirs of the Gospel, but in respect that by their
unthankfulness, they were forsaken as unworthy: yet so that the heavenly
blessyng is not utterly removed from their nation. For which reason, how
much soever they were stubborn and covenant breakers, nevertheless he
calls them holy, (so much honor he gives to ye holy generation, with whom
God had vouchsaued to make his holy covenant) but calls us, if we be compared
with them, as it were after borne, yea or the untimely borne children of
Abraham, and that by adoption, not by nature: as if a twigg broken of from his
natural tree, should be graffed into a strange stock. Therefore that they
should not be defrauded of their prerogative, it behooved that the Gospel should
be first preached to them: for they be in the household of God as it were the
first begotten children. Wherefore this honor was to be given them* until they
refused it being offered them, and by their own unthankfulness brought to
pass that it was carried away to the Gentiles. Neither yet, with how great
obstinatie soever they continue to make war against the Gospel, ought they
to be despised of us: if we consider that for the promises sake, the blessing
of God does yet still remain among them: as verily the Apostle testifies that
it shall never utterly depart from thence: Romans xi.xxix.
because the gifts and calling of God are without repentance.

Behold of what force is the promise given to the posterity of Abraham, i.
Cor. vii xiiii.
that the children of christians receive the same sanctification of their
parents. Whereupon is gathered, that they are worthily severed from the rest,
which on the other side are condemned of uncleanness. Now who can doubt, but
that it is most false which they do thereupon conclude, that say that the
infantes which in old time were circumcised, did only figure spiritual
infantie, which arises of the regeneration of the word of God. For Paul
does not so suttelly play the Philosopher, Romans xv.viii.
where he writes that Christ is ye minister of Circumcision, to fulfill the
promises which had been made to the Fathers, as if he said thus: Forasmuch as
the covenant made with Abraham has respect to his sede, Christ, to perform
and discharge the promise ones made by his Father, came to salvation to the
nation of the Jews. Se you not how also after the resurrection of Christ, he
judges that the promise of the covenant is to be fulfilled, not only by way
of allegory, but as the very words do sound, to the carnal seed of Abraham.
To the same intent serves that which Peter in the second Chapter of the Acts,
Acts. ii.xxxix.
declares to the Jews, that the benefit of the Gospel is due to them and
their sede by right of the covenant, and in the Chapter next following he
calls them the children of the testamente, that is to say heirs. Acts.
iii.xxv. Ephesians. ii.xi
From which also not much disaccordeth the other place of the Apostle above
alleged, where he accompteth and sets Circumcision emprinted in infants, for
a testimony of that communion which they have with Christ. But if we harken to
their trifles, what shall be wroughte by that promise, whereby the Lord in the
second article of his law undertakes to his servants, that he will be
favorable to their sede even to the thousandth generation? Shall we here flee
to allegories? But that were to triflyng a shift. Or shall we say that this is
abolished? But so the law should be destroyed, which Christ came rather to
stablish, so far as it turns us to good unto life. Let it therefore be out
of controversy, that God is so good and liberal to his, that for their sakes,
he will have also their children, whom they shall begett, to be adnumbred among
his people.

scripture expressly cries to the contrary that we are buried into death to
this entente, that we should dye, and from thenseforth should endeavor to this
mortification. Now, a likewise handlyng, it is, that they cavil that women
ought not to be baptized, if Baptism must be framed like to Circumcision. For
if it be most certain that the sanctifieng of the sede of Israel was testified
by the sign of Circumcision: thereby also it is undoubted, that it was given to
sanctify both males and females. But the only bodies of male children were
marked with it, which might by nature be marked: yet so that the women were by
them after a certain manner companions and parteners of circumcision. Therefore
sending far away such follies of theirs, let us stick fast in the
likeness of Baptism and circumcision, which we most largely see to agree in
the inward mystery, in the promises, in use, in effectualnesse.

They think also yt they bring forth a most strong reason, why children i.
Cor. xv xxii. Ep. ii.iii. Psalm. li.vii.
Therefore that we may be made heirs of life, we must communicate with him.
Again when it is written in an other place, that by nature we are all subject
to the wrath of God, and conceived in sin, whereunto Damnation perpetually
cleaves: we must depart out of our own nature, before that the entry be
open to us into the kingdom of God. And what can be more plainly spoken, than
that flesh and blood can not possess the kingdom of God? i. Cor. xv l.
Therefore let al be done away what soever is ours (which shall not be done
without regeneration) then we shall see this possession of the kingdom.
Finally if Christ say truly, when he reports that he is life, it is
necessary that we be graffed into him, John. x^.xxv. et xiiii.v^.
that we may be delivered out of the bondage of death. But (say they) how are
infantes regenerate, which are not endued with knowledge neither of good nor of
evil? But we answer, that the work of God is not yet no work at all,
although it be not subject to our capacity. Moreover it is nothing doutefull,
that the infantes which are to be saved (as verily of that age some are saved)
are before regenerate of the Lord. For if they bring with them from their
mothers womb the corruption naturally planted in them: they must be purged
thereof, Reave. xxi.xxvii. Ephe. ii.iii. Psa. ii.vii
before that they be admitted into the kingdom of God, whereinto nothing
enters that is defiled or spotted. If they be borne sinners, as both David
and Paul affirm: either they remain out of favor and hateful to God, or
they must needs be justified. And what seek we more, John. iii.iii.
when the judge himself openly affirms that the entry into heavenly life is
open to none but to them that be borne again? And to put such carpers to
silence, he showed an example in John the Baptist, whom he sanctified in his
mothers womb, what he was able to do in the rest. Neither do they any thing
prevail by the shifte wherewith they here mock, that that was but ones done:
whereupon it does not by and by follow that the Lord is wont commonly to do
so with infantes. For neither do we reason after that manner: only our purpose
is to show, that the power of God is by them unjustly and enuiously limited
within those narrow bounds within which it suffers not it self to be
bound. Their other by shift is even of as great weight. They allege that by
the usual manner of the Scripture, this word (from the womb,) is as much in
effect, as if it were said, from childhode. But we may clearly see, that the
Angel when he declared the same to zachary, Luke. i.xv.
meant an other thing: that is, that it which was not yet borne, should be
filled with the Holy ghost. Let us not therefore attempt to appoint a law to
God, but yt he may sanctify whom it pleased him, as he sanctified this child,
forasmuch as his power is nothing minyshed.

i. Pet. i.xxiii.
they do wrongfully expound that saying of Peter, wherein he comprehends
only the faithful which had been taught by preaching of the Gospel. To such
in deed we grant that the word of the Lord is the only sede of spiritual
regeneration: but we deny that it ought thereupon to be gathered, that infantes
can not be regenerate by the power of God, which is to him as easy and ready as
to us it is incomprehensible and wonderful. Moreover it should not be safe
enough for us to take this away from the Lord, that he may not be able to
show himself to be known to them by whatsoever way he will.

Deute. i.xxiii.
But they consider not yt the Apostle, when he makes hearing the beginning of
faith, describes only the ordinary distribution of the Lord and disposition
which he uses to keep in calling them that be his: but appoints not to him
a perpetual rule, that he may not use any other way. Which way verily he has
used in ye calling of many, to whom he has given the true knowledge of
himself by an inward manner, by ye enlightening of the Spirit, without any
preaching used for mean thereof. But whereas they think it shall be a great
absurdity, if any knowledge of God be given to infantes, from whom Moses takes
away the understanding of good and evil: I beseech them to answer me, what
danger is there if they be said to receive some part of that grace, whereof a
little after they shall enjoy the full plentifulnesse. For if the fullness of
life stands in the perfect knowledge of God, when many of them, whom in their
very first infantie death by and by takes away, do pass into eternal life,
truly they are received to behold the most present face of God. Who^ therefore
the Lord will enlighte^ with the full bryghtnesse of his light, why may he not
presently also, if it so please him, send out to shine upon them some small
sparcle thereof: specially if he do not first unclothe them of ignorance, before
ye he take them out of the prison of the flesh? Not that I mean rashly to
affirm that they be endued with the same Faith which we feel in our selves, or
yt they have altogether like knowledge of faith? (which I had rather leave in
suspense) but somewhat to restrain their foolish arrogance, which according as
their mouth is puffed up with fullness, do boldly deny or affirm they care not
what.

But that they may yet stand more strongly in this point, they add, To.
xiiii.xi
For sith Baptism and circumcision are both in one case, they can give
nothing to the one but that they must also therewithal grant the same to the
other. If they look back to their wonted starting hole, that then by the age
of infantie were figured spiritual infa^tes, the way is already stopped up
against them. We say therefore, sith God has communicated to infantes
circumcision a Sacrament of repentance and Faith, it seems no absurdity if
they be made partakers of Baptism: unless they list openly to rage against
the ordinance of God. But both in all the doings of God, and in this self
same doing also shines wisdom and righteousness enough, to beat down the
backbitinges of the wicked. For though infantes, at the same instante that they
were circumcised, did not comprehend in understanding what that sign meant:
yet they were truly circumcised into the mortification of their corrupt and
defiled nature, in which mortification they should afterward exercise
themselves when they were growe^ to ryper age. Finally it is very easy to
assoile this objection, with saying that they be Baptized into repentance and
Faith to come: which although they be not formed in them, yet by secret
workyng of the Spirit the sede of both lies hidden in them. With this answer
at ones is overthrown whatsoever they wrest against us which they have fetched
out of y^ signification of Baptism. Of which sort is ye title wherewith it is
commended of Paul, Lit. i^i.v.
where he calls it ye washing of regeneration and of renewyng. Whereupon they
gather that it is to be given to none but to such a one as is able to conceive
those things. But we on ye contrary side may answer, yt nether was
circu^cisio^ which betokened regeneration, to be given to any other tha^ to
them yt were regenerate. And so shall we co^de^ne yt ordinance of God. Wherefore
(as we have already touched in diverse places) whatsoever arguments do tend
to ye shaking of circumcision, they have no force in ye assayling of Baptism.
Nether do they so escape away, if they say yt we ought to take yt for
determined and certain, which stands upon ye authority of God, although
there appear no reso^ of it: which reverence is not due to ye Baptism of
infantes, nor to such other things which be not co^me^ded unto us by ye
express word of God: since they are still fast holden with this doble argument.
For the commandment of God concerning infantes to be circumcised, was either
lawful and subject to no cauillatio^s, or worthy to be found fault withal. If
there were no inconvenience nor absurdity in ye commandment of circumcision,
neither can there any absurdity be noted in observing the Baptism of infantes.

Romans vi.iiii. Col, ii, xii
To the same intent ought yt to be applied which Paul teaches in two places,
yt by Baptism we are buried together with Christ. For he does not mean thereby,
yt he which is to be baptized, must be already first buried together with Christ:
but simply declares what doctrine is contained under Baptism, yea and that to
them yt be already Baptized: so yt very mad men would not affirm by this place
yt it goes before Baptism. After this manner Moses and the Prophets did put ye
people in mind what circumcision meant, wherewith yet they had been marked while
they were infa^tes. Of the same effect also is yt which he writes to ye
Galatians, Gala. iii.xxvii,
yt they when they were Baptized, did put on Christ. To what end* verili yt
they should from the^se fourth live to Christ, because they had not lived
before. And although in the older sort the receiving of the sign ought to
follow the understanding of the mystery: yet it shall be by and by declared yt
infa^tes ought to be otherwise esteemed and accounted of. And no otherwise ought
we to judge of the place of Peter, i. Pet. iii.xxi.
in which they think yt they have a strong hold: when he says yt it is not a
washing to wype away the filthinesses of the body, but the witness of a good
conscience before God, by the resurrection of Christ. They in deed do gather
thereby, that nothing is left to ye Baptism of infantes, but that it should be
a vain smoke, namely from which this truth is far distant. But they often
offend in this error, that they will have the thing in order of time to go
always before the sign. For the truth of circumcision also co^sisted of the
same witness of good conscience. If it ought of necessity to have gone
before, infa^tes should never have been circumcised by ye commandment of God.
But he showing that ye witness of a good conscience was contained under the
truth of circumcision, and yet there withal also commanding infantes to be
circumcised, does in yt point sufficiently declare yt circumcision is applied
to ye time to come. Wherefore there is no more present effectualnesse to be
required in Baptism of infantes, than yt it should confirm and stablish ye
covenant made by the Lord with them. The rest of the signification of ye
Sacrament shall afterward follow at such time as God himself foreseeth.

Now I think there is no man, that does not clearly see that al such Ephesians.
v.xxvi,
They allege also this out of the Epistle to the Ephesians: that ye Chirch is
cleansed of the Lord, with the washing of water in the word of life. Tha^ which
there could nothing be alleged more fit to overthrow their error: for the rupo^
grows an easy proof of our side. If the Lord will have the washyng wherewith
he cleanses his Chirch, to be testified by Baptism: it seems not rightful
that it should want the testimony of it in infantes* which are rightfully
accounted part of the Chirch, forasmuch as they be called heirs of the
heavenly kingdom. For Paul speaks of the whole Chirch, i. Cor. xii.xvii.
where he says that it was cleansed with the Baptism of water. Likewise of
this that in an other place he says that we be by Baptism graffed into the
body of Christ, we gather that infantes, whom he reckeneth among his members,
ought to be Baptized, least they be plucked away from his body. Behold with
what violence with so many engines they assault the fortresses of our faith.

The^ they come down to ye practice and custom of y^ time of ye Apostles,
Acts. ii.xxxvii.
what was nedeful to be done, he cou^selled them first to repent, and then to
be Baptized, into ye forgiveness of sins. Likewise Philip, when ye Eunuche
required to be Baptized, answered yt he might be Baptized if he believed with al
his heart. Acts. viii xxxvii.
Hereby they think that they may win, yt it is not lawful that Baptism be
granted to any, but where Faith and repentance go before. Truly if we yield
to this reason, the first of these two places where is no mention made of
Faith, will prove yt repe^ta^ce alone suffices: and the other place, wherein
repentance is not required, will prove that Faith only is enough. I think
they will answer that the one place is helped with the other, and therefore must
be joined together. I say also likewise, yt other places must be laid together
which make somewhat to the undoing of this knot: for as much as there be many
se^tences in Scripture, the understanding whereof hangs upon the circumstance
of the place. As this presently is an example. For they to who^ Peter and
Philip spoke these things were of age sufficient to have practice of
repentance and to conceive Faith. We earnestly deny that such ought to be
Baptized, until after perceiving of their conversion and Faith, at least so
far as it may be searched out by the judgment of men. But, that infantes
ought to be accounted in an other number, it is more than evident enough. For
in old time if any man did join himself into communion of religion with
Israel, it behooved that he should first be taught the covenant of the lord, and
instructed in the law, before that he were marked with circumcision, because in
birth he was a stranger from the people of Israel, with whom the couenante had been made which circumcision stablished.

Ge. xv.i.
hyding in the mean time what he means by that sign: but first he declares
what couenante he entendeth to make with him, and then after Faith given to the
promise, he makes him partaker of the Sacrament. Genesis xvii.xvi.
Why does in Abraham the Sacrament follow Faith, and in Isaac his son it
goes before all understanding? Because it is mete that he, which being in full
grown age is received into fellowship of the covenant, from which he had been
hitherto a stranger, should first learn the conditions thereof: but an infant
begotten of him neded not so, which by right of inheritance according to ye
form of the promise is even from his mothers womb contained in the covenant.
Or (that the matter may be more clearly and brefely showed) if the children of
the faithful, without the help of understanding, are partakers of the
couenante, there is no cause why they should be debar^ed from the sign for
this that they can not swear to the form of the covenant. This verily is the
reason, why in some places God affirms yt the infantes which are issued of
the Israelites, Eze. xvi.xx. and xxiii.xxxvii.
are begotten and borne to him. For without dout he estemeth as his children
the children of them to whoes sede he promises that he will be a Father. But he
which is unfaithful, issued of ungodly parents, till he be by Faith united to
God, is judged a stranger from the communion of the covenant. Therefore it is no
marvel if he be not partaker of the sign, the signification whereof should
be deceitful and void in him. Ephesians. ii.xii.
To this effect Paul also writes, that the Gentiles so long as they were
drowned in their idolatry, were out of the testamente. With this short
sum, (as I think) the whole matter may be clearly opened: that they which in
grown age, embrace the Faith of Christ, forasmuch as they were hitherto
strangers from the couenante, are not to be marked with Baptism, but whereas
Faith and repentance come between, which only can open them the entry into
fellowship of the covenant: but the infantes that are issued of Christians, as
they are received of God into the inheritance of the covenant so sone as they
be borne, so ought to be received to Baptism. Hereunto must that be applied
which the Evangelist speaks of, Mat. lii.vi.
that they were Baptized of Ihon which confessed their sins. Which example
at this day also we think mete to be kept. For if a Turk offer himself to
Baptism, he should not be rashly Baptized of us, namely not til after
confession whereby he may satisfy the Chirch.

Moreover they bring fourth the words of Christ, which are rehearsed Ioh.
iii.v,
Unless a man be borne again of water and the Spirit, he can not enter into
the kingdom of God. Lo (say they) how Baptism is by the Lords own mouth
called regeneration. Them therefore whom it is more than enough known to be
unable to receive regeneration, by what color do we admit to Baptism which can
not be without regeneration: First they are deceived in this that they think
that in this place mention is made of Baptism, because they hear the name of
water. For after that Christ had declared to Nicodemus the corruption of
nature, and taught him that men must be borne of new, because Nicodemus
dreamed of a bodily new birth, he there showed the manner how God does
regenerate us, namely by water and the Spirit: as though he should say, by the
Spirit which in cleansing and watering faithful souls, does the office of
water. Therefore I take water and the Spirit simply for the Spirit, which is
water. Neither is this a new form of speech, for it altogether agrees with
the same which is in the third Chapter of Mathewe: Mat. ii, xxxi.
He that follows me, it is he that Baptiseth in the Holy ghost and fire.
Therefore as to Baptize in the Holy ghost and fire, is to give the Holy ghost,
which has the office and nature of fire: so to be borne again of water and
the Spirit, is nothing else but to receive that power of the holy Spirit
which does the same thing in the soul that water does in the body. I know
that other do otherwise expound it: but I am out of doubt that this is the
natural meaning: because the purpose of Christ is none other, but to teach
that all they must put of their own nature which aspire to the heavenly
kingdom. Howebit if we list to cauil vnsauoryly as they do, it were easy for
us (when we have granted as they would have it) to infer upon them that
Baptism is before Faith and repentance: forasmuch as in the words of Christ
it goes before the Spirit. It is certain that this is understood of
Spiritual gifts: which if they come after Baptism, I have obtained what I
require. But leaving cauillations, we must hold fast the plain exposition,
which I have brought, that no man til he have been renewed with living water,
that is, with the Spirit, can enter into the kingdom of God.

Now hereby also it is evident that their feigned invention is to be Ioh.
v.xxiiii.
shall not see death, nor shall come into judgment, but is allredy passed from
death into life: and it is no where found that he ever damned him that was not
yet Baptized. Which I would not have so taken of me as though I meant that
Baptism might freely be despised (by which despising I affirm that the Lords
covenant is defiled: so much less can I abide to excuse it) only it is enough
for me to prove, that it is not so necessary, that he should be immediately
thought to be lost, from whom power is taken away to obtain it. But if we
agree to their fained devise, we shall damn all them without exception, whom
any chance withholdeth from Baptism, with how great Faith soever (by which
Christ himself is possessed) otherwise they are endued. Moreover they make all
infantes giltye of eternal death, to whom they deny Baptism, which by their
own confession is necessary to salvation. Now let them look how trimly they
agree with the words of Christ, by which the kingdom of heaven is adjudged to
that age. But, to grant them every thing so much as pertains to the
understanding of this place, Math. xix.xiiii.
yet they shall gather nothing thereof, unless they overthrow the former
doctrine which we have stablished concerning the regeneration of infantes.

Mathe. xxviii.xix.
which they fetch out of the last Chapter of Matthew: where Christ sending
fourth his Apostles to all nations, gives them the first commandment to
teach them, and the second to Baptize them. Then also out of the last of
Mark they adioine this, He yt believes and is Baptized, Mark, xvi xvi.
shall be saved. What seek we further (say they) when the Lords own words do
openly sound, that we must first teach ere we Baptize, and do assign to
Baptism the second state after Faith? Math. iii.xiii, Luc. iii.xxiii,
Of which order the Lord also showed an example in himself, which would be
Baptized not till the thirtyth year. But here, O good God, how many ways do
they both entangle themselves, and bewraye their own ignorance? For herein
they now more than childishly err, that they fetch the first institution of
Baptism from thense, which Christ had from the beginning of his preaching
given in charge to his Apostles to minister. Therefore there is no cause why
they should affirm that ye law and rule of Baptism is to be fetched out of
these places, as though they contained the first institution thereof. But, to
bear with them for this fault, yet how strong is this manner of reasoning?
Truly if I listed to dally with them, there is not a little lurking hole, but a
most wide field offreth it self open for us to escape them. For when they
stick so fast to the order of words, that they gather that because it is
said, Go, preach and Baptize, Again, he that believes and is Baptized,
therefore they must preach before that they Baptize, Mar. xvi.xv.
and believe before that they require Baptism: why may not we again answer
them with saying that we must Baptize before that we must teach the keeping of
those things that Christ has commanded: namely sith it is said, Baptize ye,
teaching them to keep whatsoever things I have commanded you? which same
thing we have noted in that saying of Christ which has been even now alleged
concerning the regeneration of water and the Spirit. For if it be so
understood as they would have it, verily in that place Baptism must be before
spiritual regeneration, because it is named in the first place. for Christ does
teach that we must be regenerate, not of the Spirit and water, but of water
and the Spirit.

bold, seems to be somewhat shaken: but because truth has defense enough in
simplicity, I will not escape away with such light arguments. Therefore let
them take with them a full answer. Christ in this place gives the chief
commandment concerning preaching of the Gospel, whereunto he adioyneth the
ministry of Baptism as an addition ha^ging upon it. Again he speaks none
otherwise of Baptism but so far as the ministration of it is under the office
of teaching. For Christ sends the Apostles to publishe the Gospel to all the
nations of ye world, that they should from each where with the doctrine of
salvation gather together into his kingdom men that before were lost. But
whom, or what manner of men? It is certain that there is no mention but of them
that are able to receive teaching. Afterward he adds that such, when they
are instructed, ought to be Baptized, adjoining a promise, yt they which believe
and are baptized shall be saved. Is there in all that saying so much as one
syllable of infantes? What form therefore of reasoning shall this be wherewith
they assail us: they which are of grown age, must first be instructed, that
they may believe, ere they be baptized: therefore it is unlawful to make Baptism
common to infantes? Although they would burst themselves, they shall prove
nothing else by this place but that the Gospel must be preached to them that
are of capacity able to hear it, before that they be Baptized, forasmuch as
he there speaks of such only. Let them hereof, if they can, make a stopp to
debar infantes from Baptism.

But, that even blind men also may with gropyng find out their ii. These.
iii.x.
shall he not be worthy that al men should spit at him? Why so? Because he
without difference draws yt to al men, which was spoken of one kind and one
certain age of men. No whit handsomer is their handeling in this present
cause. For, that which every man sees to belong to one age alone, they draw to
infantes, that this age also may be subject to ye rule which was made for none
but them that were more grown in years. As for the example of Christ, it
nothing vpholdeth their side. He was not baptized before that he was thirty
years old. Luke. iii xxiii.
That is in deed true: but there is a reason thereof ready to be showed: because
he the^ purposed by his preaching to lay a sound fundatio^ of Baptism, or
rather to stablish the fundation which had been before laid of John. Therefore
when he minded with his doctrine to institute Baptism, to procure ye greater
authority to his institution, he Sanctified it with his own body, and that in
such fitness of time as was most convenient, namely when he began his
preaching. Finally they shall gather nothing else hereof, but that Baptism took
his original and beginning at the preaching of the Gospel. If they list to
appoint the thirtith year, why do they not keep it, but do receive every one
to Baptism as he has in their judgment sufficiently profited? yea and
Seruettus one of their masters, when he stiffly required this time, yet began
at the.xxi. year of his age to boste himself to be a Prophet. As though he
were to be suffered that takes upon himself the place of a teacher in the
Chirch, before that he be a member of the Chirch.

i. Cor. xi.xxviii.
to weye the power thereof. Would we have any thing plainer, than that which the
Apostle teaches when he exhorts that every man should prove and examine
himself, and then eat of this bred and drink of this cup? Therefore
examination must go before, which should in vain be looked for of infantes.
Again, he that eats unworthily, eats and drynketh damnation to himself,
not discerning the Lords body. If none can partake worthily but they that can
well discern the holiness of the Lords body, why should we give to our
tender children, poison instead of lively food? What is that commandment of
the Lord, ye shall do it in remembrance of me? what is that other which the
Apostle deriueth from the same, So often as ye shall eat of this bread, ye shall
declare the Lords death til he come? What remembrance (I beseech you) shall we
require at our infantes of ye thing which they never atteined with
understanding? what preaching of the cross of Christ* the force and benefit
whereof they do not yet comprehend in mind? None of these things is prescribed
in Baptism. Therefore between these two signs is great difference: which we
note also in like signs in the old testament. Circumcision, which is known
to answer to our Baptism, was appointed for infantes. But the passover into
whoes place ye Supper has now succeeded, did not receive al manner of gestes
without difference, but was rightly eaten of them only that might by age
enquire of the signification of it. If these men had remaining one crumme of
sound brain, would they be blind at a thing so clear and offering it self
to sight?

Christ's signs were ordained for remembrance, that every man should remember
that he was buried together with Christ. I answer that, that which he has
fained of his own head, needs no confutation: yea tha^ which he draws to
Baptism, Paul's words show to be propre to the holy Supper, that every man
should examine himself: but of Baptism there is no where any such thing.
Whereupon we gather yt they be rightly baptized which for their smalnesse of
age, John. iii.xxxvi.
are not yet able to receive examination. Whereas he thirdly allegeth, that all
they abide in death which believe not the Son of God, and that the wrath of
God, abides upon them: and therefore that infants which can not believe lie in
their damnation: I answer that Christ there speaks not of the general
gyltinesse wherewith all ye posterity of Adam are enwrapped, but only thretneth
the despisers of the Gospel, which do proudely and stubbornely refuse the
grace offered them. But this nothing pertains to infantes. Also I set a
contrary reason against them: yt whomesoeuer Christ blesses, he is discharged
from the curse of Adam and the wrath of God: Sith therefore it is known that
infantes are blessed of him, it follows that they are discharged from death.
Then he falsely cites that which is no where red, i. Cor. xv.xlvi.
that whosoever is borne of the Spirit, hears the voice of the Spirit. Which
although we grant to be written, yet shall prove nothing else but that the
faithful are framed to obedience, according as the Spirit woorketh in them.
But that which is spoken of a certain number, it is faulty to draw
indifferently to all. Fowerthly he obiecteth: because that goes before which
is natural, we must tarry type time for Baptism which is spiritual. But
although I grant that all the posterity of Adam begotten of the flesh do
from the very womb bear their own damnation, yet I deny that that
withstandeth but that God may presently bring remedy. For neither shall
Seruettus prove that there were many years appointed by God that the
spiritual newness of life many begin. 1. Cor. vii xiiii.
As Paul testifies, although they which are borne of the faithful are by
nature damned: yet by supernatural grace they are saved. ii. Sa. v.viii. Luc.
xiiii.xxi.
Then he brings forth an allegory, that David going up into ye toure of
Sion, did lead neither blind men nor lame men with him but strong soldiers.
But what if I set a parable against it, wherein God calls to the heavenly
banquet blind men and lame men: how will Seruettus vnwynde himself out of
this knott? I ask also whether lame and maimed men had not first ben soldiers
with David. But it is superfluous to tarry longer upon this reason, which the
readers shall find by the holy history to be made of mere falsehod. Mat.
iiii, xix.
There follows an other allegory, that the Apostles were fishers of men, not
of little children. But I ask, what that sayeing of Christ means that into
the net of the Gospel are gathered al kinds of fishes. Mat. xiii.xlvii.
But because I like not to play with allegories, I answer that when the office
of teaching was enjoined to the Apostles, yet they were not forbidden from
baptisyng of infantes. Howbeit I would yet know, when the Evangelist names
them Anthropous men, (in whche word is comprehended all mankind without
exception) why they should deny infantes to be men. i. Cor. ii.xiii.
Seventhly he allegeth, that sith spiritual things agree with spiritual,
infantes which are not spiritual, are also not mete for baptism. But first it
is plainly evident how wrongfully they wrest the place of Paul. There is
entreated of doctrine: when the Corinthians did to much stand in their own
conceit for vain sharpness of wit, Paul rebukes their sluggishnesse, for
that they were yet to be instructed in the first introductions of heavenly
wisdom. Who can thereof gather that Baptism is to be denied to infants, whom
being begotten of the flesh God does by free adoption make holy to himself?
Where as he says, that they must be fed with spiritual meat, if they be new
men, the solution is easy, that by Baptism they are admitted into the flock
of Christ, and that the sign of adoption suffiseth them, til being grown to
age they be able to bear strong meat: that therefore the time of examination
which God expressly requi^eth in the holy Supper, must be tarried for. Afterward
he obiecteth that Christ calls all his to the holy Supper. But it is certain
enough that he admits none, but them that be already prepared to celebrate
the remembrance of his death. Whereupon follows that infantes, whom he
vouchesaued to embrace, do stay in a several and proper degree by themselves
till they grow to age, and yet are not strangers. Whereas he says, that it is
monstrous that a man after that he is borne, should not eat: I answer that
souls are otherwise fed than by the outward eating of the Supper: and that
therefore Christ is nevertheless meat to infantes, although they abstain
from the sign. But of Baptism the case is otherwise, by which only the gate
into the Chirch is opened to them. Again he obiecteth that a good Steward
distributeth meat to the household in due time. Math. xxiiii.xlvi
Which although I willyngly grant: yet by what right will he appoint unto us
the certain time of Baptism, that he may prove that it is not given to
infantes out of time. Moreover he brings in that commandment of Christ to
the Apostles, yt they should make have into the harvest, while the fields wax
white. John. iiii xxxv.
Uerily Christ means this only, that the Apostles seeing the fruit of
their labor present, should the more cherefully prepare themselves to teach.
Who shall thereof gather that the only time of Harvest is the ripe time for
Baptism? His eleventh reason is, Acts. xi.xxvi.
that in the first Chirch christians and disciples were all one: but we see
now that he fondely reasons from the part to the whole. Disciples are
called men of full age, which had been already thoroughly taught, and had
professed Christ: as it behooved that the Jews under the law should be the
disciples of Moses: yet no man shall thereof rightly gather, that infantes were
strangers, whom the Lord has testified to be of his householde. Beside these
he allegeth, that all Christians are brethren, in which number infantes are not
unto us, so long as we debar them from the Supper. But I return to that
principle, that none are heirs of the kingdom of heaven, but they that are
the members of Christ: then, that the embracyng of Christ was a true token of
the adoption, whereby infantes are joined in common with full grown men, and
that the absteining for a time from the Supper withstandeth not but that they
perteyne to the body of the Church. Neither did the these that was converted
on the Cross, cesse to be brother of the godly, although he never came to the
Supper. Afterward he adds, that none is made our brother but by the Spirit
of adoption, which is given only by the bearing of Faith. I answer, that he
still falls back into the same deceitefull argument, because he ouerthwartly
draws that to infantes which was spoken only of grown men. Paul teaches
there that this is Gods ordinary manner of calling to bring his elect to the
faith, when he stirs up to them faithful teachers, by whoes ministry and
travail he reaches his hand to them. Who dare thereby appoint a law to him,
but that he may by some other secret way graffe infantes into Christ? Acts.
x.xxiiii. Acts. viii xxvii.
Where he obiecteth that Cornelius was baptized after that he had received the
Holy ghost: how wrongfully he doothe out of one example gather a general
rule, appears by the Eunuche and the Samaritanes, in whom the Lord kept a
contrary order, that Baptism went before the gifts of the Holy ghost. The
fiftenthe reason is more than foolish. He says that we are by regeneration
made Gods: and that they be Gods to whom the word of God is spoken, John.
x.xxxv.
which accords not to children that be infantes. Whereas he faineth a
Godhead to the faithful, that is one of his dotages, which it pertains not
to this present place to examine. But to wrest the place of the Psalm to so
contrary a sense, is a point of desperate shamelessness. Christ says, that
Kings and Magistrates are called of the Prophet gods, because they bear an
office appointed them of God. But, that which concerning the special
commandment of governance is directed to certain men, this handsome
expositor draws to the doctrine of the Gospel, that he may banishe infantes
out of the Chirch. Again he obiecteth, that infantes can not be accounted new
men, because they are not begotten by the word. But I do now again repete
that which I have often said, that to regenerate us doctrine is the
incorruptible sede, if we be fit to receive it: but when by reason of age
there is not yet in us aptness to learn, God keeps his degrees of
regeneratyng. Afterward he comes back to his allegories, that in the law a
sheep and a goat were not offered in sacrifice so sone as they came out of the
womb. If I lysted to draw figures to this purpose, I could likewise redily
obiecte against him, that all first begotten things were consecrate to God so
soon as they had opened the womb: Exo. xiii.ii. Exo. xii.v.
then, that a lamb must be killed at a years age. Whereupon follows that
ma^ly strength is not to be tarried for, but rather that the new and yet tender
issues are chosen of God for sacrifices. Furthermore he affirms that none can
come to Christ, but they that have been prepared of John. As though John's office
were not enduryng but for a time. But, to omit this, truly that same
preparation was not in the children whom Christ embraced and blessed. Wherefore
let him go with his false principle. At length he calls for patrones
Trismegistus and the Sibylles, to prove that holy washyngs perteine not but to
them that are of grown age. Lo how honorably he thinks of the Baptism of
Christ, which he reduces to the Ceremonies of the Gentiles, that it may be no
otherwise ministered than pleases Trismegistus. But we more esteem the
authority of God, whom it has pleased to make infantes holy to himself,
and to admit them with the holy sign, the force whereof they did not yet by
age understand. Neither do we count it lawful to borowe out of the cleansynges
of the Gentiles any thing that may change in our Baptism the everlasting and
inviolable law of God, which he has stablished concerning circumcision. Last
of al, he makes this argument: that if it be lawful to Baptize infantes
without understanding, then Baptism may enterludelike and in sport be
ministered of boys when they play. But of this matter let him quarrel with God
by whoes commandment circumcision was common to infantes before that they had
atteyned understanding. Was it therefore a playeng matter, or subject to the
follies of children, that they might overthrow the holy ordinance of God? But
it is no marvel that these reprobate Spirits, as though they were vexed with a
phrenesie, do thrust in all the grossest absurdities for defense of their
errors: because God does with such giddynesse justly take vengeance of their
pride and stubbornness. Uerily I trust I have made plain with how feeble
succors Seruettus has helped his silly brethren the Anabaptists.

Psalm. xlviii.xi.
that by such show of his goodness, his name may be sanctified? This,
verily Satan intends, in assayling with so great armies the Baptism of
infants: namely, that this testifyeng of the grace of God being taken away, the
promise which by it is present before our eyes, may at length by little and
little vanishe away. Whereupon should grow not only a wicked unthankfulness
toward the mercy of God, but also a certain slothfulness in instructyng our
children to godliness. For by this spurr we are not a little pricked forward to
bring them up in ye earnest fear of God and in the keeping of his law, when we
consider that even immediately from their birth, he takes and acknowlegeth them
for his children. Wherefore unless we list enuiously to darken the
bountifulness of God, let us offer to him our children, to whom he gives a
place among them that be of his family and householde, that is to say, the
members of the Church.

The.xvii. Chapter. Of the holy Supper of Christ: and what if avails us.
AFter ye God has ones received us into his family, and not only to take us
as his servants, but as his children: that he may fulfill the office of a
most goed Father, and careful for his issue, he takes also upon him to
nourishe us throughout the whole course of our life. And not contented
therewith, it pleased him by a pledge given, to assure us of this continual
liberality. To this end therefore he has given his Church an other
Sacrament by the hand of his only begotten Son, John. vi.li.
namely a spiritual banquet, wherein Christ testifies himself to be the
quicknyng bread, wherewith our souls are fed to true and blessed immortality.
But forasmuch as the knowledge of so great a mystery is very necessary, and
according to the greatness thereof, requires a diligent declaration: and
Satan, that he might bereue the Chirch of this inestimable treasure, has long
ago spread mystes, and sins that time darkness, to obscure the light of it,
and then has stirred strives and battles that might estrange the minds of the
simple from tastyng of this holy fode, and has also in our time attempted the
same craft: therefore when I shall have brefely knit up the sum for the
capacity of the unlearned, I will undo those knottes, wherewith Satan has
endeavored to snare the world. First, bread and wine are signs, which
represent unto us the invisible food, which we receyne of the flesh and
blood of Christ. For as in Baptism God again begettyng us doothe graffe us
into the fellowship of his Church, and by adoption does make us his own: so
we have said that he performs the office of a provident Father of
householde, in this that he continually ministers us meat, that he susteineth
and preserves us in that life wherinto he has by his word begotten us. Now
the only meat of our soul is Christ, and therefore the heavenly Father calls
us to him, that being refreshed with common partakyng of him, we may from time
to time gather lively force, until we atteine to heavenly immortality. But
forasmuch as this mystery of the secret vnityng of Christ with the godly is
by nature impossible to be comprehended, he gives the figure and image thereof
in visible signs most fit for our small capacity: yea as it were by
earnestes and tokens given, he makes it so assured unto us as if it were seen
with our eyes, because this so familiar a similitude enters even into the
grossest minds, that souls are so fed with Christ, as bread and wine do
sustain the bodily life. Now therefore we have it declared, to what end this
mystical blessyng tends* namely to assure us, that ye body of the Lord was
so ones offered for us, yt we now eat it, and in eating it do feel in us the
effectual working of that only sacrifice: that his blood was so ones shed for
us, that it is unto us continual drink. And so sound the words of the
promise there adjoined. Take, Mathe. xxvi.xxvi Mar. xiiii xvii. Luc. xxii.xix.
1. Cor. xi.xxiiii.
this is my body, which is delivered for you. The body therefore which was ones
offered up for our salvation, we are commanded to take and eat: that when we
see our selves to be made partakers of this, we may certainly determine that
the power of his death which brings life shall be effectual in us. Whereupon
also he calls the cup, the covenant in his blood. For after a certain
manner it renews, or rather continues the covenant which he has ones
stablished with his blood, so much as pertains to the confirmyng of our
faith, so often as he reaches unto us that holy blood to be tasted of.

A great fruit verily of affiance and sweetness may godly souls gather from
us than from him: again that we can not now be condemned by our sins, from
the gyltinesse whereof he has acquired us, when he willed them to be imputed to
himself as if they were his own. This is the maruailous exchange, which of
his immeasurable bountifulness he has made with us: that he being made with
us the son of man, has made us with him the sons of God: that by his
coming down into earth, he has made us a way to go up into heaven: that
putting upon him our mortality, he has given us his immortality: that taking
on him our weakness, he has strengthened us with his power: that taking our
poverty to himself he has conveyed his riches to us: that taking to him the
weight of our unrighteousness, wherewith we were oppressed, he has clothed us
with his righteousness.



live for ever: to seal (I say) and confirm that promise: and for bryngyng
the same to pass, to send us to the cross of Christ, where that promise has been truly performed, and in all points fulfilled. For we do not well and
healthfully eat Christ but crucified, when we do with lively feelyng conceive
the effectualnesse of his death. For whereas he called himself the bread of
life, he did not borrow that name of the sacrament, as some do wrongfully
expound it: but because he was given us such of the Father, and performed
himself such, when being made partaker of our humane martalitie, he made us
parteners of his divine immortality: when offering himself for sacrifice, he
took our accursednesse upon himself, yt he might fill us with blessing: when
with his death he devoured and swalowed up death: when in his resurrection he
raised up this our corruptible flesh which he had put on, to glory and
uncorruption.

It remains that by appliance all the same may come to us. John. vi.li.
The bread which I will give, is my flesh, which I will give for the life of the
world. By which words without dout he signifies, that his body should
therefore be to us for bread, to the spiritual life of the soul, because it
should be given forth to death for our salvation: and that it is delivered to us
to eat of it, when by faith he makes us partakers of it. Ones therefore he
gave it, yt he might be made bread, when he gave forth himself to be
crucified for the redemption of the world: daily he gives it, when by the word
of the Gospel he offreth it unto us to be received, so far as it was
crucified: where he seals that deliverance with the holy mystery of the
Supper: where he inwardly fulfilleth that which he outwardly betokens. Now
herein we must beware of two faults, that neither doing to much in abaring
the signs, we seem to pluck them from their mysteries to which they are in a
manner knitte fast: nor that being immeasurable in advancing the same, we seem
in the mean time somewhat to darken the mysteries themselves. That Christ is
the bread of life, wherewith the faithful are nourished into eternal salvation,
there is no man but he grants, unless he be altogether without religion. But
this point is not likewise agreed upon among al men, what is the manner of
partaking of him. For there be that in one word define, that to eat the
flesh of Christ, and to drink his blood, is nothing else but to believe in
Christ himlsefe. But I think that Christ meant some certainer and hyer thing,
in that notable sermon where he commends to us the eating of his flesh:
namely, that we are quickened by the true partaking of him: which also he
therefore expressed by the words of eating and drynkyng, least any man should
think, that the life which we receive of him is conceived by bare knowledge
only. For as not the syghte, but the eating of bread suffiseth the body for
nourishment: so it behooves that the soul be truly and thoroughly made partaker
of Christ, that by the power of him it may be quickened into a spiritual life.
But in the mean time we confess that there is no other eating, but of faith:
as there can no other be imagined. But this is the difference between my words
and theirs, that with them to eat is only to believe: but I say that the flesh
of Christ is eaten with believing, because by faith he is made ours, and I say
that eating is the fruit and effect of faith. Or, if you will have it plainer,
with them eating is faith: and I think it rather to follow of faith. In
words verily the difference is but small: but in the thing it self, Ephesians.
iii.xvii.
not small. For though the Apostle teaches that Christ dwells in our
hearts by Faith: yet no man will expound this dwelling to be Faith: but all
men do perceive that there is expressed a singular effect of faith, for that
by it the faithful do obtain to have Christ dwelling in them. John vi.li
After this manner, the Lord meant, in calling himself the bread of life, not
only to teach that in the faith of his death and resurrection, salvation is
reposed for us: but also that by true partakyng of himself it is brought to
pass, that his life passes into us, and becomes ours: like as bread, when
it is taken for food, ministers lyuelinesse to the body.

Homi. in Ioh. xxxi. and xl. Act. ii.xli.
Again when he says, that the three thousand men which were converted at
Peter's sermon, did drink the blood of Christ by beleuyng, which they had
shed by cruel dealyng. But in many other places he honorably sets out
that benefyte of Faith, that by it our souls are no less refreshed with the
communicatyng of the flesh of Christ, than our bodies are with the bread
which they eat. And the same is it which in a certain place Chrysostom
writes, Homi. lx.
that Christ does not only by Faith, but also in deed make us his body. For
he means not that we do from any other where than from Faith, obtain such
a benefit: but this only he means to exclude, that none when he hears
faith to be named, should conceive a naked imagination. As for them that will
have the Supper to be only a mark of outward profession, I do now pass them
over: because I think that I have sufficiently confuted their error, Luc.
xxii.xx.
when I entreated of Sacraments generally. Only this thing let the reders
mark, yt when the cup is called the covenant in the blood, there is a promise
expressed that may be of force to confirm Faith. Whereupon follows, that
unless we have respect to God, and embrace that which he offreth, we do not
rightly use the holy Supper.

Moreover they also do not satisfy me, which acknowleging that we

First of all, we are taught out of the Scripture, that Christ was from the
beginning yt life bringing word of the Father, the fountain into the
communion of that word. For how small a confidence may thou conceive
thereof, if thou hear yt the word of God in deed, from which thou art most
far removed, co^teyneth in it self the fullness of life, but in thy self and
round about thee nothing offreth it self and is present before thine eyes but
death? But sins that fountain of life began to dwell in our flesh, now it
lies not a far of hydden from us, but presently delivers it self to be
partaken of us. Yea and it makes the very flesh, wherein it rests, to be of
power to bring life to us, John. vi.xlviii. and. lviii.
that by partaking thereof we may be fed to immortality. I am (says he) the
bred of life, that am come down from heaven. And the bred which I will give,
is my flesh, which I will give for the life of the world. In which words
he teaches, not only that he is life, in respect that he is the eternal
word of God which came down to us from heaven, but that in coming down he
poured the same power into the flesh which he did put on, that from thense
the communicatyng of life might flow fourth unto us. Hereupon also these
things now follow, that his flesh is verily mente, and his blood is verily
drink, with which sustenances the faithful are fostered into eternal life.
Herein therefore consists singular comfort to the godly, that now they find
life in their own flesh. For so they do not only with easy passage atteine
unto it, but have it of it self laid abroad for them and offering it self unto
them. Only let them hold open the bosom of their heart, that they may embrace
it being present, and they shall obtain it.

John v.xix.
so he has also given to the Son to have life in himself. For there he
properly speaks of his gifts, not which he from the beginning possessed
with the Father, but with which he was garnished in the same flesh in which
he appeared. Therefore he shows that in his manhood also dwells the
fulness of life, that whosoever partaketh of his flesh and blood, may
therwithall also enjoy the partaking of life. Of what sort that is, we may
declare by a familiar example. For as out of a fountain water is sometime
dro^k, sometime is drawn, sometime by forrowes is conveyed to the watering of
grounds which yet of it self does not ouerflow into so many uses, but from
the very spring it self which with everlasting flowing yeldeth and ministers
unto it from time to time new abundance: so the flesh of Christ is like a
rich and unwasted fountain which pours into us the life springing from the
Godhead into it self. Now who sees not, that the communion of the flesh
and blood of Christ is necessary to all that aspire to heavenly life? Hereunto
tends that saying of the Apostle, that the Chirch is the body of Christ and
the fulfilling of it: and that he is the head out of which the whole body
coupled and knit together by joints, makes increase of the body: that our
bodies are the members of Christ. Al which things we understand to be
impossible to be brought to pass, but that he must whellye cleave to us in
Spirit and body. But that most nere fellowship whereby we are coupled with his
flesh, he has yet set out with a more glorious title, Ephesians. v.xxx.
when he said that we are members of his body, and are of his bones and of his
flesh. At the last, to declare it to be a matter greater than all words, he
concludes his saying with an exclamation, This is (says he) a great secret.
Therefore it should be a point of extreme madness, to acknowledge no communion
of the faithful with the flesh and blood of the Lord, which the Apostle
declares to be so great, that he had rather wonder at it than express it.

Let ye sum be, yt our souls are so fed with the flesh and blood of ii.
Cor, x.xvi.
and that ye cup which we hallow with ye word and prayers to that purpose, is
the communion of his blood. Neither is there any cause why any man should
object, that it is a figurative speech, by which the name of the thing
signified is given to the sign. I grant verily that ye breaking of ye bred is
a sign, not ye thing it self. But this being admitted, yet we shall rightly
gather of the deliverance of the sign, that the thing it self is delivered.
For unless a man will call God a deceiuer, he can never be so bold to say that
he sets before us an empty sign. Therefore if by the breakyng of bred the
Lord does truly represente the partakyng of his body, it ought to be out of
dout that he truly performs and delivers it. And this rule is always to be
holden of the godly, that so often as they se the signs ordained of the Lord,
they certainly think and persuade themselves that the truth of the thing
signified is there present. For to what purpose should the Lord deliver to
thee into thy hand the sign of his body, but to assure thee of the true
partaking of it? If it be true, that a visible sign is given us, to seal the
gift of an invisible thing: when we receive the sign of the body, let us no
less certainly believe that the body it self also is given us.



Ego Berengarius. But Peter Lombarde, although he travail much in excusing the
absurdity, yet more inclines to the contrary sentence. For as we nothing dout
yt it has limits according to the perpetual nature of the body of men, and is
holden in heaven, into which it was ones received, until he return to
judgment: so to draw it back under these corruptible elements or to imagyne
it present every where, we account it to be utterly unlawful. Neither verily
is it so needful to this that we may enjoy ye partaking of it: for as much as
the Lord gives us this benefit by his Spirit, that we be made one with him in
body, Chrysos. sermon. de Spiritu. sancto.
Spirit, and soul. The bond therefore of this conioynyng is the Spirit of
Christ, by the knitting whereof we be coupled together, and as it were a
certain conduit, by which whatsoever Christ himself both is and has, is
conveyed to us. For if we behold the sun shyning fourth with his beams upon
the earth after a certain manner to cast fourth his substance unto it to
engender, nourishe, and quicken the fruits thereof: why should the extending of
beams of the Spirit of Christ be inferior to convey the communion of his
flesh and blood into us? Wherefore the Scripture, when it speaks of our
partaking with Christ, refers the whole force thereof to ye Spirit. Yet instead of many, one place shall be sufficient. For Paul in the viii. chapter to
the Romans, says that Christ dwells in us none otherwise than by his
Spirit: whereby yet he takes not away that communion of his flesh and blood of
which we now speak, but teaches that the Spirit alone works that we
possess whole Christ and have him dwelling in us.

The Scholemen thought more shamfastly, which were withholde^ with Lib. iiii.
did.
For these be the words of Lombarde: that the body of Christ, which in it
self is visible, when the consecration is ended, lies hydden and is covered
under the form of bred. So the form of that bred is nothing else but a visor,
that takes away the sight of the flesh from the eyes. Neither need we many
conjectures, to find what snares they minded to lay with these words, sith
the thing itself plainly speaks it. For it is to be seen with how great
superstition in certain ages past, not only the common sort of men, but also
the very chief of them have been holden, and at this day be holde^ in popish
Chirches. For having little care of true Faith (by which alone we both come into
the fellowship of Christ, and do cleave together with him) so that they have a
carnal presence of him, which they have framed beside the word, they think
that they have him present enough. Therefore in a sum, we see that this has been gotten by this witty sutteltie, that bred was taken for God.

From hense proceeded yt same feigned transubsta^tiatio^, for which at this
substance of bread, but that by and by many absurdities did thrust themselves
in place. Therefore they were driven of necessity to flee to this invention,
that there is made a turning of bred into the body: not that the body is
properly made of bred, but because Christ, that he might hide himself under
the form, brings the substance to nothing. But it is marvelous, that they
fell to so great ignorance, yea senseless dullness, that not only the Scripture
but also the consent of the old Chirch fighting against it, they brought abroad
that monster. I grant in deed yt some of the old writers sometime used the
name of turning: not for that they would destroy the substance in the outward
signs, but that they might teach that the bred dedicate to the mystery
differs far from common bred and is now other. But each where they al
plainly declare, that the holy Supper consists of two parts, an earthly
part, and a heavenly: and the earthly part they do without controversy
expound to be bred and wine. Truly whatsoever they babble, it is plain that
in confirming of this doctrine they want the defense of antiquity, which they
oftentimes presume to set against the evident word of God. For it is not so
long ago sins it was inverted: it was verily unknown not only to those better
ages, in which the purer doctrine of religion yet flourished, but also even when
that same pureness was much defiled. There is none of the old writers that
does not in express words confess that the holy signs in ye Supper are bred
and wine: although, as we have said, they sometime set it out with diverse
titles, to advance the dignity of the mystery. For whereas they say that in
the consecration is made a secret turning, that now it is an other thing than
bred and wine. I have even now given warning that they do not thereby mean that
the things themselves are brought to naught, but that they are now to be
otherwise esteemed than common meats, which are appointed only to feed the
belly: forasmuch as in them is delivered to us ye spiritual meat and drink of
the soul. This we also deny not. If (say these men) there be a turning, it
must needs be that there is of one thing made an other thing. If they mean
that there is some thing made which before was not, I agree with them. If they
will draw it to that their own imagination, let them answer me what change they
think to be made in Baptism. For herein the Fathers also do determine a
marvelous turning, when they say that of a corruptible eleme^t is made a
spiritual washing of the soul, yet none of them denies that water remains.
But (say they) there is no such thing in Baptism, as is that in ye Supper.
This is my body. As though the question were of those words, which have a
meaning plain enough: and not rather, of that word of turning, which ought to
signify no more in the Supper than in Baptism. Therefore farewell they with
these snares of syllables, whereby they do nothing else but bewray their own
hungrinesse. For otherwise ye signification would not agree together, unless
the truth which is there figured, had a lively image in the outward sign.
Christ's will was by the outward sign to testify that his flesh is meat. If
he did set before us only an empty imaginatiue form of bred not true bread,
where were ye correlation or similitude which should lead us from the visible
thing to the invisible? For, that al things may agree together, the
signification shall extend no further, but that we be fed with the form of
the flesh of Christ. As if in Baptism the form of water should deceive our
eyes, it should not be to us a certain pledge of our washing: yea by that
deceitful show there should be given us an occasion of wavering. Therefore the
nature of the Sacrament is overthrown, unless in the manner of signifieng, the
earthly sign answer to the heavenly thing. And therefore we lose the truth of
this mystery, unless true bred represent to us the true body of Christ. I
repete it again: Since the Supper is nothing else, than a visible testifieng of
that promise which is in the vi. chapter of John, namely that Christ is the
bred of life, which came down from heaven: there must be visible bred used for
a mean, whereby that same spiritual bred may be figured: unless we will that
we lose all the fruit, which in this behalf God tenderly grants to
sustain our weakness. Now by what reason should Paul gather, i. Cor. x.xvii.
that all we are one body and one bred, which do together partake of one
bred, if there remained only an imaginatiue form and not rather a natural
truth of bred?

But they could never have been so fowly begyled with the deceites of Exo.
xvii.vi.
The water springing out of the rock in the desert was to the fathers a token
and sign of the same thing, i. Cori. x.iiii.
which the wine does figure to us in the Supper. For Paul teaches that they
drunk the same spiritual drink. But it was a common watering for the beasts
and cattle of the people. Whereupon it is easily gathered, that in earthly
elements, when they are applied to a spiritual use, there is made no other
turning but in respect of men, in so much as they are to them seals of the
promises. Moreover sith Gods purpose is (as I often repete) as it were by
handsome chariots to lift us up to himself, they do by their waywardenesse
wickedly disapoint the same, which do in deed call us to Christ, but lurkig
inuisibly under bred. For it is not possible that the mind of men, vncombryng
it self from the immesurablenesse of places, should atteine to Christ even
above the heavens. That which nature denied them, they attempted to amend with
a more hurtful remedy: that abiding in earth, we should need no heavenly
nerenesse of Christ. L^e, this is the necessity, that compelled them to
transfigure the body of Christ. In Bernardes time, although a harder manner of
speaking was grown in use, yet transubstantiation was not then known. And in
all ages before that, this similitude did fly about in every man's mouth, that
there is with bred and wine a spiritual thing joined in this mystery. Of the
words they answer, as they think, wittily: but bringing nothing fit for this
present cause. The rod of Moses (say they) being turned into a Serpent, Exo.
iiii.iii. and. vii.x
although it did get the name of a Serpent, yet keeps still the old name, and
is called a rod. So in their opinion it is as probable, that although the bred
pass into a new substance, it may be abusively and yet not unaptly called yt
which it appears to the eyes. But what likelhode or nerenesse find they
between a clear miracle, and their fained illusion, of which no eye in earth
is witness? The Magicians had mocked with deceites, so that the Egiptians were
persuaded, that they excelled in divine power to change creatures above the
order of nature. Moses came fourth, and dryuing away all their deceites, showed
that the invincible power of God was on his side, because his own rod consumed
all the rest. But forasmuch as that was a turning discernable with eyes,
therefore as we have said, it perteyneth nothing to this present cause: and in a
little time after, the rod visibly returned into his own form. Beside that it
is not known, whether that soden turning was of substance or no. Also the
alluding to the rods of the Magicians is to be considered, which ye Prophet
therefore would not call Serpents, least he should seem to signify a turning
where none was: because those deceivers had done nothing but cast a mist before
the eyes of the beholders. What likeness herewith have these forms of speech,
i. Cor. x.xvi. and. xi.xxvi. Acts. ii.iiii.
The bred which we break, So often as ye shall eat this bred, They
co^mmunicated in breaking of bred, and such other? It is certain yt their
eyes were only deceived with the enchantme^t of the Magicians. As concerning
Moses, the matter is more douteful, by whose hand it was no more hard for God
to make of a rod a Serpent, and again of a Serpent to make a rod, tha^ to
cloth Angels with fleshly bodies, and by and by after to unclothe them. If the
nature of this mystery were the same or like, there were some color for their
solution. Let this therefore remain certain, that it is not truly nor fittly
promised us that in the Supper the flesh of Christ is truly to us for meat,
unless the true substance of the outward Sign agree with it. And (as one
error grows of an other) the place of Jeremy is so foolishlye wrested to
prove transubstantiation, that it irketh me to rehearse it. The Prophet
complains that wood is put in his bred: Iere. xi.xix. Psa. lxix.xxii.
meaning that by the cruelty of his enemies, his bred was infected with
bitterness. As David with a like figure bewayleth that his meat was corrupted
with gall, and his drink with vinegar. These men will have it that the body of
Christ was by way of allegory fastened to the cross. But some of the old
fathers thought so. As though we ought not rather to pardon their ignorance,
and to bury their shame, than to add shamelessnesse to compel them yet still
to fight like enemies with the natural meaning of the Prophet.

which shall by and by follow in place fit for it. They will therefore have the
body of Christ to be invisible and immeasurable, that it may lie hid under the
bread: because they think that they do not otherwise communicate with him than
if he descend into bread: but they comprehend not the manner of descending,
whereby he lifts us upward to himself. They lay upon it all the colors that
they can: but when they have said all, it sufficiently appears, that they
stay upon the local presence of Christ. Whense comes that? even because
they can abide to conceive no other partakyng of the flesh and blood, but
which consysteth either of ioynyng and touching of place, or of some gross
enclosyng.

And, that they may obstinately defend the error ones rashly conceived, Act.
i.iii. and. ix.vii. Act. i.iii.
and perform the other duties of man. Where as after his resurrection he was
seen in his wonted form of body, whereas he was taken up to heaven, whereas last
of all also after his ascension he was seen of Stephen and Paul: it was done
by the same dispensation, that it might appear to the sight of men that he was
made a king in heaven. What is this else, but to raise up Marcion out of hell?
For no man can dout that the body of Christ was a fantasy or a fantastical
thing, if he was of such state. Some slip away somewhat more suttelly, with
saying that this body which is given in the Sacrament is glorious and
immortal: and that therefore it is no absurdity, if it be contained in many
places, if in no place, if with no form, under the sacrament. But I ask what
manner of body Christ gave to the disciples the day before that he suffered: do
not the words sound that he gave the same mortal body, Mat. xvii.ii.
which was within a little after to be delivered? He had already before (say
they) showed his glory to be seen to three of the disciples. That is true in
deed, but his will was by that brightness to give them a taste of immortality
for an hour. In the mean time they shall not there find a double body, but
that one body which Christ did bear, garnished with new glory. But when he
distributed his body at his first Supper, the time was now at hand, when he
being stricken of God, Esa. liii.iiii.
and humbled should lie without glory as a leprous man: so far is it of that
he then would show forth the glory of his resurrection. And how great a
wyndowe is here opened to Marci^n, if the body of Christ was seen in one place
mortal and base, and in an other place was holden immortal and glorious?
Howebeit if their opinion take place, the same happens daily: because they are
compelled to confess that the body of Christ being visible in it self, lies
hyd inuisibly under the sign of bread. And yet they that vomit out such
monstruousnesse, are so not ashamed of their own shame, that they do unprovoked
hainously rail at us, because we do not subscribe to them.

Now if they list to fasten the body and blood of the Lord to bread to the
bread must needs be divided from the blood enclosed in the cup. For when they
affirm that the body is in the bread, and the blood in the cup: and the bread
and wine are by spaces of place distant the one from the other: they can by no
shift escape, but that the body must be severed from the blood. But whereas they
are wont to allege, that by accompainyng (as they feign) in the body is the
blood, and likewise in the blood is the body, that verily is to triflyng:
forasmuch as the Signs in which they are enclosed, are so severed. But if we
be lifted up with our eyes and minds to heaven, that we seek Christ there in
the glory of his kingdom: as the signs do allure us to him whole, so under
the sign of bread, we shall be fed with his body, under the sign of wine we
shall severally drink his blood, that at length we may enjoy him whole. For
although he has taken away his flesh from us, and in his body is ascended up
into heaven, yet he sits at the right hand of the Father, that is to say,
he reigns in the power, and majesty, and glory of the Father. This kingdom
is neither bounded with any spaces of place, nor compassed about with any
measurynges, but that Christ may show forth his might wheresoever it pleases
him both in heaven and in earth: but that he may show himself present with
power and strength: but that he may always be at hand with them that be his,
breathing his life into them, may live in them, strengthen them, quicken them,
preserve them safe, even as if he were present in body: finally but that he may
feed them with his own body, the communion whereof he does by the power of
his Spirit pour into them. After this manner the body and blood of Christ is
delivered to us in the Sacrament.

it contains neither any absurdity, nor darkness, nor doutfulnesse: it is
not against true godliness and sound edification: finally it has nothing in
it, that may offend, saving that in certain ages past, when that ignorance and
barbarousnesse of Sophisters reigned in the Church, so clear light and open
truth has been unworthily oppressed. Yet because Satan at this day also
trauayleth by troublesome Spirits to spot it with all the sclanders and
reproaches that he can, and bends himself to no other thing with greater
endeavor: it is profitable the more diligently to defend and rescue it.

Now before that we go any further, we must entreat of the self Mat. xxvi
^^vi. Mar. xiiii xxii. Luc. xxii.xvii. i. Cor. xi.xxiiii.
Three Evangelists and Paul rehearse, that Christ took bread, when he had
given thanks he brake it, gave it to his disciples and said, Take, eat: this
is my Body which is delivered, or broken, for you. Of the cup Matthew and
Mark say thus: This cup is the blood of the new testament, which shall be
shed for many unto forgiveness of sins. But Paul and Luke say thus: This
cup is the new testament in my blood. The patrones of transubstantiation
will have by the pronoune (this) the form of bread to be signified, because
the consecration is made in the whole content of the sentence, and there is no
substance that can be showed. But if they be holden with religious care of the
words, because Christ testified, that that which he reached into the
disciples hands, was his body: truly this their devise, that that which was
bread is now the body, is most far from the propre meaning of them. That
which Christ took into his hands and gave the Apostles, he affirms to be
his body: but he took bread: who therefore can not understand that bread is yet
showed? and therefore there is no greater absurdity, than to remove that to the
form, which is spoken of the bread. Other, when they expound this word
(is) for (to be transubstantiate,) do flee to a more enforced and violently
wrasted gloss. Therefore there is no cause why they should pretend that they
be moved with reverence of words. For this was unheard of among all nations
and languages, that the word (is) should be taken in this sense, namely for to
be turned into an other thing. As for them that leave bread in the Supper,
and affirm that there is the body of Christ, they much differ among
themselves. They which speak more modestly, although they precisely exact
the letter, This is my body, yet afterward swerve from their preciseness, and
say that it is as much in effect as that the body of Christ is with bread, in
bread, and under bread. Of the matter it self which they affirm, we have
already touched somewhat, and we shall by and by have occasion yet to speak
more. Now I dispute only of the words, by which they say they are restrained
that they can not admit bred to be called the body, because it is a sign of
the body. But if they shun all figures, why do they leap away from the
plain showing of Christ, to their own manners of speaking far differing from
it? For there is great difference between this that bread is the body, and this
that the body is with bread. But because they saw it to be impossible, that
this simple proposition might stand, that bread is the body: they have
attempted to escape away by those forms of speech, as it were by crooked
turnyngs. Some more bold stick not to affirm that even in propre speaking,
bread is the body, and by this mean they truly prove themselves to be
litteral me^. If it be objected, that therefore the bread is Christ, and is God:
this verily they will deny, because it is not expressed in the words of
Christ. But they shall nothing prevail by denyeng it: forasmuch as all do
agree that whole Christ is offered us in the Supper. But it is an intolerable
blasphemy, that it be without figure spoken of a frail and corruptible
element, that it is Christ. Now I ask of them, whether these two propositions
be both of one effect, Christ is the Son of God, and bread is the body of
Christ. If they grant that they are diverse, (which we will enforce them to
grant whether they will or no) then let them answer whens comes the
difference. I think they will bring none other but that the bread is after the
sacramental manner called the body. Whereupon follows, that Christ's words are
not subject to the common rule, nor ought to be tried by Grammar. Also I
ask of all the precise and stiff requirers of the letter, where Luke and
Paul do call the cup the testament in the blood, Luc. xxii.xx. i. Cor.
xi.xxv.
whether they do not express the same thing which they did in the first part,
where they call bread the body. Truly the same religion was in the one part
of the mystery that was in the other: and because shortness is dark, longer
speech does better open the meaning. So often therefore as they shall affirm by
one word, that the bread is the body: I will out of mo words bring a fit
exposition, that it is the Testament in the body. For why? Shall we need to
seek a more faithful or surer expositor than Paul and Luke? Neither yet do I
tend herunto, to diminishe any thing of that communicating of the body of
Christ which I have confessed: only my purpose is to confute that folish
waiwardnesse, whereby they do so hatefully brawle about words. I understand, by
the authority of Paul and Luke, that the bread is the body of Christ, because
it is the covenant in the body. If they fight against this, they have war not
with me, but with the Spirit of God. Howsoever they cry out that they be
touched with reverence of the words of Christ, whereby they do not figuratively
understand those things that are plainly spoken: yet this is not a pretense
rightful enoughe, why they should so refuse all the reasons which we obiecte
to the contrary. In the mean time, as I have already given warnyng, it is
convenient to learn, what manner of thing this is. The testament in the body
and blood of Christ: because the covenant stablished with the sacrifice of
death, should otherwise not profit us, unless there were adjoined that secret
communicatyng whereby we grow into one with Christ.

For neither can you otherwise understand that which is said: that
circumcision is a covenant: that the lamb is the Passover: that the
Sacrifices of the law are expiations: finally that the rock, out of which
water flowed in the deserte, was Christ: unless you take it to be spoken by
way of transferring of names. Neither are names transferred only from the hyer
name to the lower: but contrariewise the name of the visible sign is also
given to the thing signified: as when it is said yt God appeared to Moses in
the bushe: Exodus iii.ii. Psalm lxxxiiii.viii. and. xlii iii. Math. iii.xvi.
when the arc of couenante is called God, and the face of God: and the dove is
called the Holy ghost. For though the sign differ in substance from the thing
signified: because this is spiritual and heavenly, and that is corporal and
visible: yet because it does not only figure the thing which it is holily
appointed to represente, as a naked and empty token, but does also truly
deliver it in deed: why may not the name of the thing rightly accord with it?
If signs devised by men, which are rather images of things absent, than
marks of things present, which self absent things, they do oftentimes
deceitfully shadow, are yet sometime garnished with the titles of the things:
then those things that are ordained of God, do by much greater reason borrow
the names of those things, of which they always both bear a sure and not
disceytfull signification, and have the truth adjoined with them. There is
therefore so great likeness and nerenesse of the one to the other, that it is
easy to draw their names to and froe. Therefore let our adversaries cesse to
heap unsavory scoffings against us, in calling us Tropistes: because we
expound the Sacramental manner of speaking after the common use of the
Scripture. For whereas the Sacraments agree together in many things: in this
tra^sferryng of names, they have all a certain community together. As
therefore the Apostle teaches, that the stone out of which spiritual drink did
spring to ye Israelites, i. Cori^. x.iiii.
was Christ, because it was a visible sign, under which that spiritual drink
was truly in deed but not discernably to the eye perceived: so bread is at
this day called the body of Christ, forasmuch as it is a sign whereby the
Lord offers to us the true eating of his body. Neither did Augustine
otherwise think or speak, least any man should despise this as a new
invention. If (says he) the Sacraments had not a certain likeness of
those things whereof they are Sacraments, epi. xxiii. ad Bonifac.
they should not be Sacraments at all. And of this likeness oftentimes they
take the names of the things themselves. As therefore after a certain manner the
sacrament of the body of Christ, is the body of Christ: the sacrament of the
blood of Christ, is the blood of Christ: so ye sacrament of faith is faith.
There be in him many like places, which it were superfluous to heap together,
sith that same one suffiseth: saving that the readers must be warned that the
holy man teaches the same thing in the Epistle to Enodius. But it is a
trifling shift to say, that where Augustine teaches, that when transferryng is
often and commonly used in mysteries, he makes no mention of the Supper:
because if this shyft were received, we might not reason from the generaltie to
the specialtie, neither were this a good argument: Every feling creature has
power of moving, therefore an ox and a horse have power of mouyng. Howbeit long
disputation hereof is in an other place ended by the words of the same holy
man, where he says, that Christ sticked not to call it his body, when he gave
the sign of his body. Against Adimantus, the Manichean, in the.xii. Chapter.
And in an other place, upon the third Psalm, Marvelous (says he) is the
patience of Christ, that he received Judas to the banquet, wherein he committed
and delivered to his disciples the figure of his body and blood.

this is) as though is severed this mystery from all other, the solution is
easy. They say that the vehemence of the substantive verb ( is) is so great
that it admits no figure. Which if we grant to them: even in the words of
Paul is read the Substantive verb, where he calls bread the communicatyng
of the body of Christ. i. Cor. x.xvi.
But the communicatyng is an other thing than the body it self. Yea commonly
where sacraments are entreated of, we find the same word used. Genesis xvii
xiii. Exodus xii.xliii. i. Cor. x iiii. John. vii xxxix.
As. This shall be to you a covenant with me. This Lamb shall be to you a
Passover. To rehearse no more: when Paul says that the rock was Christ, why
do they take the substantive verb in that place to be of less vehemence than
in the speech of Christ? Let them also answer, where John says, the Holy ghost
was not yet, because Jesus was not yet glorified, of what force the substantive
verb is in that place. For if they abide fastened to their rule, the eternal
essence of the Holy ghost shall be destroyed, as though it took beginning at the
Ascension of Christ. Tit. iii.v.
Finally let them answer, what means that saying of Paul, that Baptism is
the washyng of regeneration and renewyng, which it is evident to be
unprofitable to many. But nothing is stronger to confute them, i. Cor. xi.xii.
than that saying of Paul, that the Chirch is Christ. For. bryngyng a
similitude of the body of man, he adds, So is Christ: in which place he
understands the only begotten son of God, not in himself, but in his
members. Hereby I think I have obtained that to soundwitted and uncorrupted
men the sclaunders of our enemies, are loathsome, when they spread abroad,
that we withdraw credit from the words of Christ: which we do no less
obediently embrace than they, and do wey them with more godly reverence. Yea
their negligent carelessness shows that they do not greatly care what
Christ meant, so that it give them a buckler to defend their obstinatie: like
as our earnest searchyng ought to be a witness how much we esteem the
authority of Christ. They odiously spread abroad, that natural sense of man
withholdeth us from beleuyng that which Christ has uttered with his own holy
mouth: but how maliciously they burden us with this sclander, I have a great
part already made plain, and hereafter it shall more clearly appear. Therefore
nothing withholdeth us from believing Christ when he speaks, nor from obeying
so soon as he does but with beck will this or that. Only this is the
question, whether it be unlawful to enquire of the natural meaning.

God do see, It went up to his ears, His hand stretched out, The earth his
footestole, they cried out that God had his body taken from him, which the
Scripture assigns unto him. If this law be received, outrageous
barbarousnesse shall ouerwhelme the whole light of faith. For, what monsters of
absurdities may not phrentike men pick out, if it be granted them to allege
every small tittle to stablishe their opinions? That which they object, that
it is not likely, that when Christ prepared for his Apostles a singular comfort
it adversities, he did then speak in a riddle or darkly, makes of our side.
For if it had not come in the minds of the Apostles, that bread was
figuratively called the body, because it was the sign of the body, they had
without doubt ben troubled with so monstrous a thing. Almost at the same moment
John reports that they did stick in perplexity at every of the least
difficulties. They which strive among themselves, how Christ will go to the
Father: and do move question, how he will go out of the world: they which
understand nothing of those things that are spoken concerning the heavenly
Father, till they see him: how would they have been so easy to believe that which
all reso^ refuses, that Christ sits at the boorde in their sight, and is
enclosed invisible under bread? Whereas therefore they in eating the bread
without doutyng, testified their consent, hereby appears that they took
Christ's words in the same sense that we do, because they remembered that which
ought not to seem strange in mysteries, that the name of the thing signified is
transferred to the sign. Therefore it was to the disciples, as it is to us, a
certain and clear comfort, entangled with no riddle. Neither is there any other
cause why some should depart from our exposition, but because the enchauntment
of the devil has blinded them, namely that they should feign darkness to
themselves, where the exposition of an apt figure offreth it self. Moreover if
we precisely stand upon the words, Christ should wrongfully have spoken in one
place severally an other thing concerning the bread than he speaks of the
cup. He calls the bread his body, he calls the wine his blood: either it
shall be a confused vain repetition, or it shall be such a partition as shall
divide the body from the blood. Yea it shall as truly be said of the cup,
This is my body, as of the bread it self, and it may likewise enterchangeably
be said, that the bread is the blood. If they answer that we must consider to
what end or use the signs were ordained: I grant it in deed: but in the
mean time they shall not vnwynde themselves, but that their error must draw
this absurdity with it, that the bread is the blood, and the wine is the
body. Now I wot not what this means, when they grant the bread and the
body to be diverse things, yet to affirm that the one is spoken of the other
proprely and without any figure: as if a man should say that a garment is in
deed a thing differyng from a man, and yet that it is proprely called a man. In
the mean while as though their victory consisted in obstinatie and railing,
they say that Christ is accused of lie^g, if an exposition be sought of the
words. Now it shall be easy for us to show to the reders how unjust wrong these
catchers of syllables do to us, when they fill the simple with this opinion,
that we withdraw credit from the words of Christ, which we have proved to be
furiously perverted and confounded by them, but to be faithfully and rightly
expounded by us.

But the sclaunder of this lie can not be utterly purged, till an other Heb.
iiii.xv.
but what he would. We affirm that to be done which pleased him. But it
pleased him, that Christ should be made like to his brethren in all things,
except sin. What manner of thing is our flesh? Is it not such as consists
of the certain measure of it, as is contained in place, as is touched, as is
seen? And why (say they) may not God make, that one self same flesh may
occupy many and diverse places, may be contained in no place, may be without
measure and form? Thou mad man, why requirest thou of the power of God, to
make flesh at one self time to be and not to be flesh? Like as if thou
sholdest instantly require him to make at one self time the light to be both
light and darkness. But he wills light to be light, darkness to be
darkness, flesh to be flesh. He shall in deed when it pleases him, turn
darkness into light, and light into darkness: but wen thou requirest that
light and darkness may not differ, what do thou else but pervert the order
of the wisdom of God? Therefore flesh must be flesh: and Spirit, Spirit:
every thing in such law and condition as God has created it. But such is
the condition of flesh, that it must be in one yea and that a certain place,
and consist of her measure and other form. Epi. ad darda.
With this condition Christ took flesh upon him, to which (as Augustine
witnesses) he has given in deed uncorruption and glory, but he has not
taken from it nature and truth.

They answer, that they have the word, whereby the will of God is Marcion and
the Manichees had, when they feigned the body of Christ to be either heavenly or
fantastical. i. Cor. xv.xlvii.
For they alleged for testimonies, The first Adam was of the earth, earthly:
the second Adam is of heaven, heavenly. Again, Christ abaced himself, taking
upon him the form of a servant, and was found in likeness as a man. Phi.
ii.vii
But the gross eaters think that there is no power of God, unless with the
monster forged in their brains the whole order of nature be overthrown:
which is rather to limit God, when we covet with our fained inue^tions to
prove what he can do. For out of what word have they taken, that the body of
Christ is visible in heaven, but lurketh invisible in earth under* innumerable
little pieces of bred? They will say that necessity requires this, that the body
of Christ should be given in the Supper. Uerily because it pleased them to
gather a fleshly eating out of the words of Christ: they being carried away
with their own foreiugement, were driven to necessity to coin this
sutteltie, which the whole Scripture cries out against. But that any thing is
by us diminished of the power of God, is so false, that by our doctrine the
praise of it is very honorably set out. But forasmuch as they always accuse us,
that we defraude God of his honor, when we refuse that which according to
common sense is hard to be believed, although it have been promised by the mouth
of Christ: I make again the same answer that I made even now, that in the
mysteries of Faith we do not ask counsel of common sense, but with quiet
willingness to learn, Iam. i.xxi.
and with the Spirit of meekness which James commends, we receive the
doctrine come from heaven. But in that when they perniciously err. I deny not
that we follow a profitable moderation. They hearing the words of Christ,
This is my body, imagine a miracle most far from his mind. But when out of
this feigned invention arise foul absurdities, because they have already with
hedlong have put snares upon themselves, they plunge themselves into the
bottomless depthe of the almightinesse of God, that by this mean they may
quench the light of truth. Hereupon comes that proud preciseness: We will
not know how Christ lies hid under the bred, holdyng our selves contented
with this saying of his, This is my body. But we, as we do in the whole
Scripture, do with no less obedience than care, study to obtain a sound
understanding of this place: neither do we with preposterous heat rashly and
without choice catch hold of that which first thrusts it self into our
minds: but using diligent musing upon it, we embrace the meaning which the
Spirit of God ministers: and standing thereupon we do from alofte despise
whatsoever earthly wisdom is set against it. Yea we hold our minds captive,
that they may not be bold so much as with one little word to carpe against
it: and do humble them, that they may not dare to rise up against it. Hereupon
sprung up the exposition of the words of Christ, which to be by the continual
usage of the Scripture common to al Sacraments, al they that have been though
but meanly exercysed therein, Luke. i.xxxiiii.
do know. Neither do we, after the example of the holy virgin, think it
lawful for us, in a hard matter to enquire how it may be done.

Ioh. xiiii.xxii. and. xxviii.
leaving the world, they answer that that departing is nothing else but a
changing of mortal state. But after this manner, Christ should not set the
Holy ghost in his place to supplye (as they call it) the want of his absence:
forasmuch as he does not succeed into his place, nor Christ himself does
descend again out of the heavenly glory to take upon him the state of
mortal life. Truly the coming of the Holy ghost, and the ascending of
Christ are things set as contrary: therefore it can not be yt Christ should
according to the flesh dwell with us after the same manner that he sends his
Spirit. Mat. xxvi.xi.
Moreover he in plain words expresses, that he will not be always with his
disciples in the world. This saying also they think that they do gayly wype
away, as though Christ said that he will not always be poor and miserable or
subject to the necessities of this frail life. But the circumstance of the
place cries plainly to the contrary, because there is not entreated of
poverty and need or of the miserable state of earthly life, but of worship and
honor. The anointing pleased not the disciples, because they thought it to be a
superfluous and unprofitable cost, and nere unto riotous excess, therefore
they had rather that the price thereof which they thought to be il wasted, had been bestowed upon the poor. Trac. in John. l.
Christ answers that he shall not always be present, that he may be
worshipped with such honor. And none otherwise did Augustine expound it,
whoes words be these which are nothing doutefull. When Christ said, Ye shall
not always have me, he spoke of the presence of his body. For according to his
majesty, according to his providence, according to his unspeakable and
invisible grace, this was fulfilled which he said, Behold, I am with you even
to the ending of the world. Matthew. xxviii.x^.
But according to the flesh which the word took unto him, according to this
that he was borne of the Uirgin, according to this that he was taken of the
Jews, that he was fastened to the tree, that he was taken down from the
cross, that he was wrapped in linen clothes, that he was laid in the grave,
that he was manifestly showed in the resurrection, this was fulfilled, Ye shall
not always have me with you. Why so? Because he was conuersante according to
the presence of his body forty? days with his disciples, and while they
accompanied him in seeing not in following, he ascended. He is not here: for he
sits there at the right hand of the Father. And yet he is here: because he
is not gone away in presence of majesty. Otherwise according to the presence
of majesty we have Christ always: and according to the presence of the flesh it
is rightly said, But me ye shall not always have. For according to the presence
of the flesh, the Chirch had him a few days: now she holds him by Faith,
but sees him not with eyes. Where (that I may note this also brefely) he
makes him present to us three ways, by majesty, providence, and unspeakable
grace, under which I comprehend this marvelous communion of his body and
blood: if so that we understand it to be done by the power of the Holy ghost,
not by that feigned enclosing of his body under the elemente. For our Lord has
testified, that he has flesh and bones which may be felt and seen. And to Go^
away and Ascend do not signify to make a show of one ascending and going
away, Lib. de fide and symb. cap. vi.
but to do in deed that which the words sound. Shall we then (will some
man say) assign to Christ some certain coast of heaven? But I answer with
Augustine, that this is a most curious and superfluous question, if so that
yet we believe that he is in heaven.

But what does the name of ascending so often repeted: does it not signify
Acts. i.i^ Mark. xvi xix. Lu. xxiiii.li.
lifted up on hye? Do not the Evangelists plainly declare, that he was taken
up into ye heavens? These witty Sophisters do answer, that with a cloud set
between him and them, he was conveyed out of their sight, that the faithful
might learn that from thense fourth he should not be visible in the world. As
though, to make credit of his invisible presence, he ought not rather to
vanishe away in a moment: or as though the cloud ought not rather to compass
him before that he stirred his foot. But when he is carried up on hye into ye
air, and with a cloud cast underneath him, teaches that he is no more to be
sought in earth: we safely gather, that now he has his dwelling place in the
heavens: Phi. iii.^.
as Paul also affirms, and from thense bids us to look for him. After
this manner the Angels warned the disciples, that they in vain gazed up into
heaven: because Jesus which is taken up into heaven, shall so come as they have
seen him go up. Here also the adversaries of sound doctrine starte away with
a pleasante shifte as they think, saying that he shall then come visible,
which never went out of the earth but that he abides invisible with them that
be his. As though the Angels did there signify a double presence, and do not
simply make the disciples witnesses of his going up seeing it with their eyes,
that no douting might remain: even as if they had said: he in your sightes
beholding it, being taken up into heaven, has claymed to himself the heavenly
Empire: it remains that ye patiently abide in expectation, till he come
again the judge of the world: because he is now entered into heaven, not that
he may alone possess it, but that he may gather together with him you and all
the godly.

But forasmuch as the defenders of this bastard doctrine are not and
specially of Augustine: I will in few words declare how peruersly they go
about it. For whereas their testimonies have been gathered together of learned
and godly men, I will not do a thing already done: let him that will, seek them
out of their works. I will not heap together, neither out of Augustine
himself, all that might make to the purpose: but will be content to show by a
few that he is without controversy whole on our side. As for this that our
adversaries, to writhe him from us, Ad Boni fac. Epi. xxv.
do allege that it is commonly red in his books, that the flesh and blood of
Christ is distributed in the Supper, namely the Sacrifice ones offered in the
cross: it is but trifling: sith he also calls it either Thankesgeuing, or
the Sacrament of the body. But in what sense he uses the words of flesh
and blood, we need not to seek with long compassing about: forasmuch as he
declares himself, saying that Sacraments take their names of the likeness
of the things which they signify: and that therefore after a certain manner
the Sacrament of the body is the body. Contra. Adama. Manich. Lib* xii.
Wherewith accords an other place which is well enough known: The Lord
sticked not to say, This is my body, when he gave the sign of it. Again they
object, that Augustine writes expressly, that the body of Christ falls to
the ground, and enters into the mouth: even in the same sense, that he
affirms it to be consumed, because he joins them both together. Neither
does that make to the contrary, which he says, that when the mystery is
ended the bred is consumed: Lib. iii. de trini. cap. x.
because he had a little before said: sith these things are known to men,
forasmuch as they are done by me^, they may have honor as things: but as
marvelous things, they may not. And to no other end tends that which our
adversaries do to unadvisedly draw to themselves: that Christ did (after a
certain manner) bear himself in his own hands, when he reached the
mystical bred to the disciples. For by enterlacing this aduerbe of likeness
(after a certain manner) he sufficiently declares, that he was not truly nor
really enclosed under the b^ed. In Psalm. xxxiii.
And no marvel: sith in an other place he plainly affirms that bodies, if
spaces of places be taken from them, shall be no where: and because they shall be
no where, they shall not be at al. It is a hungry cauillation, to say that in
that place is not entreated of the Supper, in which God utters special
power: because the question was moved concerning the flesh of Christ, and the
holy man of set purpose answering says: ^pis^. a^. Dar^an.
Christ gave immortality to his flesh, but took not nature from it. After
this form it is not to be thought that he is each where spread abroad: for we
must beware that we do not so affirm the Godhed of the man, that we take away
the truth of the body. And it follows not, that that which is in God must be
each where as God is. There is a reason by and by added: for one person is God
and man, and both are one Christ: each where, by this that he is God: in
heaven, by this that he is man. What a negligence had it ben, not to except
the mystery of the Supper being a thing so earnest and weyghty, if there had been in it any thing against the doctrine which he entreated of. And yet if a
man do hedefully read that which follows within a little after, he shall find
that under that general doctrine, the Supper is also comprehended, that Christ
the only begotten Son of God, and the same the son of man, is each where
whole present as God: that he is in the temple of God (that is in the Chirch)
God as it were there dwelling, and in some certain place of heaven by reason
of the measure of his true body. We see how, to the uniting of Christ with
the Chirch, he does not draw his body out of heaven: which surely he would have
done, if the body of Christ were not truly meat to us unless it were
enclosed under bred. In an other place defining how the faithful do now
possess Christ, Tract. l. in. Ioha.
Thou have him (says he) by ye sign of the cross, by the Sacrament of
Baptism, by the meat and drink of the altar. How rightly he reckeneth a
superstitious usage among the Signs of the presence of Christ, I do not now
dispute: but he that co^pareth the presence of the flesh to the sign of the
cross, sufficiently shows that he fayneth not a two bodyed Christ, that the
same he may lurk hidden under the bred, Mat. xxvi.xi.
which sits visible in heaven. If this need plainer declaration, it is by
and by after added in the same place, that according to the presence of
majesty, we always have Christ: that according to the presence of the flesh,
Matthew. xxviii.xx.
it is rightly said, Me ye shall not always have. They answer, that this is
also added, that according to an unspeakable and invisible grace, it is
fulfilled which is said of him, I am with you, even unto the ending of the
world* But that is nothing for their auantage: because this is at length
restrained to his majesty, which is ever in comparison set against the body,
and his flesh by express name is made different from his grace and power. As
in an other place the same comparison of contraries is red in him, that Christ
by bodily presence left the disciples, that by spiritual presence he may be
still with them: where it is plain that the substance of the flesh is
distinguished from the power of the Spirit, which conioyneth us with Christ,
though we be otherwise far severed by distance of places. The same manner of
speaking he oftentimes uses, as when he says: He is to come again to the
quick and the dead with bodily presence, according to the rule of Faith and
sound doctrine. For with spiritual presence he was also to come to them, and
to abide with the whole Chirch in the world until the ending of the world.
Therefore this speech is directed to the beleuers, whom he had already begone
to save with bodily presence, and whom he was to leave with bodily absence:
that he might with his Father save them with spiritual presence. To take
bodily for visible is but trifling: sith he sets also the body in
comparison against the divine power: and adding (to save with the Father) he
clearly expresses that he does pour abroad his grace from heaven to us by
his Spirit.

And sith they putt so much confidence in this lurkyng hole of invisible
Supper after a special manner of dispensation. But how trimly this agrees, it
is easy to judge both by other places of Scripture, and by the witness of
Peter. Act. iii.xxi
Peter says that Christ must be holden or contained in heaven, til he come
again. These me^ teach that he is every where, but without form. They take
exception and say that it is unjust dealing, to make the nature of a glorified
body subject to the laws of common nature. But this answer draws with it
that doting error of Seruettus, (which is worthily to be abhorred of all the
godly) that the body was swallowed up of the Godhed. I do not say that they
think so. But if this be reckened among the qualities of a glorified body, to
fill all things after an invisible manner, it is euidente that the bodily
substance is destroyed, and that there is left no difference of the godhed and
the nature of man. Again if the body of Christ be so of many fashions and
diverse, that it is seen in one place, and is invisible in an other: where is
the very nature of a body which consists of his mesured proportio^s? and
where is the unity? Much more rightly does Tertullia^ say, which affirms
that the body of Christ was a true and natural body, because in the mystery of
the Supper ye figure of it is set before us for a pledge and assurance of the
spiritual life. Luke xxiiii xxxix.
And verily Christ said of his glorified body, see and feel, for a Spirit has
not flesh and bones. Lo by Christ's own mouth the truth of his flesh is
proved, because it can be felt and seen. Take away these things, than it shall
cesse to be flesh. They still flee to their den of dispensation which they
have framed to themselves. But it is our part so to embrace that which Christ
absolutely pronounces, that that which he means to affirm may be of force
with us without exception. He proves himself to be no ghost, because he is
visible in his flesh. Let that be taken away which he claims as propre to
the nature of his body: must they not then be feign to coin a new definition
of a body? Ph. iii.xxi
Now whether soever they turn themselves about, their fained dispensation has
no place in that place of Paul where he says, that we look for a Savior from
heaven, which shall fashion our base body like to his glorious body. For we may
not hope for a like fashioning in those qualities which they feign to Christ,
that every one should have an invisible and unmeasurable body. Neither shall
there be found any man so dull witted whom they may make to believe so great an
absurdity. Let the^ not therefore ascribe this gift to Christ's glorified body,
to be at ones in many places, and to be contained in no space. Finally let them
either openly deny the resurrection of the flesh, or let them grant that
Christ being clothed with heavenly glory, did not put of his flesh, who shall
make us in our flesh fellows and parteners of the same glory, when we shall
have the resurrection common with him. For, what does the Scripture teach more
plainly, tha^ that as Christ did putt on our true flesh when he was borne of
the Uirgin, and suffered in our true flesh when he satisfied for us: so he
received again also the same true flesh in rising again, and carried it up to
heaven. For this is to us the hope of our resurrection and ascending into
heaven, that Christ is risen again and ascended: and (as Tertullian says) he
carried the earnest of our resurrection into the heavens with him. Now how
weak and frail should that hope be, unless this our self flesh had been
raised up with Christ and entered into the kingdom of heaven? But this is the
propre truth of a body, to be contained in space, to consist of his mesured
proportions, to have his form. Therefore away with this folish devise, which
does fasten both the minds of men and Christ to the bred. For to what purpose
serves the secret presence under bred, but yt they which covet to have Christ
joined with them, John. xx.xxvii.
may rest in that sign? But the Lord himself willed us to withdraw not only
our eyes but al our senses from the earth, forbidding himself to be touched of
the women until he had gone up to his Father. When he sees Marie with godly
zele of reverence to make have to kiss his fete, there is no cause why he
should disalow and forbid this touching til he have been taken up into heaven,
but because he will be sought no where else. Ac. vii.lvi
Whereas they object that he was afterward seen of Stephen, the solution is
easy. For neither was it therefore necessary that Christ should change place,
which could give to ye eyes of his servant such sharpness of sight as might
pearce through the heavens. The same also is to be said of Paul. Whereas they
obiecte that Christ came out of the Sepulcher being shut: Act. ix iiii. Matthew.
xxviii.vi. Ioh xx.xix Mat. xiiii.xxv.
and entered in among the disciples, the doors being shut: that makes never a
whit more for maintenance of their error. For as the water like a fast paueme^t
made a way to Christ walking upon the lake: so it is no marvel, if at his
coming the hardness of the stone yielded it self. Howbeit it is more
prouable, that by his commandment the stone was removed, and by and by after
passage given him returned into his place. And to enter, the doors being shut,
is not as much in effect as to pearce through the whole substance, but by divine
power to open an entry for himself, that he suddenly stood among the
disciples, verily after a marvelous manner, when the doors were fast locked. Lu.
xxiiii.xxxi.
That which they allege out of Luke, that Christ suddenly vanished away from
the eyes of the disciples with who^ he went to Emaus, profits them nothing,
and makes for us. For, that he might take away the sight of himself from
them, he was not made invisible, Lu. xxiiii.xvi.
but only went out of sight. As when he went in journey together with them (as
the same Luke witnesses) he did not put on a new face, that he might not be
known, but held their eyes. But these fellows do not only tra^sforme Christ,
that he may be co^uersant in earth, but in diverse places they make him diverse
and unlike himself. Finally in so trifling they do, not by one word in deed,
but by a circumsta^ce, make of the flesh of Christ a Spirit: and not
contented therewith, they put upon it altogether contrary qualities. Whereupon
of necessity follows that it is doble.

Now although we grant them that which they prate of the invisible I am with
you even to the ending of the world. Mathe. xxviii.xx.
First the continual co^ioyning can not stand, unless Christ dwell in us
corporally without ye use of the Supper. Therefore there is no just cause why
they should so sharply brawle about the words of Christ, that they may in the
Supper enclose Christ under bred. Again the text it self proves, yt Christ
speaks nothing less than of his flesh, but promises to his disciples
inuicible help, whereby he may defend and sustain them against all the
assaults of Satan and the world. For when he enjoined them a hard charge:
least they should dout to take it in hand, or should ferefully execute it, he
strengthens them with affiance of his presence: as if he had said, that his
succor shall not fail them, which shall be impossible to be overcome. Unless
they listed to confound all things, ought they not to have made distinction
of the manner of presence. And verily some had rather with great shame to utter
their ignorance, than to yield never so little of their error. I speak not of
the Papists: whoes doctrine is more tolerable, or at the least more shamefast.
But contentiousnesse so carries some away, that they say that by reason of the
natures united in Christ, wheresoever the Godhed of Christ is, there is also
his flesh, which can not be severed from his Godhed. As though that same
uniting have compounded of those two natures I wot not what mean thing which
was neither God nor man. So in deed did Eutyches, and after him Seruettus. But
it is plainly gathered out of the Scripture, that the only one person of Christ
does so consist of two natures, that either of them has still her own
property remaining safe. And that Eutyches was rightfully condemned, they will
be ashamed to deny: it is marvel that they mark not the cause of his
condemning, that taking away the difference between the natures, enforcing the
unity of person, he made of God man, and of man God. What madness therefore
is it, rather to mingle heaven and earth together, than not to draw the body of
Christ out of the heavenly Sancturarie? For whereas they bring for themselves
these testimonies, Ioh. iii xiii, Ioh. i.xviii.
None is gone up to heaven but he that is come down the Son of man which is
in heaven, Again, The son which is in the bosom of the Father, he shall
declare them: it is a point of like senseless dullness, to despise the
communicating of properties which was in old time not without cause inverted
of the holy Fathers. Truly, i. Cori. ii.viii.
when the Lord of glory is said to be crucified, Paul does not mean that he
suffered any thing in his godhed: but because ye same Christ which being an
abject and despised in the flesh did suffer, was both God and Lord of glory.
After this manner also the Son of man was in heaven: because the self same
Christ, which according to the flesh did dwell the Son of man in earth, was
God in heaven. In which sort he is said to have descended from the said place
according to his Godhed: not that the Godhed did forsake heaven, to hide it
self in the prison of the body: but because, although it filled all things,
yet in the very ma^hode of Christ it dwelled corporally, that is to say
naturally and after a certain unspeakable manner. It is a common distinction in
schools, which I am not ashamed to rehearse: that although whole Christ be every
where, yet not the whole that is in him is every where. And I would to God the
Scholemen themselves had well weyed the pith of this saying: for so should the
unsavory invention of the fleshly presence of Christ have been met withal.
Therefore our mediator, sith he is whole every where, is always at hand with
his, and in the Supper after a special manner gives himself present: but yet
so, that whole he is present, not the whole that he is: because, as it is said,
in his flesh he is contained in heaven till he appear to judgment.

But they are far deceived, which conceive no presence of the flesh

Now if any man do ask me of the manner, I will not be ashamed Lu. xxiiii xxvi.
and no less diligently sets forth in his nature of man, those things that
are proprely belongyng to his true manhood. Neither ought this to seem
incredible, or not consonant to reason: because as the whole kingdom of Christ
is spiritual, so whatsoever he does with his Chirch, ought not to be reduced
to the reason of this world. Or, that I may use the words of Augustine, this
mystery, as other are, is done by men, Iren. lib. iiii. cap. xxiiii.
but from God: in earth, but from heaven. Such (I say) is the presence of the
body, as the nature of the Sacrament requires: which we say here to excel
with so great force, and so great effectualnesse, that it not only brings to
our minds undoubted trust of eternal life, but also assures us of the
immortality of our flesh. For it is now quickened of his immortal flesh,
and after a certain manner communicates of his immortality. They which are
carried above this with their excessive speches, do nothing but with such
entanglementes darken the simple and plain truth. If any be not yet
satisfied, I would have him here a while to consider with me, that we now speak
of a Sacrament, all the parts whereof ought to be referred to Faith. But we do
no less deintyly and plentifully feed Faith with this partakyng of the body
which we have declared, than they that pluck Christ himself out of heaven.
In the mean time I plainly confess, that I refuse that mixture of the flesh
of Christ with our soul, or the pouryng out of it such as they teach:
because it suffiseth us, that Christ does out of the substance of his flesh
breathe life into our souls, yea does pour into us his own life, although
the very flesh of Christ does not enter into us. Moreover it is no doubt that
the proportion of Faith, whereby Paul wills us to examine all exposition of
Scripture, Romans xii.iii.
does in this behalf very well agree with me. As for them that speak against
so evident a truth, let them look after what rule of faith they fashion
themselves. He that does not confess that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh,
ii. John. vii.
is not of God. These men, although they cloak it, or mark it not, do spoil
him of his flesh.

Lib. 4. D^t. ^.
the sacrament and the thing, are the flesh and blood of Christ: the thing
and not the sacrament, is his mystical flesh. Again within a littell after.
The thing signified and contained, is the propre flesh of Christ: the thing
signified and not contained is his mystical body. Whereas he makes difference
between the flesh of Christ, and the effectual power of norishyng, wherewith it
is endued, I agree: but whereas he faineth it to be a sacrament, yea and
contained under bread, it is an error not to be suffered. Hereupon has grown
the false exposition of sacramental eating, because they have thought that
wicked men also and evil doers do eat the flesh of Christ, how much
soever they be strangers from him. But the flesh of Christ it self in the
mystery of the Supper is no less a spiritual thing than eternal salvation.
Whereupon we gather, that whosoever be void of the Spirit of Christ, can no
more eat the flesh, of Christ than they can drink wine wherewith is joined no
taste. Truly Christ is to haynously torn in sonder, when that dead body and
which has no lively strength, is given forth in common to unbelievers: and his
express words are directly against it, Whosoever eats my flesh and
drinks my blood, John. vi.lvi.
abides in me, and I in him. They answer that in that place is not entreated
of the sacramental eating: which I grant, so that they will not now and then
stomble against the same stone, in saying that the flesh it self is eaten
without fruit. But I would know of them, how long they hold it when they
have eaten it. Here, in my judgment, they shall have no way to get out. But
they object, that nothing can be withdrawn or fail of the promises of God by
the unthankfulness of men. I grant in deed, and I say that the force of the
mystery remains whole, howsoever wicked men do, as much as in them lies,
endeavor to make it void. Yet it is one thing to be offered, and an other thing
to be received. Christ reaches this spiritual meat and offreth this
spiritual drink to all men: some do gredily eat of it, some do lothingly
refuse it: shall these men's refusyng make the meat and the drink to lose
their nature? They will say that their opinion is helped by this similitude,
namely that the flesh of Christ, though it be unsavory, is nevertheless his
flesh. But I deny that it can be eaten without the taste of faith: or (if we
list rather to speak as Augustine does) I say that men bear away no more of
this sacrament, tha^ they gather with the vessel of faith. So nothing is abated
from the Sacrament, yea the truth and effectualnesse thereof remains
vnminished, although the wicked depart empty from the outward partakyng of it.
If they again object that this word, this is my body, is diminished, if the
wicked receive corruptible bread and nothing else: we have a solution ready,
that God will not be acknowen true in the receiuyng it self, but in the
steadfastness of his own goodness, when he is ready to give, yea liberally
offreth to the unworthy that which they refuse. And this is the fullness of
the Sacrament, which ye whole world can not break, that the flesh and blood of
Christ is no less given to the unworthy than to the chosen faithful ones of
God: but therewithal it is true, that as water lightyng upon a hard stone,
falls away, because there is no entry open into the stone: so the wicked do
with their hardness drive back the grace of God that it ca^ not perce into
them. Moreover, that Christ should be received without faith, is no more
agreeyng with reason, than sede to bud in the fire. Whereas they ask, how
Christ is come to damnation to some, unless they receive him unworthily, it
is a very cold question: forasmuch as we no where read, that me^ do procure
death to themselves by unworthily receiuyng Christ, but rather by refusing
him. Neither does Christ's parable help them, where he says that sede grows
up among thorns, Mat. xiii.vii
and afterward, being choked is marred: because he there entreats, of what
value the faith is which endures but for a time, which they do not think to
be necessary to the eating of Christ's flesh and drinkyng of his blood, that in
this behalf do make Judas egally fellow with Peter. But rather by the same
parable their error is confuted, where Christ says yt some sede falls in the
hie way, other some upon stones, and neither of them takes root. Whereupon
follows that to the unbelievers their own hardness is a let ye Christ
atteineth not to them. Whosoever desires to have our salvation helped by this
mystery, shall find nothing fitter, than that the faithful being led to the
very fountain, should draw life out of the Son of God. But the dignity of it
is honorably enough set out, when we keep in mind that it is a help whereby
we be graffed into the body of Christ, or being graffed do more and more grow
together, till he do fully make himself one with us in the heavenly life. They
object that Paul ought not to have made them guilty of the body and blood of
Christ, unless they were partakers of them. i. Cor. xi.xxix.
But I answer that they are not therefore condemned, because they have eaten
them, but only because they have profaned the mystery, in treadyng under
feet the pledge of the holy conioynyng with God, which they ought reverently
to receive.

Homil. in Ioha^. xxvi. Ioh. vi.l.
He that eats my flesh, and drinks my blood, shall not die for ever, says:
Namely the power of the sacrament, not only the visible sacrament: and verily
within, not without: he yt eats it with heart, not he yt presses it with
tooth. Whereupon at length he concludes that the sacrament of this thing, that
is to say, of the unity of the body and blood of Christ, is set before men in
the Supper of the Lord, to some unto life, to some unto destruction: but the
thing it self whereof it is a sacrament, to al men unto life, to none unto
destruction, whosoever be partaker of it. That none should here cavil, that the
thing is called not the body, but the grace of the Spirit which may be severed
from the body, the contrary comparison between these two words of addition
Uisible and Invisible drives away al these mystes: for under the first of them
can not be comprehended the body of Christ. Whereupon follows yt the unbelievers
do communicate only of ye visible sign. And yt al douting may be better taken
away, after yt he had said yt this bread requires the hunger of the inward
man, he adds: Moses and Aaron and Phinees, and many other that did eat
Manna, Exodus xvi xiiii.
pleased God. Why so? because the spiritual meat they spiritually
understood, spiritually hungered, spirituallye tasted, that they might be
spiritually filled. For we also at this day have received spiritual meat: but
the Sacrament is one thing, and the power of the sacrament is an other. A little
after: And by this he that abides not in Christ, and in whom Christ abides
not, without doubt neither eats spiritually his flesh, nor drinks his
blood, though carnally and visibly he presses with teeth the sign of the body
and blood. We hear again that the visible sign is set in comparison as
contrary to spiritual eating. Whereby ye error is confuted, that the body of
Christ invisible is in deed eaten sacrame^tally, though not spiritually. We
hear also that nothing is granted to profane and unclean me^ beside the
visible receiuyng of the sign. Homil. in John. lix.
Hereupon comes his famous saying, yt the other disciples did eat the bred ye
Lord, but Judas did eat ye bread of ye Lord: wherein he plainly excludes ye
unbelievers from the partakyng of ye body and blood. Neither tends it to any
other end which he says in an other place: Homil. lxii. i. Cor. xi.vii. Lib v
de bapt co^tra (...) i. Cor. xi.xxix.
What meruailest thou, if to Judas was given the bread of Christ, by which he
might be made bond to the deuel: when thou see on the contrary side that to
Paul was given the angel of the deuell, by whom he might be made perfect in
Christ? He says verily in an other place, that the bread of the Supper was ye
body of Christ to them to whom Paul said, He that eats unworthily, eats
and drinks judgment to himself: and that they have not therefore nothing,
because they have received noughtily. But in what sense, he declares more
fully in an other place. For (taking in hand purposely to define how the
wicked and evil doers, which profess the christian faith with mouth but with
deeds do deny it, do eat the body of Christ, and that against the opinion of
some which thought that they did not eat in sacrament only but in very deed.)
But neither (says he) ought it to be said that they eat ye body of Christ,
because they are not to be reckned among the members of Christ. For (to speak
nothing of the rest) they can not together be ye members of Christ, and the
members of a harlot. John. vi.xxiii. Lib. de ^^ (...) xxi capi. xxv.
Finally where himself says. He that eats my flesh, and drinks my blood,
abides in me, and I in him, he shows what it is not sacramentally but in
very deed to eat the body of Christ. For this is to abide in Christ, that
Christ may abide in him. For he so said this, as though he had said, he that
abides not in me, and in whom I abide not, let him not say or think that he
does eat my body, or drink my blood. Let the readers weye the things set
as contraries in the comparison to eat. Sacrame^tally, and in Uery deed: and
there shall remain no dout. He confirms the same, no less plainly in these
words: Prepare not your jaws, but your heart: Herupon is this Supper
commended. Lo we believe in Christ, when we receive by faith: in receiuyng we
know what to think. We receive a little and are fatted in heart. Therefore not
that which is seen, but that which is believed, does feed. Here also that
which the wicked receive, he restrains to the visible sign: and teaches
that Christ is none otherwise received than by Faith. So also in an other
place, pronou^cyng expressly that the good and the evil do communicate
together in the signs, Co^ (...) lib xiii. capi xvi. Sermon. de (...) Apost.
he excludes the evil from the true eating of the flesh of Christ. For if
they received the thing it self, he would not utterly have left that unspoken
which was more fit for his matter. Also in an other place, entreating of the
eating and the fruit thereof, he concludes thus. Then shall the body and blood
of Christ be life to every man, if that which in the Sacrament is visibly
received, be in the truth it self spiritually eaten, spiritually dro^k.
Therefore whosoever make unbelievers partakers of the flesh and blood of Christ,
that they may agree with Augustine, let them show us the visible body of
Christ: forasmuch as, by his judgment, the whole truth is spiritual. And it
is certainly gathered out of his words, that the Sacramental eating, when
unbelief closes up the entry to truth, is as much in effect as visible or
outward eating. If the body of Christ might be eaten truly and yet not
spiritually, what should that mean which he says in an other place? In psalm.
x^^iii.
Ye shall not eat this body which ye see, and drink the blood which they
shall shed that shall crucify me. I have commended a certain sacrament unto
you, being spiritually understood it shall quicken you. Uerily he would not
deny but that the same body which Christ offered for sacrifice, is delivered in
the Supper: but he did set out the manner of eating: namely that being received
into heavenly glory, by the secret power of the Spirit it breaths life
into us. I grant in deed that there is oftentimes found in him this manner of
speaking, Homil in Ioha^. xxvii.
that the body of Christ is eaten of the unbelievers: but he expounds
himself, addyng, In Sacrament. And in an other place he describes spiritual
eating, in which out biringes consume not grace. And least mine adversaries
should say, that I fight with them with a heap of places, I would know of
them how they can vnwynde themselves from one saying of his, where he says
that Sacraments do work in the only elect that which they figure. Truly they
dare not deny but that the bred in the Supper figureth the body of Christ.
Whereupon follows that the reprobate are debarred from the partakyng of it.
That Cyrill also thought none otherwise, In. vi. Johan cap. xvii.
these words do declare. As if a man upon molten wax do pour other wax, he
wholly tempereth the one wax with the other: so is it necessary, if any man
receive the flesh and blood of the Lord, that he be joined with him, that
Christ may be found in him and he in Christ. By these words I think it is
evident, that they are bereued of the true and real eating, that do but
sacramentally eat the body of Christ, which can not be severed from his power:
and that therefore fails not the faith of the promises of god, which cesseth
not to rain from heaven, although the stones and rocks conceive not the
liquor of the rain.

This knowledge shall also easily draw us away from the carnal worshipping,
they by and by with their logical arguments be dissolved and melt? namely when
they shall see themselves destitute of the certain word of God, upon which
alone our souls do stand fast, when they are called to account, and without
which they faint at every first moment: when they shall call to mind that the
doctrine and examples of the Apostles are against them, and that themselves
alone ar to themselves the authors of it. To such motions shall be added other
not small prickynges. What? Shall it be a matter of no importance, to worship
God in this form, where nothing was prescribed unto us? When it concerned the
true worship of God, ought they with so great lightness to have attempted that
of which there is no where red any one word? But if they had, with such
humbleness as they ought, holden all their thoughts under the word of God,
they would truly have harkened to that which he said, Take, eat, drink, and
would have obeyed this commandment, wherein he bids the Sacrament to be
received, not to be worshipped. But they which, as it is commanded of God, do
receive it without worshippyng, are assured that they do not swerve from Gods
commandment: than which assuredness there is nothing better when we take any
work in hand. They have the example of the Apostles, whom we read not to
have fallen down flatt and worshipped it, but even as they were sitting, to
have received it and eaten it. Act. ii.iiii
They have the use of the Apostolic Chirch, wherein Luke reports that the
faithful did communicate not in woorshyppyng but in breakyng of bread. i. Cor.
xii.
They have the Apostles doctrine, wherewith Paul instructed the Chirch of the
Corynthians, professyng that he had received of the Lord that which he
delivered.

And these things verily tend to this end, that the godly readers should Sursum
corda.
And for none other cause was it in old time ordained, that before the
consecration the people should with a loud voice be put in mind to have their
hearts lifted upward. The Scripture it self also, beside that it diligently
declares unto us the ascension of Christ, Coloss. iii.ii.
whereby he conveyed away the presence of his body from our sight and
conversation: to shake away from us all carnal thinkyng of him, so often as it
makes mention of him, commands us to be in minds raised upward, and to
seek him in heaven sittyng at the right hand of the Father. According to this
rule he was rather to be spiritually worshipped in heavenly glory, tha^ this
so perilous a kind of worshippyng to be devised, full of carnal and gross
opinion of God. Wherefore they yt have inverted ye worshipping of ye sacrament,
have not only dreamed it of themselves beside ye Scripture, in which no mention
of it can be showed (which yet should not have been ouerpassed if it had been
acceptable to God.) But also al ye scripture crieng out against it, they have
framed to themselves a God after ye will of their own lust, leaving ye living
God. For what is idolatry, if this be not, to worship the gifts instead of the
geuer of himself? Wherein they have doblely offended: For both ye honor taken
from God was conveyed to a creature: and he himself also dishonored in the
defilyng and prophanyng of his benefit, when of his holy sacrament is made a
cursed idol. But let us contrariwise, least we fall into the same pit,
thoroughly settle our ears, eyes, hearts, minds, and tongues in the holy
doctrine of God. For that is the schole of the Holy ghost, the best
scholemaister, in which such profit is atteined that nothing need more to be
gotten from any where else, but we willingly ought to be ignorant of whatsoever
is not taught in it.

Psalm. l.xv.
Call upon me: He added a promise, I will hear thee. If any man calling upon
Peter and Paul, do glory upon this promise, will not al me^ cry out that he
does wrongfully? And what other thing I pray you, do they which leaving the
commandment concerning eating, do catch hold of a maimed promise, this is my
body, to abuse it to strange ceremonies from the institution of Christ? Let us
therefore remember that this promise is given to them which keep the
commandment joined with it: but yt they be destitute of all the word which
remove the Sacrament to any other way. We have heretofore entreated how the
mystery of the holy supper serves our Faith before God. But forasmuch as the
Lord does here not only bring into our remembrance so great largess of his
bou^tie, as we have before showed, but does as it were from hand to hand
bring it forth, and stirs us to acknowledge it: he does therwithal warn us
yt we be not unthankful to so ple^tiful liberality: but rather yt we should
publishe it with such praises as it is mete, and advance it with thankesgeuyng.
Therefore when he delivered the institution of the Sacrament it self to the
Apostles, Luc. xxii.xix. i. Cor. xi.xxvi.
he taught them that they should do it in remembrance of him. Which Paul
expounds, to declare the Lords death. That is, publicly and altogether with
one mouth openly to confess, yt al our affiance of life and salvation is
reposed in the death of ye Lord: yt we may glorify him with our confession, and
may by our example exhort other to give glory to him. Here again it appears
whereunto ye mark of this Sacrament is directed, namely to exercise us in ye
remembrance of the death of Christ. For, this that we are commanded to declare
the Lords death till he come to judge, is nothing else but that we should
publishe that with confession of mouth, which our Faith has acknowleged in the
Sacrament, that is, that the death of Christ is our life. This is the second
use of the Sacrament, which pertains to ourwarde confession.

Thirdly the Lord also willed it to be to us instead of an exhortation, i.
Cor. x.xvi.
This I had rather to be expressed with Paul's words. The cup of blessing
(says he) which we bless, is the communicating of the blood of Christ: and
the bred of blessing which we break, is the partaking of the body of Christ.
Therefore we al are one body, that partake of one bread. We shall have very
well profited in the Sacrament, if this thought so shall be emprinted and
engraven in our minds, that none of the brethren can be hurt, despised,
refused, abused, or in any wise be offended of us, but that therewithal we do
in so doing hurt, despise and abuse Christ with our injurious dealinges: yt we
can not disagree with our brethren, but that we must therewithal disagree
with Christ: that Christ can not be loved of us, but that he must be loved
in our brethren: that what care we have of our own body, such also we ought
to have of our brethren which are members of our body: as no part of our bodi
is touched with any feli^g of grefe, which is not spread abroad into all the other
parts, so we must not suffer, our brother to be grieved with any evil whereof
we should not also be touched with compassion. Therefore Augustine not without
cause so often calls this Sacrament ye bond of charity. For what sharper spur
could be put to us, to stir up mutual charity among us, tha^ when Christ
giving himself to us, does not only allure us with his own example yt we
should mutually dedicate and deliver our selves one to an other: but in so
much as he makes himself common to al, he makes al us also one in himself?

But hereby is that very well confirmed which I have said in an other place,
that the true ministration of the Sacrament stands to whom it most of all
behooved yt the mystery should be declared. But thereupon has grown this
error, yt they marked not that those promises wherwt the consecration is made,
are directed not to ye eleme^tes themselves, but to them that receive them. But
Christ speaks not to the bred, that it may be made his body, but commands
his disciples to eat, and promises to them the communicating of his body and
blood. And none other order does Paul teach, than yt together with the bred and
the cup, the promises should be offered to the faithful. Thus it is truly. We
ought not here to imagine any magical enchauntment, yt it be sufficient to have
mu^bled up ye words, as though ye eleme^tes did hear them: but let us
understand yt those words are a lively preaching, which may edify ye
hearers, which may inwardly pearce into their minds, which may be emprinted
and settled in their hearts, which may show fourth effectualnesse in ye
fulfilling of yt which it promises. By these reasons it clearly appears, yt
the layeng up of ye Sacrament, which many do earnestly require, yt it may be
extraordinarily distributed to the sick, is unprofitable. For either they shall
receive it without rehersing of ye institution of Christ, or ye minister shall
together with the sign join ye true declaration of ye mystery. In silence is
abuse and fault. If ye promises be rehearsed, and ye mystery declared, yt they
which shall receive it may receive it with fruit, there is no cause why we
should doubt that this is the true consecration. To what end then will that
other consecration come, the force whereof comes not so far as to the sick
men? But they that do so, have the example of the old Chirch. I grant: but
in so great a matter, and in which we err not without great danger, nothing is
safer than to follow the truth it self.

Tit. i.xv. i. Cor. xi.xxix.
For (as Paul says) they that eat and drink unworthily, are gylty of the
body and blood of the Lord, and do eat and drink judgment to themselves, not
discerning the body of the Lord. For, such kind of men as without any
sparcle of Faith, without any zele of charity, do thrust themselves fourth
like swyne to take the Supper of the Lord, do not discern the body of the
Lord. For insomuche as they do not believe that that body is their life, they
do as much as in them lies dishonor it, spoiling it of all the dignity
thereof, and finally in so receiving it they profane and defyle it. But in so
much as being estranged and disagreyng from their brethren, they dare myngle
the holy sign of the body of Christ with their disagreementes, it is no
thank to them that the body of Christ is not rent in sonder, and limmemeale
torn in pieces. And so not unworthily they are gyltie of the body and blood of
the Lord, which they do with ungodliness full of sacrilege so fowly defile.
Therefore by this unworthy eating, they take to themselves damnation. For whereas
they have no Faith reposed in Christ, yet receiving the Sacrament they
profess that there is salvation for them no where else tha^ in him, and do
forswere al other affiance. Wherefore they themselves are accusers to
themselves, they themselves pronounce witness against themselves, and they
themselves seal their own damnation. Again when they being with hatred and
evil will divided and drawn in so^der from their brethren, that is, from the
members of Christ, have no part in Christ: i. Cor. xi.xxviii.
yet they do testify that this is the only salvation to communicate with
Christ, and to be made one with him. For this cause Paul commands, that a
man prove himself, before that he eat of this bred or drink of this cup.
Whereby (as I expound it) he meant that every man should descend into
himself, and weye with himself, whether he do with inward affiance of heart
rest upon the salvation which Christ has purchaced: whether he acknowledge it
with confession of mouth: then whether he do with desirous endeavor of innocence
and holiness aspire to the following of Christ: whether after his example he be
ready to give himself to his brethren, and to communicate himself to them with
who^ he has Christ common to him: whether, as he himself is accounted of
Christ, he do likewise on his behalf take al his brethren for members of his
own body: whether, he covet to cherishe, defend, and help them as his own
members. Not for that these duties both of Faith and charity can now be
perfect in us: but because we ought to endeavor this, and with all our desires
to long toward it, yt we may daily more and more increase our Faith begone.

Commonly when they go about to prepare men to such worthiness partaking of
his Supper but the righteous and innocente: there needs no small head that may
make a man assured of his own righteousness which he hears to be required of
God. But whereby is this assuredness confirmed unto us, that they are
discharged before God, which have done so much as in them lay? But although it
were so, yet when shall it be that a man may be bold to assure himself that
he has done as much as in him lay? So when there is made no certain
assurance of our worthiness, the entry shall always remain shut by that
horrible forbidding, whereby is pronounced that they eat and drink judgment
to themselves, which eat and drink unworthily.

has showed toward us. But hereby they do none otherwise than those other
before, drive all men away from coming to this holy Supper. For if their
sentence should take place, no man should receive but unworthily, forasmuch
as all without exception should be holden gyltie and conuicte of their
imperfectness. And truly it were a point of to much amazed dullness, I will
not say foolishness, to require such perfection in the sacrament, as may make
the sacrament void and superfluous: which was not ordained for the perfect,
but for the weak and feeble to awake, to stir up, to prick forward, and
exercise the affection of Faith and charity, and to correct the defaut of
either of them.

But so much as concerns the outward form of doing, whether the Luke xxii;
xvii.
And Christ said, Divide it among you. The histories report, that it was
leuened and common bread before the time of Alexander Bishop of Rome, which
first delited in unleavened bread: but for what reason, I see not, unless it
were with a new sight to draw the eyes of the common people to wondering at it,
rather than to instruct their minds with good religion. I adjure al them that are touched with any though but light zele of godliness, to tell whether they do
not evidently see, both how much more brightly the glory of God shines
herein, and how much more abundant sweetness of spiritual comfort comes
to the faithful, than in these cold and playerlike trifles, which bring one
use but to deceive the sense of the amazed people. This they call the holding
of the people in religion, when being made foolish and senseless with
superstition it is drawn whether they list. If any man will defend such
inventions by antiquity, I my self also am not ignorant how aunciente is the
use of the chresme, and blowing in Baptism: How nigh to the age of the
Apostles the Supper of the LORD was infected with rustinesse: but this verilye
is the waywardness of man's boldness, which can not withholde it self but
that it must always play and be wanton in the mysteries of God. But let us
remember that God does so hyely esteem the obedience of his word, that he
wylleth us in it to judge both his Angels and the whole world. Now, byddyng
farewell to so great a heap of ceremonies: it might thus have been most comlyly
ministered, if it were often and at least every weke set before the Chirch, but
that first they should begin with public prayers: then a sermon should be
made: then the minister, having bread and wine set upon the board, should
rehearse the institution of the Supper: and then should declare the promises
yt are in it left unto us: and therewithal should excommunicate al them that
by the lords forbidding ar debarred from it, afterward they should pray that
with what liberality ye lord has given us this holy food, he would
instruct and frame us also with the same Faith and thankfulness of mind to
receive it, and that forasmuch as we are not of our selves, he would of his
mercy make us worthy of such a banquet: that then either Psalms should be soong,
or somewhat red, and the saythful should in semely order communicate of the holy
banquet, the ministers breaking the bred and giving it to the people: that when
the Supper is ended, exhortation should be made to pure Faith and confession of
Faith, to charity, and to manners mete for Christians: last of all that giving
of thanks should be rehearsed, and praises be soong to God: which being ended
the congregation should be let go in peace.

Act. ii.xlii
when he says that the faithful were continuing in the doctrine of the
Apostles, in communicating, in breaking of bred, and in prayers. So was it
altogether mete to be done, that there should be no assembly of the Chirch
without the word, prayers, partaking of the Supper and alms. That this order
was also institute among the Corynthians we may sufficiently gather of Paul:
and it is certain that in many ages afterward it was in use: For thereupon
came those old Canons, which they Father upon Anacletus and Calixtus, that
when the consecration is done, al should communicate, that will not be without
ye doors of ye Chirch. And it is red in those old Canons, which they call the
Canons of the Apostles: that they which continue not unto the end, and do not
receive the holy communion, must be corrected as men that move unquietness of
the Church. Also in the Council at Antioche, it was decreed that they which
enter into the Chirch, and hear the Scriptures, and do abstain from the
communion, should be removed from the Chirch, til they have amended this
fault. Which, although in the first Council at Toletum it was either somewhat
qualified or at least set fourth in mylder words, yet it is there also
decreed, that they which when they have heard the sermon are found never to
communicate, should be warned: if after warning they absteyne, they should be
debarred from it.

Sacrament (says he) of this thing, In. vi. ca. Johan. tract. xxvi.
of the unity of the Lords body, is somewhere daily, somewhere by certain
distances of days, prepared upon the Lords table, and is there received at
the table, to some unto life, to other some unto destruction. And in the first
Epistle to Ianuarius: some do daily communicate of the body and blood of the
Lord: some receive it at certain days: in some places there is no day let
pass wherein it is not offered, in some other place only upon the saturday and
the Sunday, and in some other places never but on the Sunday. But forasmuch as
the common people was (as we have said) somewhat slack, the holy men did call
earnestly upon them with sharp rebukinges, least they should seem to wink at
such slouthfulness. Such an example is in Chrysostom upon the Epistle to the
Ephesians. In cap i. Homil. xxvi. Mat. xxii.xii.
It is not said unto him that dishonored ye banquet: wherefore did thou sit
down? but, wherefore did thou come in? Whosoever is not partaker of the
mysteries, he is wicked and shameless for that he stands here present. I
beseech you, if any be called to a banquet, washes his hands, sits down,
seems to prepare himself to eat, and then does taste of nothing: shall he not
shame both the banquet, and the maker of the banquet? So thou, standing among
them that with prayer do prepare themselves to receive ye holy meat, haste
even in this that thou haste not gone away confessed that thou art one of the
number of them, at the last thou do not partake: had it not ben better that
thou had not ben present. Thou will say, I am unworthy. Therefore neither
wast thou worthy of the Communion of prayer, which is a preparing to the
receiving of the holy mystery.

And truly this custom which commands to communicate yearly without
rightful cause therefore at the beginning I complained, that by the craft of
the devil this custom was thrust in, which when it apointeth one certain day
of the year, makes men slothful for all the rest of the year. We se in deed
that this perverse abuse was crept in even in the time of Chrysostom: but we
may also therewithal see how much it displeased him. For he complains with
grievous words in the same place which I even now alleged, that there is so
great inequality of this matter, that often in sometimes of the year they came
not even when they were clean, but at Easter they came eue^ when they were
unclean. Then he cries out: O custom. O presumption. Then in vain is the
daily offering used: in vain we stand at the altar: there is none that
partaketh together with us. So far is it of that he allowed it by his
authority adjoined to it.



when they say that it was but a bare doing: for Christ did not only deliver
the cup, but also did institute that his Apostles should in time to come do
the same. For they are the words of a commander, drink ye all of this cup.
And Paul so reherseth that it was a deed, that he also commends it for a
certain rule. An other starting hole is, that the Apostles alone were received
of Christ to the partaking of this Supper, whom he had already chosen and
taken into the order of the sacrificyng prestes. But I would have them answer
me to five questions, from which they shall not be able to escape, but that
they shall be easily convinced with their lies. First, by what oracle have they
this solution reveled, being so strange from the word of God? The Scripture
reckeneth.xii. that sat with Jesus: but it does not so obscure the dignity
of Christ, that it calls them sacrificing prestes: of which name we will
speak hereafter in place fit for it. Though he gave it then to the.xii. yet he
commanded that they should do the same, namely that they should so distribute
it among them. Secondely, why in that better age, from the Apostles almost a
thousand years, were al without exception made partakers of both the signs?
was the old Church ignorant what gestes Christ had received to his Supper? It
were a point of most desperate shamelessness, here to stick and dally in
grau^tyng it to be true. There remain the ecclesiastical hystories, Lib. de
resur. carnis. Theodorit. lib. iii cap. viii. Eucharistia. Hier. in ii. Mal.
Chrysos. in ii. Cor. cap. viii. Eucharistia.
there remain the books of the old writers, which minister evident testimonies
of this matter. The flesh (says Tertullian) is fed with the body and blood of
Christ, that the soul may be fatted with fedyng upon God. How (said Ambrose to
Theodosius) will thou receive with such hands the holy body of the Lord?
With what boldness will thou with thy mouth partake of the cup of the
precious blood? And Hierome says. The prestes which make the Thankesgeuing,
and do distribute the blood of the Lord to the people. Chrysostom, Not as in
the old law the pressed did eat part, and the people part: but one body is
set before all, and one cup. Those things that perteine to the
Thankesgeuing, are all common between the pressed and the people. The self same
thing does Augustine testify in many places.

But why dispute I about a thing most known? Let all the Greek De consecra
did. ii. ca. Co^per.
For thus says Gelasius. We have found, that some receyuyng only the portion
of the holy body, do absteyne from the cup. Let them without dout, because
they seem to be bound with I wot not what superstition, either receive the
Sacraments whole, or be debarred from them whole. For the diuidyng of this
mystery is not committed without great sacrilege. Sermon v. de laps.
Those reasons of Cypriane were heard, which truly ought to move a christian
mind. How (says he) do we teach or provoke them to shed their blood in the
confessing of Christ, if we deny his blood to them that shall fight? Or how do
we make them fit for the cup of Martyrdom, if we do not first in the Chirch
by right of communion admit them to drink the cup of the Lord? Whereas the
Canonistes do restrain that decree of Gelasius to the prestes, that is so
childish a cavil that it need not to be confuted.

ii. Cor. ii.xix.
and with such pretense defend it. As though either these Antechristes were
the Chirch, which so easily tread under foot, scatter abroad, and destroy
the doctrine and institution of Christ: or the Apostolic Church were not the
Church, in which the whole force of religion flourished.

The.xviii. Chapter. Of the Popish Mass, by which sacrilege the Supper of
Christ has not only ben profaned, but also brought to naught.
WIth these and like inventions Satan has travailed, as by ouerspredyng of
darkness to obscure and defile the holy Supper of Christ, that at least the
pureness of it should not be kept still in the Church. But the head of
horrible abomination was, when he advanced a sign, by which it might not
only be darkened and perverted, but being utterly blotted and abolyshed should
vanyshe away and fall out of the remembrance of men: namely when he blinded
almost the whole world with a most pestilent error, that they should believe
that the Mass is a sacrifice and oblation to obtain the forgiveness of
sins. How at the beginning the sounder sort of the Scholeme^ took this
doctrine, I nothing regard: farewell they with their crabbed suttelties: which
howsoever they may be defended with cauillyng, yet are therefore to be refused
of all good men because they do nothing else but spread much darkness over the
brightness of the Supper. Therefore biddyng them farewell, let the readers
understand that I here match in fight with that opinion, wherewith the Romish
Antichrist and his prophets have infected the whole world, namely that the
Mass is a work whereby the sacrificyng Pressed which offreth up Christ, and the
other that do partake at the same oblation, do deserve the favor of God: or
that it is a cleansying sacrifice, whereby they reconcile God to themselves.
Neither has this ben received only in common opinion of the people, but the
very doing it self is so framed, that it is a kind of pacifyeng wherewith
satisfaction is made to God for the purging of the quick and dead. The words
also which they use, do express the same: and no other thing may we gather of
the daily use of it. I know how deep roots this pestilence has taken, under
how great seming of goodness it lurketh, how it bears in show the name of
Christ, how in the one name of Mass many believe that they comprehend the
whole sum of Faith. But when it shall be by the word of God most clearly
proved, that this Mass, how much soever it be colored and glorious, yet
shamefully dishonoreth Christ, burieth and oppresses his cross, puts his
death in forgetfulness, takes away the fruit that comes thereof unto us, does
weaken and destroy the Sacrament wherein was left the memory of his death:
shall there then be any so deep roots, which this most strong are, I mean
the word of God, shall not cut down and overthrow? Is there any face so
beautiful, that this light can not bewray the evil which lurketh under it?

Let us therefore show that which has been set in the first place, that in Heb.
v.v. and. vii.^vii et. ^x. xi.c^ x.xxi.
For he was consecrate of his Father a Pressed and Bishop, not for a time as we
read that they were ordained in the old testament, whoes life being mortal
their presthode also could not be immortal: for which cause also there neded
successors that should from time to time be putt in the place of them that
dyed. Psalm. cx. xiii. Genesis xiiii xviii.
But in place of Christ, which is immortal, there needs no vicar to be set
after him. Therefore he was ordained of the Father a pressed for ever, according
to the order of Melchisedech, that he should execute an everlasting presthode.
This mystery had been long before figured in Melchisedech, whom when the
Scripture had ones brought in for the priest of the living God, it never
afterward made mention of him, as though he had had no end of his life. After
this point of likeness, Christ was called a pressed according to his order. Now
they that do daily sacrifice, must needs appoint prestes to make the
oblations, whom they must appoint as it were successors and vicars in the stead
of Christ. By which puttyng instead of him, they do not only spoil Christ of
his honor, and pluck from him the prerogative of eternal presthod, but also
travail to thrust him down from the right hand of his Father, on which he
can not sit immortal, but that he must therwithall remain the eternal
pressed. Neither let them lay for themselves, that their pety sacrificers are
not putt in place of Christ as if he were dead, but only are helpers of his
eternal presthod, which ceasseth not therefore to continue. For they are more
strongly holden fast with the words of the Apostle, Heb. vii.x^^i.
than that they may so escape: namely, that there were many other prestes made,
because they were by death let to continue. Therefore there is but one that
is not let by death, and he needs no companions. Yet, such is their
frowardness, they arm themselves with the example of Melchisedech to defend
their wickedness. For, because it is said that he offered bread and wine, they
gather that he was a foreshewyng of their Mass: as though the likeness
between him and Christ were in the offryng of bread and wine. Which is so
empty and triflyng that it needs no confutation. Melchisedech gave bread and
wine to Abraham and his companions, to refreshe them being weary after their
journey and battle. What is this to a sacrifice? Moses praises the gentleness
of the holy king: these fellows unseasonably coin a mystery whereof no
mention is made. Yet they deceitfully paint their error with an other color,
because it follows by and by after. And he was ye pressed of ye highest God. Heb.
vii.vii.
I answer, yt they wrongfully draw to the bread and wine that which the Apostle
refers to the blessing. Therefore when he was the pressed of God he blessed
Abraham. Whereupon the same Apostle (tha^ whom we need to seek no better
expositor) gathers his excellence, because the lesser is blessed of the
greater. But if the oblatio^ of Melchisedech were a figure of the sacrifice of
the Mass: would the Apostle. I pray you, which s^ar^heth out al even ye least
things, have forgotten so earnest and weighty a thing? Now (howsoever they
trifle) they shall in vain go about to overthrow the reason which the
Apostle himself brings that the right and honor of sacrificing presthoode
cease among mortal men, because Christ which is immortal, is the only and
perpetual sacrificing priest.

Heb. ix.xi
For if he offered himself for a sacrifice upon the cross, that he might
sanctify us for ever, and purchase to us eternal redemption: undoubtedly ye
force and effectualnesse of that sacrifice continues without any end.
Otherwise we should think nothing more honorably of Christ, than of oxen and
calves which were sacrificed under the law: the offringes whereof are proved
ineffectual and weak by this that they were often ren^ed. Wherefore either we
must confess, that the sacrifice of Christ, which he fulfilled upon the
cross, wanted the force of eternal cleansyng, or that Christ has made an
end of all with one sacrifice ones for ever. Heb. ix.xxvi. and. x.x
This is it that the Apostle says, that this chief Bishop Christ ones appeared
by offering up of him self before ye ending of the world, to the driving away of
sin. Again, That we are sanctified by the will of God, by the off^ing of ye
body of Jesus Christ ones. Again, That Christ with one oblatio^ for ever has
made perfect them that are sanctified: whereunto he adioineth a notable sentence
yt forgiveness of sins being ones purchaced, there remains no more any
oblation. This also Christ signified by his last saying and uttered among his
last gaspings, when he said, It is ended. We are wo^t to note ye last saienges
of men when they are dieng, Ioh. xix.^^x.
for oracles. Christ dieng testifies yt by his one sacrifice is p^rfited and
fulfilled whatsoever was for our salvation. Shall it be lawful for us daily to
patch innumerable sacrifices to such a sacrifice, (the perfection whereof he
has so shiningly set forth) as though it were imperfect? When the holy word
of God not only affirms, but also cries out, and protests, that this
sacrifice was ones fully done that the force thereof remains everlasting:
whosoever require an other sacrifice, do they not accuse this of imperfection and
weakness? But as for the Mass, which has been delivered in such sort that
there may every day be made a hundred thousand sacrifices, to what end rendeth
it, but that the passion of Christ, whereby he offered him an only sacrificed
oblation to the father, should lie buried and drowned? Who, unless he be
blind, can not see that it was the boldness of Satan which wrastled against
so open and clear truth? Neither am I ignorant with what deceites that father
of lyeng uses to color this his fraud, saying that there are not sundry nor
diverse sacrifices, but that one self same sacrifice is repeted. But such
smokes are easily blown away. For in the whole discourse the Apostle
trauaileth to prove: not only that there are no other sacrifices, but that that
one sacrifice was ones offered up, and shall no more be repeted. The sutteller
men do yet slip out at a narrower hole, saying that it is not a repeting but an
applying. But this Sophistical argument also is no less easily confuted. For
neither did Christ ones offer up him self with this condition, that his
sacrifice should be daily confirmed with new oblations: but that by the
preaching of the Gospel, and ministering of the holy Supper, the fruit
thereof should be communicated unto us. i. Cor. ii.vii.
So Paul says that Christ our Passover was offered up, and bids us to
eat of him. This (I say) is the mean whereby the Sacrifice of the Cross is
rightly applied to us, when it is communicated to us to take the use of it, and
we with true faith receive it,

But it is worth the labor to hear, with what other fundation beside Mal.
i.viii
whereby the Lord promises that the time shall come when throughout the whole
world there shall be offered his name incense and a clean sacrifice. As though
it were a new or unwonted thing among the Prophets, when they speak of the
calling of the Gentiles to express by the outward ceremony of the law the
spiritual worshipping of God, to which they exhort the^: that they might the
more familiarly declare to the men of their age, that the Gentiles should be
called into the true fellowship of religion. Like as also they are wont
altogether to describe by figures of their law, the truth yt was delivered by
the Gospel. Joel. ii.xxviii^
So they set for turning to the Lord, asce^ding into Jerusalem: for the
worshipping of God, the offering of al kinds of gifts: for larger knowledge of
him which was to be given to the faithful in the kingdom of Christ, dreams
and visions. That therefore which they allege, is like unto an other prophecy
of Esaye, Esai. xix.xxi.
where the Prophet foretells of three altars to be set up in Assiria,
Egipte, and Iurye. For first I ask, whether they do not grant that the
fulfillyng of this prophecy is in the kingdom of Christ. Secondly where be
these altars, or when they were ever set up. Thirdly whether they think that to
every several kingdom is appointed a several temple, such as was that at
Jerusalem. These things if they wey, I think they will confess, that the
Prophet under fygures agreeable with his time, prophecieth of the spiritual
worship of God to be spread abroad into the whole world. Which we give to them
for a solution. But of this thing sith there do every where examples commonly
offer them selves, I will not busy my self in longer rehearsal of them.
Howbeit herein also they are miserably deceived, that they acknowledge no
sacrifice but of the Mass, whereas in deed the faithful do now sacrifice to
the Lord, and do offer a clean offering, of which shall be spoken by and by.

Heb. ix:xvi:
The Mass shows it self to be a new testament of Christ: therefore it
requires his death. Moreover the host which is offered, must necessarily be
slain and sacrificed. If Christ in every several Mass be sacrificed, then he
must at every moment be in a thousand places cruelly slayen. This is not
mine, but the Apostles argument, If he had neded to offer him self often, he
must often have dyed sins the beginning of the world. I know that they have
an answer in readiness, whereby also they charge us with sclander. For they
say that that is objected against them which they never thought, nor yet can.
And we know, that the death and life of Christ is not in their hand. We look
not whether they go about to kill him: only our purpose is to show, what
manner of absurdity follows of their ungodly and wicked doctrine. Which self
thing I prove by the Apostles own mouth. Though they cry out to the contrary
a hundred times, that this sacrifice is unbloody: I will deny that it hangs
upon the will of men, that sacrifices should change their nature, for by this
mean the holy and inviolable ordinance of God should fail. Whereupon follows
that this is a sure principle of the Apostle, th^^ there is required sheding of
blood, that washing may not be wanting.

he brings nothing else than as if he would boste, that Christ has redeemed
us with this condition that we should redeem our selves. For such doctrine
has been spread by the ministers of Satan, and such at this day they mainteyn
with cryenges out, with swerd and fire, that we when in the Mass we offer up
Christ to his Father, by this work of offering do obtain forgiveness of
sins, and are made partakers of the passion of Christ. What now remains to
the passion of Christ, but to be an example of redemption, whereby we may
learn to be our own redemers? Christ him self, when in the Supper he
seals the confidence of pardon, does not bid his disciples to stick in
that doing, but sends the^ away to the sacrifice of his death: signifieng
that the Supper is a moniment or memorial (as the common spech is) whereby they
may learn that ye satisfactorie clensing sacrifice, by which the Father was to
be appeased, must have been offered but ones. For neither is it enough to know
that Christ is the only sacrifice, unless the only sacrificing be joined
with it, that our faith may be fastened to his cross.

Now I come to the conclusion, namely that the holy Supper, in which the Lord
had left the remembrance of his passion graven and expressed,

And whense the very name of Mass first sprung, I could never certainly
therefore they are a wicked prophanyng of the holy Supper. For what has the
Lord commanded us? not to take, and divide it among us? What manner of
obseruyng of the commandment does Paul teach? i. Cor. x.xvi:
not the breaking of bread, which is the communion of the body and blood?
Therefore when one takes it without distributing, what liknesse is there? But
yt same one man does it in the name of ye whole Chirch. By what commandment?
Is not this openly to mock God, when one man privately takes to him self that
which ought not to have been done but among many? But because ye words of
Christ and Paul ar plain enough, we may brefely conclude, yt whersoeuer is not
breaking of bread to the communion of the faithful, there is not ye Supper of
ye Lord, but a false and wrongful counterfaiting of the Supper. But a false
counterfaityng is a corrupting. Now the corrupting of so great a mystery is
not without wickedness. Therefore in private Masses is a wicked abuse. And (as
one fault in religion from time to time bredeth an other) after yt that manner
of offering without communion was ones crept in, by little and little they began
in every corner of Chirches to make innumerable Masses, and diversely to draw
the people hither and thither, which should have come together into one
assembly, that they might reknowlege the mystery of their own unity. Now
let them go and deny it to be ydolatrie, that in their Masses they show forth
bread to be worshipped instead of Christ. For in vain they bost of those
promises of the presence of Christ, which howsoever they be understood, verily
were not given to this purpose, that wicked and profane men, so often as they
will, and to whatsoever abuse they list, may make the body of Christ: but that
the faithful, when with religious observation they do in Celebrating of the
Supper follow the commandment of Christ, may enjoy the true partaking of him.

i. Samu: xvi:xxii.
and that he more requires that his voice be harkened to, tha^ that sacrifices
be offered: how they believe that this manner of sacrificing is acceptable to God,
whereof they have no certain commandment, and which they see not to be
allowed by any one syllable of the Scripture. Moreover when they hear the
Apostle say, that no man takes to himself ye name and honor of sacrificing
presthode but he yt is called as Aaron was: yea and that Christ himself did not
thrust in himself, but obeyed ye calling of his father: either they must bring
forth God ye author and ordeiner of their sacrificing presthod, or they must
confess yt the honor is not of God, into which they have with wicked rashness
broken in uncalled. But they ca^ not show one tittle of a letter yt mainteineth
their sacrificing presthod. Why therefore shall not their sacrifices vanish away,
which ca^ not be offered without a pressed?

the forged devise of sacrifice, such as the Papists have feigned in the
Mass, the old writers do never speak in defe^se of such sacrilege, They do in
deed use the word Sacrifice: but therwithal they expound, that they mean
nothing else but the remembrance of that true and only sacrifice, which Christ
our only sacrificing priest (as they each where report of him) made on the
cross. Lib. xx. contra. Faust. cap. xviii.
The Hebrews (says Augustine) in the sacrifices of beasts which they offered
to God, did celebrate a prophecy of the sacrifice to come, which Christ
offered: the Christians do with the holy oblation and partaking of the body of
Christ celebrate a remembrance of the sacrifice already made. Here verily he
teaches altogether the same thing, which is written in more words in the book
of Faith to Peter the Deacon, whosoever be the author of it. The words be
these, Believe most steadfastly and dout not at al, that the only begotten
himself, being made flesh for us, offered himself for us a sacrifice and
oblation to God into a savor of sweetness: to who^ with the Father and the
Holy ghost in the time of the old testamente beasts were sacrificed: and to
whom now with the Father and the Holy ghost (with who^ he has one Godhed) the
holy Chirch throughout the whole world cesseth not to offer the sacrifice of
bred and wine. For in those fleshly sacrifices was a figuring of the flesh of
Christ which he should offer for our sins, and of his blood which he should
shed to the forgiveness of sins. But in this sacrifice is thankesgeuing and
rehearsal of the flesh of Christ which he offered for us, and of his blood
which the same he has shed for us. Whereupon Augustine himself in many places
expounds it to be nothing else but a sacrifice of praise. Co^tra aduersar.
legis.
Finally you shall commonly find in him, that the Supper of the Lord is for no
other reason called a sacrifice, but because it is the remembrance, image, and
witness of that singular, true, and only sacrifice wherewith Christ has
cleansed us. Also there is a notable place in his fourth book of the Trinity
the xxiiii. Chapter, where after that he has discoursed of the only sacrifice,
he thus concludes: because in a sacrifice four things ar considered, to who^
it is offered, and of who^, what is offered, and for who^. The same he himself
the one and true mediator reco^ciling us to God by the sacrifice of peace,
remains one with him to who^ he offered: makes them one in him for whom he
offered: Lib ii co^tra parm. cap. viii.
is one himself which offered, and the thing which he offered. To the same
effect also speaks Chrysostom. But they so challenge ye honor of sacrificing
presthode to Christ, yt Augustine testifies it to be ye voice of Antichrist if
any man make a Bishop intercessor between God and men.

Yet do we not deny but yt the offering up of Christ is there so showed in Gal.
iii.i.
when the preaching of ye cross was set before them. But forasmuch as I se
that those old Fathers also wrested this remembrance an other way tha^ was
agreeable with the institution of ye Lord (because their Supper contained I wot
not what repeted or at least renewed form of sacrifici^g) the safest way for
godly hearts shall be to rest in ye pure and simple ordinance of God: whoes also
the Supper is therefore called, because in it his authority alone ought to be
in force. Truly sith I find that they have kept a Godly and true sense of
this whole mystery, and I do not perceive that they meante to abate any thing
were it never so little from the only sacrifice of the Lord, I can not condemn
them of ungodliness: yet I think that they can not be excused, but that they
have offended somewhat in the manner of the celebration. For they counterfaited
the Iewishe manner of sacrificing more nerely than either Christ had ordained,
or the nature of the Gospel did bear. Therefore that same overthwart appliance
to heavenly things is the only thing wherein a man may worthily blame them, for
that being not contented with the simple and natural institution of Christ,
they swarued to the shadows of the law.

i. Cor. xi.xx.
Therefore when the Apostle minded to cleanse it from al faults which had
already crept into the Chirch of the Corinthia^s, he uses the rediest way
thereunto, that is, he calls it back to the only institution of it, from
whense he shows that a perpetual rule ought be fetched.

Thusia, sometime Prosphora sometime Telete. Which being generally taken
co^prehendeth whatsoever is in any wise offered to God. Wherefore we must make
distinction: but yet so that this distinction may have a supernall appliance of
similitude from the sacrifices of the law of Moses: under the shadows whereof
the Lord willed to represe^t to his people the whole truth of sacrifices. Of
those although there were diverse forms, yet they may al be referred to two
sorts. For either there was oblation made for sin after a certain manner of
satisfaction, whereby gyltinesse was redeemed before God: or it was a sign of
the worshipping of God, and a testifyeng of religion: sometime instead of
supplication, to crave ye favor of God: sometime instead of tha^kesgeuing, to
testify tha^kfulnesse of mind for benefits received: sometime only for an
exercise of Godliness, to renew the stablishing of the covenant: to which
later sort perteined burnt offryngs, drink offrynges, oblations, first fruits,
and peace offringes. Wherefore let us also divide ours into two kinds: and
for teachinges sake let us call the one the sacrifice of worship and of Godly
devotion, because it consists in the honoring and worshipping of God, which
the faithful both owe and yield unto him: or, if you will, the sacrifice of
Tha^kesgeuing: forasmuch as it is given to God of none but of them y^ being
laden with immeasurable benefits, do render to him them selves with all their
doings. The other may be called propitiatory or of expiation. The sacrifice
of expiration is yt which tends to appease the wrath of God, to satisfy his
judgment, and so to wash and wype away sins: whereby the siner cleansed from
the filthy spots of them and restored into purity of righteousness, may
return into favor with God himself. ^^o. xxix ixxix.
So in the law those were called sacrifices yt were offered for the purging of
sins: not for yt they were sufficient to recover the favor of God, or to put
away iniquity: but for yt they shadowed out such a true sacrifice which at
length was fully done by Christ alone: and by him alone, because it could be
done by none other: and ones, because the effectualnesse and force of yt one
sacrifice which Christ has fully done, is eternal, as he himself has
testified with his own mouth, Job. xix.xxx.
when he said y^ it was ended and fulfilled: yt is to say, that whatsoever was
necessary to the reco^ciling of the Fathers favor, to the obteyning of the
forgiveness of sins, to righteousness and to salvation, all the same was
performed and fulfilled with yt his only oblation, and there so nothing wanted
thereof that there was afterward no place left to any other sacrifice.

Wherefore I determine, yt it is a most wicked reproach, and blasphemy not The
common price of a Mass in france is iii. Karolus.

Which make. xxx deniers, about the value of a sterling grote.


or rather to every one whosoever he were yt would bye for himself such ware
with ready money. Now because they could not reach to ye price that Judas had,
yet yt they might in some mark resemble their author, they kept the likeness
of number. Judas sold him for thirty silver pens: these fellows sell him,
after the French account, for xxx. brazen pens: but Judas sold him ones, these
fellows sell him as often as they can find a bier. In this sense also we deny yt
they be sacrificing prestes, that is to say, they that with such an oblation
are means to God for ye people, they that appeasing God, may purchase ye
satisfactorie purging of sins. For Christ is ye only Bishop and sacrificing
pressed of ye new Testamente, into whom all Presthodes are removed, and in whom
they be shut up and ended. And if the Scripture had made no mention of the
eternal Presthode of Christ: yet forasmuch as God, sins that he has taken
away those old Presthodes, has ordained none, the Apostles argument remains
invincible, that no man takes honor to himself but he that is called of God.
He. v.iiii
By what affiance therefore dare these robbers of God, that bost themselves for
the butchers of Christ, call themselves the sacrificing Prestes of the living
God?

Plato has an excellent place in his second book of Common weal. Where when
he entreats of the old manners of expiation, and laugheth to scorn the
foolish confidence of evil me^ and wicked doers, which thought that their
wicked doings were by these as by coueringes hidden that the Gods could not se
them, and did, as if they had gotten warrant of the Gods by covenant, more
carelessly follow their own Iustes: he seems thoroughly to touch the manner of
satisfactorie purging of the Mass, such as is at this day in the world. To
beguile and undermine an other man, al men know to be unlawful. To grieve
widows with wrongful dealinges, to rob the fatherless, to troble the poor,
by evil crafty means to catch other men's goods to themselves, with
forsweringes and deceites to enter forceably into any man's possessions, to
oppress any man with violence and tyrannous fear, al men confess to be
wicked. How therefore dare so many commonly do al these things, as though they
should freely be bold to do them? Truly, if we ryghtly wey it, no other
cause does so much encourage them, but because they have confidence, that by
the sacrifice of a Mass, as by paymente of full price for reco^pense, they
shall satisfy God, or at the least that this is an easy way to co^pounde with
him. The^ Plato proceeds further to scorn their gross blockishnesse, which
think yt by such satisfactorie clea^singes those peynes are redeemed that
otherwise they should suffer in hell. And whereto serve at this day the yereli
obites, and the greater part of Masses, but that they which throughout al their
life have been most cruel tyra^tes, or most ravenous robbers, or given fourth to
al mischeuous doings, should as though they were redeemed by this price, escape
the fire of purgatory?

it shall be everlasting, so long as the people of God shall continue, as we have
before already showed out of the Prophet: for in that meaning I will take this
prophecy, Mala. i.xi.
For from the rising of the sun to the going down thereof, great is my name
among the Gentiles, and in every place ince^se shall be offered to my name, and a
clean offering: because my name is terrible among the Gentiles, says the Lord:
so far is it of, that we would put it away. To. xii.i.
So Paul bids us to offer our bodies, a sacrifice living, holy, acceptable
to God, a reasonable worship. Where he spoke very pithily, when he added yt
this is our reasonable worshipping: for he meant the spiritual manner of
worshipping of God, which he did secretly set in co^pariso^ against the
carnal sacrifices of ye law of Moses. Heb. xiii.xvi. Phili. iiii.xvii^.
So liberal doing of good and communicating are called sacrifices by which God
is pleased. So ye liberality of the Philippians, whereby they had releued ye
poverty of Paul, is called a sacrifice of sweet smellyng. So al ye good works
of ye faithful are called spiritual sacrifices.

And why do I seek out many examples? For commonly this manner of Ps. cxli.ii
Ose, xiiii.iii. Ps li xxi. Hebr. xiii.iv.
After which manner David prayed, yt his prayer might as ince^se, ascend into
ye sight of God. And Osee called geuinges of thanks, ye calves of lips, which
in an other place David calls ye sacrifices of praise. Whom the Apostle
himself following, calls them also the sacrifices of praise, and expounds
them the fruits of lips confessing to his name. This kind of sacrifice the
Supper of the Lord can not want: wherein when we declare his death and render
thankesgeuing, we do nothing but offer the sacrifice of praise. Of this office
of sacrificing, al we Christians are called a kingly Presthode: i. Pe. ii.ix.
because by Christ we offer to God that sacrifice of praise of which the
Apostle speaks, the fruit of lips that confess to his name. For neither do
we with our gifts appear in the sight of God without an intercessor. Christ
is he, which being the mediator coming between, we offer us and ours to the
Father. He is our Bishop, which being entered into the sanctuary of heaven has
opened the entry to us. He is the altar, upon which we lay our gifts, that in
him we may be bold all that we are bold. Reave. i.vi
It is he (I say) that has made us a kingdom and Prestes to the Father.

What remains but y^ the blind may se, the deff may hear, children
themselves may understand this abhominatio^ of ye Mass? which being offered
in a golden cup, has made drunk ye kings and peoples of the earth, from the
highest to the lowest, has so stryken them with drowsinesse and giddiness, yt
being become more senseless than brute beasts, they have set ye whole ship of
their safety only in this deadly devouring gulf. Truly Satan never did bend
himself with a stronger engine tha^ this to assail and va^quish ye kingdom of
Christ. This is the Helene, Queen Helene ye Grecian Harlott, cause of ye war
of Troy.
for whom the enemies of the truth fight at this day with so great rage, so
great furiousness, so great cruelty: and a Helene in deed, with whom they so
defile themselves with spiritual whordo^e, which is ye most cursed of al. I do
not here so much as ones touch with my little finger those gross abuses, wherwt
they might color ye vnholi pureness of their holy Mass: how filthy
markettinges they use, how dishonest gains they make with their massinges, with
how great ravening they fill their covetousness. Only I do point unto, and yt
with few and plain words, what manner of thing is eue^ the very holiest
holiness of the Mass, for which it has deserved in certain ages past to be
so honorable and to be had in so great reverence. For, to have these so great
mysteries set out according to their worthiness, requires a greater work:
and I am unwilling to mingle herewith those filthy uncleannesses yt commonly
show themselves before the eyes and faces of al me^: yt al me^ may understand,
yt the Mass taken in her most piked pureness, and wherewith it may be set out
to the best show, without her appendances, from the root to the topp swarmeth
full of all kind of wickedness, blasphemy, idolatry, and sacrilege.

^sa xl xiii. Romans xi.xxxiiii.
yt none has been Gods cou^seller, yt might promise us any certainty of his
will, or assure us and bring us out of care, what affection he bears toward
us, what he will give, or what he will deny us. For therewt is also determined,
yt no man can set fourth a sign to be a testimony of any will or promise of
his: it is he himself alone, yt can by a sign given testify to us of
himself. I will speak it more brefely, and paraduenture more grossly, but more
plainly. A Sacrament ca^ never be without promise of salvation. Al men gathered
on a heap together can of themselves promise nothing of our salvation.
Therefore neither can they of themselves set fourth or set up a Sacrament.

E^o. xvi.xiii. and. xvii.vi. i. Corin, x, iii. Numer. xxi.viii.
beside those their ordinary ones, were given to the Jews, according to the
diverse course of times, as Ma^na, Water sprynging out of the rock, the
Brazen serpente and such other: they were by this change put in mind that
they should not stay upon such figures, whoes state was not very steadfast: but
yt they should look for some better thing from God, which should continue
without any decayeng, and without any end. But we are in a far other case, to
who^ Christ is openly showed: in whom all the treasures of knowledge and
wisdom are hidden with so great abundance and plenty, John. iii.xiiii. Col.
ii.iii.
that either to hope for or look for any new increase to these treasures, is
verily to move God to wrath, and to provoke him against us. We must hunger
for, seek, look upon, learn, and thoroughly learn Christ alone, until that
great day shall appear, wherein the Lord shall openly show to the full of glory
of his kingdom, and himself such as he is, to be beholden of us. i. Io.
iii.ii. i. John ii.xviii. i. Pe. i.xx. Heb. i.ii.
And for this reason this our age is in the Scriptures signified by the last
hour, the last days, the last times, that no man should deceive himself
with vain loking for any new doctrine or revelation. For many times and in
many sorts he spoke before by his Prophets: in these last days the heavenly
Father has spoken in his beloved Son, which only can manifestly show the
Father: and in deed he has manifestly showed him to the full, so much as
behooves us, while we now behold him by a glass. i. Cor. x^i xii.
As therefore this is now taken away from men, that they can not make new
Sacraments in the Chirch of God: so it were to be wished, that as little as
were possible of man's inue^tion might be myngled with those Sacraments that
are of God. For like as when water is poured in, the wine departs and is
delayed: and as with leaven scattered among it, the whole lump of done waxes
sower: so the pureness of the mysteries of God is nothing else but defiled
when man adds any thing of his own. And yet we see how far the Sacraments
are swarued out of kind from their natural pureness, as they be handled at
this day. There is echewhere to much of pompes, ceremonies, and gesturinges:
but of the word of God in the mean time there is neither any consideration
nor mention, without which even the Sacraments themselves are not
Sacraments. Yea and the very ceremonies that are ordained of God, in so great
a route can not ones lift up their head, but lie as it were oppressed. How little
is that seen in Baptism, which only ought there to have shyned and been looked
upon, as we have in an other place rightfully complained, even Baptism it
self? As for the Supper, it is utterly buried, sins that it has been turned
into ye Mass, saving that it is seen ones every year but in a mangled and
half torn fashion.

The.xix. Chapter. Of the five falsely named Sacraments: where is declared,
that the other five which have been hitherto commonly taken for Sacraments, are
not Sacraments: and then is showed what manner of things they be.
OUr former discourse concerning Sacraments might have obtained this with the
sobre and willing to learn, that they should not over curiously proceed any
further, nor should without the word of God embrace any other Sacraments beside
those two which they knew to be ordained of ye Lord. But forasmuch as that
opinion of the seven Sacraments, being commonly used in all men's take, having
wa^dered through all schools and preachinges, has by very auncientie gathered
roots, and is yet still settled in the minds of men: I thought that I should
do a thing worth the trauail, if I should severally and more nerely search
those other five that are commonly adnumbred among the true and natural
Sacraments of the Lord, and wyping away al deceitful color, should set them
fourth to be seen of the simple such as they be, and how falsely they have been
hitherto taken for Sacraments. First, I here protest to all the godly, that I
do not take in hand this contention about the name for any desire of
striving, but that I am by weighty causes led to fight against the abuse of it
I am not ignorante that Christians are Lords, as of words, so of al things
also, and therefore may at their will apply words to things, so that a godly
sense be kept, although there be some vnproprenesse in the speaking. Al this I
grant: although it were better that the words should be made subject to
things, than things to the words. But in the name of Sacrament there is an
other consideration. For they which make seven Sacraments, do therewithal give
to them all this definition, yt they be visible forms of invisible grace: they
make them altogether vessels of the Holy ghost: instruments of giving of
righteousness, causes of the obteining of grace. Yea and the Master of the
sentences himself denies that the Sacraments of the law of Moses are
properly called by this name, because they did not deliver in deed the thing
that they figured. Is it, I beseech you, to be suffered, that those signs which
the Lord has hallowed with his own mouth, which he has garnished with
excellent promises, should not be accounted for Sacraments: and in the mean
time this honor should be conveyed away to those vsages which men either have
devised of themselves, or at least do observe without express commandment of
God? Therefore either let them change the definition, or let them abstain from
the wrongful using of this word, which does afterward engender false
opinions and full os absurdity. Extreme anointing (say they) is a figure and
cause of invisible grace, because it is a Sacrament. If we ought in no wise to
grant that which they gather upon it, then truly we must resist them in the
name it self, least thereby we admit that it may give occasion to such an
error. Again when they would prove it to be a Sacrament, they add this cause,
for that it consists of ye outward sign and the word. If we find neither
commandment nor promise of it, what can we do else but cry out against them?

Esaias. xl.xiii. Romans xi.^xxiiii.
A Sacrament ought to be to us a witnessing of the good will of God toward us,
whereof none of all men or Angels can be witness, forasmuch as none has been of
Gods counsel. Therefore it is he alone which does with right authority
testify of himself to us by his word. A Sacrament is a seal, wherwt the
testament or promise of God is sealed. But it could not be sealed with bodily
things and elements of this world, unless they be by the power of God
framed and appointed thereunto. Therefore man can not ordeine a Sacrament,
because this is not in the power of man, to make that so great mysteries of God
should lie hidden under so base things. The word of God must go before,
which may make a Sacrament to be a Sacrament, as Augustine very well teaches.
Homil. in Iol. 5. lxxx. Act. ix.xl. and. x.xxxvi.
Moreover it is profitable that there be kept some difference between the
Sacraments and other ceremonies, unless we will fall into many absurdities.
The Apostles prayed kneling: therefore men shall not kneel without a Sacrament.
It is said that the disciples prayed toward the East: therefore the loking into
the East shall be a Sacrament. Paul wills men in every place to lift up pure
hands, i. Tim. ii.viii.
and it is rehearsed that holy me^ oftentimes prayed with their hands lifted
up: then let the lifting up of hands also be made a Sacrament. Finally let all
the gestures of the holy ones turn into Sacraments. Howbeit I would not also
much pass upon these things, if so that they were not joined with those
other greater discommodities.

If they will press us with the authority of the old Church, I say Episto.
11^.
I will here rehearse a few testimonies of Augustine. To Ianuarius he says:
First I would have thee to hold fast that which is the chief point of this
disputation, that our Lord Christ (as he himself says in the gospel) has
made us subject to a light yoke and a light burden. Wherefore he has bound
together the fellowship of the new people with Sacraments very few in number,
very easy in obseruyng, very excellent in signification. As are Baptism
hallowed in the name of the Trinity, and the Communicating of the body and
blood of the Lord, and whatsoever else is set forth in the cononicall
Scriptures. Again, in his book of Christian doctrine. Lib. iii. cap. ix.
Sins the Lords resurrection, the Lord himself and the doctrine of the
Apostles has delivered certain few signs instead of many, and those most
easy to be done, most reverend in understanding, most pure in observing: as is
Baptism, and the Celebrating of the body and blood of the Lord. Why does he
here make no mention of the holy number, that is, of the number of seven? Is it
likely that he would have passed it over, if it had been at that time ordained
in the Chirch, specially sith he is otherwise in obseruyng of numbres more
curious than need were? Yea, when he names Baptism and the Supper, and
speaks nothing of the rest: does he not sufficiently signify, that these two
mysteries do excel in singular dignity, and that the other ceremonies do
rest benethe in a lower degree? Wherefore I say that these Sacramentarie
doctors are destitute not only of the word of the Lord, but also of the
consent of the old Chirch, how much soever they glory of this pretense? But now
let us come down to the special things themselves.

Of Confirmation.
This was the manner in old time, that the children of Christians, the Bishop:
that they should fulfill that duty which was required of those that being
grown in years did offer them selves to Baptism, For these sat among those
that were to be catechized, till being fully instructed in the mysteries of
the faith, they could make a confession of their faith before the bishop and
the people. Therefore they that were baptized being infantes, because they had
not then made confession of their faith before the Chirch, were about the end
of their childehod or in the beginning of their years of discretion presented
again by their parents, and were examined of the Bishop according to the
form of the Catechism, which they had then certain and common. And that
this doing, which otherwise ought worthily to be grave and holy, might have the
more reverence and dignity, there was added also the Ceremony of layeng on of
hands. So that same child, his faith being allowed, was let go with solemn
blessyng. The old writers do often make mention of this manner. Leo the Pope
writes: If any return from heretics, let him not be baptized again: but
(which he wanted among the Heretics) let the virtue of the Spirit be given
him by the Bishops layeng on of his hands. Epist. 39.
Here our adversaries will cry out, that it is rightfully called a Sacrament,
in which the holy ghost is given, but Leo himself does in an other place
declare what he means by those words: Whosoever (says he) is baptized among
heretics, let him not be rebaptized, but with calling upon the Holy ghost,
Episto. lxxvii.
let him be confirmed with laieng on of hands: because he received only the
form of Baptism without sanctifieng. Hierome also makes mention of it,
writing against the Luciferians. But although I do not deny that Hierome
somewhat erreth therein, for that he says that it is an observation of the
Apostles: yet he is most far from these men's follies. And the very same also
he qualifieth, when he adds, that this blessing is given to the bishops
only, rather in honor of their presthode than by the necessity of law.
Therefore such laying on of hands, which is done simply instead of blessing,
I praise and would that it were at this day restored to the pure use thereof.

yt he do nothing without commandment. Go to, let them bring forth any
commandment of this point ministry, and I will not speak one word more. If
they have no commandment, they can not excuse their boldness full of
sacrilege. After this manner the Lord asked the Pharisees, Mat. xii xxv.
whether the Baptism of John were from heaven or from men: if they had
answered, from men, the^ he had made them confess that it was trifling and
vain: if from heaven, then were they compelled to acknowledge the doctrine of
John. Therefore least they should to much sclander John, they durst not
confess that it was from men. If therefore Confirmation be from men, it is
proved to be vain and trifling: if they will persuade us that it is from
heaven, let them prove it.

They do in deed defend themselves with the example of the Apostles, Act.
viii.xv.
But what did the Apostles? Luke reports in the Acts, that the Apostles
which were at Jerusalem, when they heard that Samaria had received the
word of God, sent thither Peter and John: they prayed for the Samaritans, yt
they might receive the Holy ghost, which was not yet come into any of them, but
they were baptized only in the name of Jesus: when they had prayed, they laid
their hands upon them: by which layeng on, the Samaritanes received the Holy
ghost. And of this laieng on of hands he diverse times makes mention. I hear
what the Apostles did: that is, they faithfully executed their ministry. The
Lord willed that those visible and wonderful graces of the Holy ghost, which
he then poured out upon his people, should be ministered and distributed of his
Apostles by the laieng on of hands. But under this laieng on of hands I think
there was not contained any hier mystery: but I expound it, that they adjoined
such a ceremony, that by the very outeward doing they might signify, that
they commended and as it were offered to God him upon whom they laid their
hands. If this ministry which ye Apostles then executed, were yet still
remaining in ye Chirch, the layeng on of hands also ought to be kept. But sins
that same grace has cessed to be given, whereto serves the laieng on of
hands? Truly the Holy ghost is yet present with the people of God, without
whom being guider and directer, the Chirch of God can not stand. For we have
the eternal promise and which shall ever stand in force, by which Christ
calls to him self them that thirst, Ioh. vii.xxxvii.
that they may drink living waters. But those miracles of powers, and manifest
workinges, which were distributed by the layeng on of hands, have ceased,
neither behooved it that they should be, but for a time. For it behooved that the
preaching of the Gospel while it was new, should be gloriously set fourth and
magnified, with unheard of and unwonted miracles. From which when the Lord
cessed, he did not by and by forsake his Chirch, but taught that the royalty
of his kingdom, and the dignity of his word was excellentlye enough
disclosed. In what point therefore will these stageplaiers say that they follow
the Apostles? They should have done it with layeng on of hands, that the
evident power of the Holy ghost might by and by show forth it self. This they
bring not to pass: why therefore do they bost that the laieng on of hands
makes for them, which we read in deed that the Apostles used, but altogether
to an other end?

This has like reason as if a man should teach that that breathing John.
xx.xxii.
But whereas the Lord did this ones, he did not also will that we should do the
same. After the same manner also the Apostles laid on their hands, during the
time that it pleased the lord that the visible graces of the Holy ghost
should be distributed at their prayers: not that they which come after, should
only playerlike and without the thing in deed cou^terfait an empty and cold
sign, as these apes do. But if they prove that in layeng on of hands they
follow the Apostles, (wherein they have no like thing with the Apostles, saving
I wot not what overthwart wrongful counterfaiting) yet whense comes their
oil which they call ye oil of salvation? Who taught them to seek salvation in
oil? Who taught them to give to it the power of strengthening? Did Paul, Ga.
iiii.ix Colo. ii.xx.
which draws us far away from ye elements of this world, which condemns
nothing more than the sticking to such pety observations? But this I boldly
pronounce, not of my self, but from the Lord. Whosoever call oil the oil of
salvation, they forswear the salvation which is in Christ, they deny Christ
they have no part in the kingdom of God. For oil is for the belly, and the
belly for oil: the Lord shall destroy both. For all these weak elements,
which decay with very use, belong nothing to the kingdom of God, which is
spiritual and shall never decay. What then? will some men say: do you measure
with the same measure, the water wherewith we be baptized, and the bread and
wine under which the Supper of the Lord is given? I answer that in Sacraments
given of God, two things are to be looked unto: the substance of the bodily
thing which is set before us, and the form that is by the word of God printed
in it, wherein lies the whole strength. In respect therefore that the bread,
wine, and water that are in the Sacraments offered to our sight, do keep their
own substance, this saying of Paul always has place* i. Cor. vi.xiii.
Meat for belly, and the bellye for meats: God shall destroy them both. For
they pass and vanish away with the fashion of this world. But in respect that
they be sanctified by the word of God, that they may be Sacraments, they do
not hold us in the flesh, but do truly and spiritually teach us.

But let us yet more nerely look into it, how many monsters this fat To. vi.iiii
and quickening of our spirit: for that our old man is crucified, that we may
walk in newness of life. What is to be armed to battle if this be not? If they
comp^ed it a matter of nothing, to trede under feet the word of God: why did
they not yet at least reverence the Chirch, to whom they will in every point
seem so obedient. But what can be brought forth more strong against their
doctrine, tha^ that decree of the Mileuitane council? Whosoever says that
Baptism is given only for forgiveness of sins, and not for a help of
grace to come, Acts. viii.xvi.
accursed be he. But whereas Luke, in the place which we have alleged, says
that they were baptized in the name of Jesus Christ, which had not received
the Holy ghost: he does not simply deny that they were endued with any gift of
ye Holy ghost, which believed in Christ with heart, and confessed him with mouth:
but means of that receiving of the Holy ghost, whereby the open powers and
visible graces were received. Act. ii.iiii
So is it said that the Apostles received the Spirit on the day of Pentecost,
whereas it had been long before said unto them of Christ, It is not you that
speak, but the Spirit of my Father which speaks in you. Behold all ye that
are of God, the malicious and poisonous deceit of Satan. That thing which was
truly given in Baptism, he lyengly says to be given in his confirmation,
that he may by stealth lead you unware from Baptism. Who now can doubt that
this is the doctrine of Satan, which cuttyng away from Baptism the promises
proprely belongyng to Baptism, does convey away and remove them to an other
thing? It is found (I say) upon what manner of fundation this godly annoyntyng
stands. The word of God is, that al they which are baptized in Christ,
Gala. iii.xvii. De cons^ did. v. cap. Sp.
have put on Christ with his gifts. The word of the anoynters is, that they
received in Baptism no promise, by which they may be armed in batails. That is
the voice of the truth, therefore this must be the voice of lying. Therefore I
can more truly define this Confirmation than they have hitherto defined it:
namely, that it is a notable sclander of Baptism, which darkeneth, yea
abolysheth the use thereof: that it is a false promise of the deuell, which
draws us away from the truth of God. Or, if you will, it is oil defiled
with the lyeng of the devil, which as it were by ouerspreadyng of darkness,
deceives the eyes of the simple.

They add furthermore, that all the faithful ought after Baptism to Verba cap
i. de Consecr. dis. v co^. aurel. ca. vt Ieiuni^
because he shall never be a Christian, that is not chresmed with the Bishopps
Confirmation. These be their own sayings word for word. But I had thought
that whatsoever things perteined to Christianity, were all set forth in
writing and comprehended in Scriptures. Now, as I perceive, the true form of
religion is to be sought and learned from else where than out of the the
Scriptures. Therefore the whole wisdom of God, the heavenly truth, the whole
doctrine of Christ, does but begin Christians, and oil makes them perfect.
By this sentence ar damned all the Apostles, and so many Martyrs, whom it is
most certain to have never ben ^hresmed: forasmuch as the oil was not yet
made, which being poured upon them, they might fulfill all the parts of
christianity, or rather might be made christians which yet were none. But,
though I hold my peace, they do largely confute themselves. For, how many
of the number of their own people do they annoint after Baptism? why
therefore do they suffer such half christians in their flock, whoes
imperfection might easily be helped? Why do they with so careless negligence
suffer them to omit that which was not lawful to be omitted without grievous
offense? Why do they not more severely call upon the keeping of a thing so
necessary, and without which salvation ca^ not be obtained, unless
peradventure some be prevented by death? Uerily when they so freely suffer it
to be despised, they secretly confess that it is not of so great value as
they boste it.

Cap. De his vero, Did. eadem.
because this anointing is peculiarly ministered by the hands of the chief
Bishops, but Baptism is co^monlye distributed by every pressed. What may a man
here say, but that they are utterly mad, which so flatter their own
inventions, that in comparison of them they carelessly despise the holy
ordinances of God? O mouth that robbest God, dare thou set a fat liquor only
defiled with the stink of thine own breath, and enchaunted with murmuring
sound of words, against the Sacrament of Christ, and to compare it with water
hallowed with the word of God? But thy wickedness accounted this but a small
matter, unless thou did also prefer it above the same. These be the
answers, Trestle, Apollo among ye Heathen gave answers and Prophecies at a
threefooted board or trestle Lib. iiii. Senten. Did. vii cap. ii.
of the Holy see, these be ye Oracles of the Apostolic trestle. But some of
them, even in their own opinion, begone somewhat to qualify this unbridled
madness. It is (say they) to be worshipped with greater reverence:
peradventure not for the greater virtue and profitte that it gives: but
because it is given of the worthier men, and is made in the worthier part of
the body, that is, in the forehed: or because it brings a greater increase of
virtues, although Baptism avail more to forgiveness. But in the first reason
do they not bewraye themselves to be Donatistes, which measure the force of
the Sacrament by the worthiness of the minister. But I will admit, that
Confirmation be called ye worthier by reason of the worthiness of the Bishops
hand. But if a man ask of them, from whense so great prerogative has been
given to Bishops, what reason will they bring beside their own lust? The
Apostles alone used that power, which alone distributed the Holy ghost? Are
the Bishops alone Apostles? Yea, are they Apostles at all? But let us also
grant them that: why do they not by the same argument affirm, that Bishops
alone ought to touch the Sacrament of the blood in the Supper of the Lord:
which they therefore deny to lay men, because the lord gave it to the Apostles
alone? If to the Apostles alone, why do they not conclude: therefore to the
Bishops alone? But in that place they make the Apostles, simple prestes: but
now the gyddynesse of their head carries them an other way, sodeinly to create
them Bishops. Finallye Ananias was no Apostle, Acts. ix.xvii. Did. ix. cap.
Peruenit.
to whom yet Paul was sent, that he should receive his sight, be baptized,
and be filled with the Holy ghost. I will add this also to the heap: If by
the law of God this was the proper office of Bishops, why have they ben so
bold to give it away to common prestes? as we read in a certain epistle of
Gregory.

As for their other reason, how triflyng, fond, and foolish is it, to call
believe me therein, let him now at least believe his own masters. Loc, passing
over the water, and making no account of it, they hyely esteem the only oil
in Baptism. We therefore on the contrary side do say, that in Baptism the
forehed also is dipped in water. In comparison of this, we esteem not your
oil worth one piece of dong, whether it be in Baptism or in confirmation. If
any allege yt it is sold for more: by this adding of price, the goodness (if
any were in it) is corrupted: so much less may they commend a most filthy
deceit by theft. In the third reason they bewray their own ungodliness,
while they prate that in confirmation is given a greater increase of virtues
than in Baptism. By the laying on of hands the Apostles distributed the
visible graces of ye Spirit. In what thing do these men's fat liquor show it
self fruiteful? But away with these qualifiers, that cover one sacrilege with
many sacrileges. It is like the Gordian: which it is better to break in
sonder, than to labor so much in undoing it.

But now when they see themselves destitute of the word of God and Lib. iii. de
bap. contra. Donat. Cap. xv^.
but do they call it a Sacrament? Augustine plainly affirms that it is no
other thing than prayer. Neither let them here bark against me with their
stinking distinctions, that Augustine meante that not of the layeng on of
hands used to confirmation, but which was used to healing or reconciliation.
The book remains and is abroad in the hands of me^. If I wrest it to any
other sense than Augustine himself wrote it, I give them leave after their
ordinary manner to oppress me not only with railing, but also with spitting
at me. For he speaks of the^ that returned from Schism to the unity of the
Chirch. He denies that they neded to be newlye baptized: for he says, that
the layeng on of hands suffices, that by the bond of peace the Lord may
give them the Holy ghost. But for as much as it might seem an absurdity,
that the layeng on of hands should be done of new rather than Baptism: he
shows a difference. For (says he) what other thing is the layeng of hands,
than prayer upon a man? And that this is his meaning, appears by an other
place, where he says: Hand is laid upon heretics amended, for the coupling
of Charity, Lib v Cap. xxiii
which is the greatest gift of the Holy ghost, without which whatsoever
holy things are in mann they a uayle not to salvation.

But I would to God we did keep still ye manner which I have said to
catechizyng, whereby children or they that were nere to the age of discretion
did declare an account of their faith before the Chirch. But it should be
the best manner of Catechizing, if a form were written to that use,
conteinyng and familiarly setting out a sum in a manner of all the articles of
our religion, in which the whole Chirch of the faithful ought without
controversy to agree: that a child being ten years old should offer
himself to the Chirch to declare a confession of his faith, should be
examined of every article, and answer to every one: if he were ignorant of any
thing, or did not understand it he might be taught. So should he, before the
Church witnessing and beholding it, profess the only, true, and pure faith,
wherewith the people of the faithful does with one mind worship the one God.
If this discipline were at this day in force, truly ye slothfulness of some
parents would be whetted, who do carelessly neglect instruction of their
children as a thing nothing belonging to them, which then without open shame
they could not omit: there should be among christian people a greater consent
of faith, and not so great ignorance and rudeness of many: some should not be
so rashly carried away with new and strange doctrines: finally all should have
as it were a certain orderly instruction of christian learning.

Of Penance.
Epi lib. i ep. ii.
to give peace. That this doing might be of greater dignity, and have more
commendation among the people, it was ordained that ye Bishops authority should
always be used for ye mean herein. From hense came yt decree of ye second
council at Carthage: Be it not lawful to a pressed at ye Mass publicly to
reco^cile a penitent. And an other decree of ye counsel at Arausiu^. Let those,
which in time of their penance departout of this life, be admitted to ye
Communion without ye laieng on of hands used in reco^ciling: if they recover of
their sickness let them stand in ye degree of penite^tes, and when ye time is
fully expired, ca. xxxiii.
let them receive of the Bishop ye laie^g on of hands used in reco^ciling.
Again ye decree of the third council at Carthage: Let not the pressed without
the authority of ye Bishop, reco^cile a penitent. All these te^ded to this
end, that ye severity which they would have to be used in ye behalf, should
not with to much lenity grow in decay. Therefore they willed the Bishop to be
judge of it, which was likely that he would be more circu^spect in ye
examination thereof. Howbeit Cyprian in a certain place shows, that not only
the Bishop, but also the whole Clergy laid their hands on him. For thus he
says. At the full time they do penance, then they come to the Communion, and by
the layeng on of hands of the Bishop and the clergy, they receive power to
partake of the Communion. Afterward by process of time it came to this point,
that beside public penance they used this ceremony also in private
absolutions. Decret. 26. que. 6
Hereupon came that distinction in Gratian between public and private
reconciliation. I judge that same old usage of which Cypriane makes mention,
to have been holy and healthful for the Chirch, and I would that it were at
this day restored. As for this later, although I dare not disallow it, or at
least speak more sharpelye against it, yet I think it to be less necessary.
Howsoever it be, yet we se yt the layeng on of hands in penance is a ceremony
ordained of men, not of God, which is to be set among mean things and outward
exercises: and those verily which are not to be despised, but which ought to be
in a lower degree, than those yt are co^me^ded unto us by ye word of the Lord.

But ye Romanistes and ye scholeme^, (which have an ordinary custom to Libr.
4. Sen. di. 22. cap. 2
in suspe^se, uncertain, and confounded and trobled with diversity of opinions.
They say therefore either yt ye outward penance is a Sacrament, and if it be so,
yt it ought to be taken for a sign of ye inward penance, that is, of the
contrition of heart, which shall be ye thing of ye Sacrament: or that they both
together are a Sacrament, not two Sacraments, but one full one. But, that the
outward penance is only the Sacrament: the inward is both the thing and the
Sacrament: and yt the forgiveness of sins is the thing and not the
Sacrament. Let them which keep in remembrance the definition of a Sacrament
which we have above set, examine thereby yt which these me^ call a Sacrament, and
they shall find yt it is not an outward ceremony ordained of the Lord for the
co^firming of our faith. If they cauil yt my definition is not a law which they
need to obey: Libr. 3. que. vet. testam.
let the^ hear Augustine, who^ they feign yt they esteem as most holy visible
Sacraments (says he) were ordained for carnal men's sakes, yt by degrees of
Sacraments they may be conveyed from those things yt are seen with eyes to
those things yt are understood. What like thing do either they themselves
see, or can they show to other in yt which they call the Sacrament of
Penance? The same Augustine says in an other place: It is therefore called a
Sacrament, Sermon de bapt. infant.
because in it one thing is seen, and an other thing is understood. That
which is seen, has a bodily form: yt which is understood, has a spiritual
fruit. Neither do these things in any wise agree with the Sacrament of
penance, such as they feign it, where there is no bodily form yt may represent
a spiritual fruit.

And, to kill these beasts upon their own fighti^g place, if there be any
Sacrament obtain no such thing by such absolution: whereas by their doctrine
the Sacraments of the new law ought to work in deed that which they figure.
This were but to be laughed at. For, as in the Supper, they make a doble
eating, a Sacramental eating which is egally common to good and to evil, and a
spiritual eating which is only propre to ye good: why might they not also feign
ye absolutio^ is received two ways? Yet could I not hitherto understand what
they meant with this their doctrine, which we have already taught how far it
disagreeth from ye truth of God, when we purposely entreated of yt argument.
Here my mind is only to show, ye this dout withsla^deth not, but yt they may
call ye absolutio^ of the Pressed a Sacrament. Lib. iii. que ver. Testam. De bapt.
paruul. Libr. v. de bapt. contra. Donat.
For they might answer by ye mouth of Augustine, that sanctification is
without ye visible Sacrament, and the visible Sacrament without inward
sanctification. Again, yt the Sacraments do work in ye only elect yt which
they figure. Again, that some do putt on Christ so far as to ye partaking of
ye Sacrament, other some to sanctification: ye one, the good and evil egally
do: this other, the good only. Truly they have more than childishly erred and
be blind in ye clear sun, which travailing with great hardness, yet espied
not a thing so plain and open to every man.

Lib. 4. Sen. did. xiiii. cap. i. De peni. disti* i. cap. ii.
This feigned Sacrament they have garnished with a mete commendation, calling it a
second board after shipwrecke: because if a man have by sinning marred the
garment of innocence which he received in Baptism, he may by penance repair
it. But it is the saying of Hierome, Whoes soever it be, it can not be excused
but yt it is utterly wicked, if it be expounded after their meaning. As though
Baptism be blotted out by sin, and is not rather to be called to remembrance
of every sinner, so often as he thinks of the forgiveness of sin, that he
may thereby gather up himself, and recover courage, and strengthen his Faith,
that he shall obtain the forgiveness of sins which is promised him in
Baptism. But that which Hierome has spoken hardly and improperly, that by
penance Baptism is repaired (from which they fall away yt deserve to be
excommunicate from the Chirch) these good expositors draw to their
wickedness. Therefore you shall most fittly speak, if you call Baptism the
Sacrament of penance, sith it is given for a confirmation of grace, and seal
of confidence, to them yt purpose repentance. And least you should think this
to be our devise, Decret. xv. que. i cap. firmissime. Marce. l.iiii. Luke.
iii.iii.
beside this that it agrees with the words of the Scripture, it appears yt
it was in the old Chirch commonly spoken like a most certain principle. For
in the book of Faith to Peter, which is said to be Augustines, it is called the
Sacrament of Faith and of penance. And why flee we to uncertain sayenges? As
though we could require any thing more plain, tha^ that which the Evangelist
recites: that Ihon preached the Baptism of repentance unto forgiveness of
sins?

Of extreme unction as they call it.
The third fained Sacrament is extreme vnctio^, which is not done James.
v.xiiii.
They say that the institution of it is set of James, whose words are these.
Is any sick among you? Let him bring in the Elders of the Chirch, and let them
pray over him, anointing him with oil in the name of the Lord: and the prayer
of Faith shall save the sick man, and the Lord shall raise him by: and if he be
in sins, they shall be forgeuen him. Of the same sort is this anointing, of
which we have above showed that the other layeng on of hands is, namely a
playerlike hypocrisy, whereby without reason and without fruit they would
resemble the Apostles. Marc. vi.xiii.
Marc rehearses that the Apostles at their first sending, according to the
commandment which they have received of the Lord, raised up dead me^, cast
out devils, cleansed leprous me^, healed the sick, and yt in healing of the
sick they used oil. They anointed (says he) many sick me^ with oil, and
they were healed. Hereunto James had respect, when he commanded the Elders to
be called together to anoint the sick man. That under such Ceremonies is
contained no hyer mystery, they shall easily judge which mark how great
liberty the Lord and his Apostles used in these outward things. Ioh. ix.vi.
Math. ix.xxix. Luke xviii xlii. Act. iii.vi. and. v.xvi. and. xix.xii, Psalm.
xlv.viii.
The Lord going about to restore sight to the blind man, made cley of dust and
spittle, some he healed with touching, other some with his word. After the same
manner the Apostles healed some diseases with the word only, some with touching,
other some with anointing. But it is likely yt this anointing was not (as al
other things also were not) causelessly put in ure. I grant: yet not yt it should
be a mean of healing, but only a sign, yt the dullness of the unskillful might
be put in mind from whense so great power proceeded, to this end that they
should not give the praise thereof to the Apostles. And, that the Holy ghost and
his gifts are signified by oil it is a common and usual thing. But that same
grace of healinges is vanished away, like as also the other miracles, which ye
Lord willed to be showed for a time, whereby he might make ye new preaching of
ye Gospel marvelous for ever. Therefore though we grant never so much, yt
anointing was a Sacrament of those powers which were the^ ministered by ye hands
of ye Apostles, it now nothing pertains to us to whom the ministratio^ of
such powers is not committed.

And by what greater reason do they make a Sacrament of this anointing, John.
ix.vii. Act. xx.x.
wherinto at certain ordinary recourses of times sick men may plunge
themselves? That (say they) should be done in vain. Truly no more in vain
than anoyntyng. Why do they not lie along upon dead men, because Paul raised
up a dead child with lyeng upon him? Why is not cley made of spittle and dust,
a Sacrament? But the other were but singular examples: but this is given of
James for a commandment. Uerily James spoke for the same time, when the
Chirch yet still enioied such blessing of God. They affirm in deed yt there is
yet still ye same force in their anointing^ but we find it otherwise by
experience. Let no man now marvel how they have with such boldness mocked
souls, which they know to be senseless and blind when they are spoiled of ye
word of God, yt is, of their life and light: since they are nothing ashamed to
go about to mock ye living and feling senses of ye body. Therefore they make
themselves worthy to be scorned, while they bost yt they are endued with the
grace of healinges. The Lord verily is present with his in all ages, and so often as
need is he helps their sicknesses no less tha^ in old time: but he does not
so utter those manifest powers, nor distributeth miracles by the hands of the
Apostles: because this gift both was but for a time, and also is partly fallen
away by the unthankfulness of men.

Math. iii.xvi. John. i.xxxii.
which make a stinking oil and of no force, to be his power. This is
altogether like as if one would say yt al oil is ye power of ye Holy ghost,
because it is called by ye name in Scripture: that every dove is the Holy
ghost, because he appeared in yt form. But these things, let them look to. So
much as for this present is enough for us, we do most c^rtainly perceive yt
their anointing is no Sacrament: which is neither a Ceremony ordained of
God, nor has any promise. For when we require these two things in a
Sacrament, that it be a ceremony ordained of God, and that it have a promise
of God^ we do there wtal require that ye same Ceremony be given to us, and yt
the promise belong unto us. For no man does affirm ye Circumcision is now a
Sacrament of the Christian Chirch, although it both was an ordinance of God,
and had a promise knitt unto it: because it was neither commanded to us, nor
the promise which was adjoined to it was given to us wi^h the same condition.
That the promise which they proudely bost of in their anointing, is not given
to us, we have evidently showed, and they themselves declare by experience. The
Ceremony ought not to have been used, but of them that were endued with the
grace of healinges, not of these butchers that can more skill of slayeng and
murdering than of healing.

James. v.^iiii
James wylleth that all sick men be anointed: these men infecte with their
fatt liquor, not sick men, but corpses half dead, when the life lies already
laboryng at the top of their lips, or (as they themselves term it) in
extremes. If they have in their Sacrament a present medicine, whereby they may
either ease the sharpness of diseases, or at the least may bring some comfort
to the soul, they are to cruel that do never heal in time. James wills that
the sick man be anointed of the Elders of the Chirch: these men allow no
anointer but the pety sacrificing Pressed. Whereas they expound in James
presbyteros the Elders to be Prestes, and fondly say that the plural number is
there set for comlynesses sake: that is but trifling: as though the Chirches at
that time abounded with swarms of sacrificing Prestes, that they might go in
a long pompous show to carry a pageante of holy oil. When James simply
bids that sick men be anointed, I understand by it none other anointing
but of common oil: and none other is found in marks rehearsal. These men
vouchesaue to have none other oil, but that which is hallowed of the Bishop,
that is to say, warmed with much breathing on it, enchaunted with much
mumbling, and with the knee bowed nine times saluted in this manner: thrice
Hail holy oil: thrice Hayle holy chresme: thrice Hayle holy balm. Out of
whom have they sucked such coniurations? James says: that when the sick man
is anointed with oil, and prayer has been pronounced over him, if he be in
sins they shall be forgeuen him: namely, that the giltinesse being taken away,
they may obtain release of the peine: not meaning that sins are put away
with fat liquor, but that the prayers of the faithful whereby the afflicted
brother is commended to God, shall not be vain. These men do wickedly lie, that
by their holy, that is to say, abominable anointing, sins are forgeuen. Lo
how gayly they shall prevail, when they have been at large suffered to abuse the
testimony of James at their pleasure. And least we should need to travail
long in proof hereof, their own chronicles do discarge us of this hardness.
For they report that Pope Innocentius, which in Augustines time governed ye
Chirch of Rome, ordained that not only Prestes, but also all Christians should
use oil to anoint for their own necessity and others. Author hereof is
Sigebert in his Cronicles.

Of ecclesiastical Orders.
The fourth place in their register has the Sacrament of Order: but Libr. 4.
Sen. did. xxxiiii. cap. 9.
and then we will se whether ye Ceremony which Chirches use in ordering of
ministers, ought to be called a Sacrament at al. They make therefore seven
ecclesiastical Orders or degrees, which they garnish with the name of a
Sacrament. Those be, dorekepers, Reders, Exorcistes, Acoluthes or folowers,
Subdeacons, Deaco^s, Prestes. And vii they say that they be, for the seuenfolde
grace of the Holy ghost, wherewt they ought to be endued yt are promoted unto
them. But it is increased and more largely heaped to them in their promotion.
Now ye number it self is hallowed with a wro^gful expou^ding of Scripture. when
they think yt they have red in Esai vii virtues of ye Holy ghost whereas both in
deed Esaias there rehearses but six, Esa xi.ii. Ezec. i.x. To. i.iiii. and
viii.xv.
and also ye prophet me^t not to co^prehe^d them al in that place: for he is
else where as well called the Spirit of life, of sanctification, of adoption of
the children, as he is in ye place called the Spirit of wisdom, The first is
the opinion of Hue, the other of William of Parise, Isidorus lib vii. Did. 21.
and. disti. 33. cap. Lect. and. cap. Ostiarius.
of understanding, of counsel, of strength, of knowledge, and of the fear of
the Lord. Howbeit some sutteler me^ make not seven orders, but nine, after ye
likeness (as they say) of the Church triu^phing. But among them also there is
strife: because some would have ye shauing of the clergy to be ye first order
of al, and Bishoprike the last: other some excluding shauing altogether, reckon
Archebishoprike among the orders. I sidore otherwise divides them? For he
makes Psalmis^es and Reders to be diverse: he apointeth ye Psalmists for
so^ges, and the Reders to ye reding of ye Scriptures, wherwt the people may be
instructed. And this distinction is kept by ye canons. In so great diversity
what will they have us to follow or flee? Shall we say yt there be seven orders?
So teaceth ye master of ye schole: but ye most illuminate doctors do otherwise
determine. Again they also disagree among themselves. Moreover the most
sacred canons call us an other way. Thus forsooth do men agree, when they
dispute of Godly matters without the word of God.

John. ii.xv.
First (say they) he executed the office of dorekeper, when he did with a whip
made of cords, drive the buyers and sellers out of the temple. He signifies
himself to be a dorekeper, when he says. Ioh. x.vii Luke. iiii xvii. Mar.
xvi. xxxiii. Ioh. viii.xiii. Ioh. iii, iiii. Mac. xxvi xxvi Matthew xxvii.l.
Ephesians. v.ii.
I am the door. He took upon him the office of Reader, when he red Esaias in the
Sinagoge. He did the office of an Exorcist, when touching the tongue and ears of
the deff and dumme man, he restored to him his hearing. He testified himself
to be an Acoluthe or follower in these words, He that follows me, walks not
in darkness. He executed the office of Subdeacon, when being girded with a
linen cloth he washed the disciples feet. He did bear the person of a
Deacon, when he distributed his body and blood in the Supper. He fulfilled the
office of Priest, when he offered himself upon the cross a sacrifice to his
Father. These things can not so be heard without laughing, yt I marvel yt they
were written without laughing, if yet they were me^ that wrote them. But most
notable is their sutteltie wherewith they play ye Philosophers about ye name of
Acoluth, calling him a Ceroferar, a taper bearer with a word (as I think) of
sorcerie, truly such a one as was never heard of in all nations and languages,
whereas Acoluthos in Greek simply signifies a follower. Howbeit if I should
earnestly tarry in confuting these men. I should my self also worthily be
laughed at, they are so trifling and very mockeries.

the title. Behold why they have need to be consecrate by Sacraments, and to
receive the Holy ghost, namely, yt they may do nothing. If they allege for
exercise, that this is the frowardness of times, that they forsake and neglect
their ministeries: let them therwtal confess that there is at this day in the
Chirch not use nor fruit of their holy Orders, which they maruelously advance,
and that their whole Chirch is full of curse: because it suffers tapers and
cruets to be handled of children and profane me^, which none are worthy to
touch but they that are consecrate Acoluthes: and because it commits the
songs to children, which ought not to be heard but of a hallowed mouth. As for
their Exorcistes, to what end do they consecrate them? Acts. xix.xiii.
I hear that the Jews had their Exorcistes: but I se that they were so called
of the exorcismes or coniurations which they used. Of these counterfeit
exorcistes who ever heard it spoken, that they showed any example of their
profession? It is feigned that they have power given them to lay their hands
upon mad men, them that are to be catechized, and me^ possessed with devils:
but they can not persuade the devils that they have such power, because the
devils do not only not yield to their commandments, but also use
commanding authority over them. For a man can scarcely find every tenth of
them, that is not led with an evil Spirit. Therefore whatsoever things they
babble concerning their pery Orders, are patched together of folish and
unsavory lies. Of the old Acoluthes, and Dorekepers, and Reders, we have spoken
in an other place, when we declared the order of the Chirch. Our purpose here
is only to fight against that new found inue^tio^ of the seue^fold Sacrament in
ecclesiastical orders. Of which there is no where any thing red, but among
these foolysh praters the Sorbonistes and Canonistes.

Now let us consider of ye ceremonies which they use about it. First who^soeuer
they receive into their order of soldiars, they do with one common sign enter
them into Clergy. cap Dupl xii quest. i
For they shave them in ye crown, that the crown may betoke^ kingly dignity,
because Clerks ought to be kings, that they may rule themselves and other.
For Peter speaks thus of them, Ye are a chosen kind, i. Pet. ii, ix
a kyngly presthode, a holy nation, a people of purchase. But it was sacrilege
to take to themselves alone that which is given to the whole Chirch, and
proudely to glory of the title which they had taken from the faithful. Lib.
^iii. Senten. Did. xxiiii. cap. Duo sunt.
Peter speaks to ye whole Chirch: these fellows wrest it to a few shaue^
me^: as though it were said to them alone, be ye holy: as though they alone were
purchaced by the blood of Christ: as though they alone were by Christ made a
kingdom and presthode to God. The^ they assign also other resons: the top of
their head is made bare, yt their mind may be declared to be free unto the Lord,
which with open face may behold ye glory of God. Or yt they may be taught yt the
faults of their mouth and their eyes must be cut of. Or ye shauing of their
head is ye putting away of temporal things, and ye heary compass about ye
crown are ye remnantes of goods yt are retained for their suste^ance. Al in
signs: because forsooth the beile of ye temple is not yet cut in so^der.
Therefore being persuaded yt they have gaily discharged their duties, because
they have figured such things by their crown, of ye very things in deed they
perform nothing at al. How long will they mock us with such false colors and
deceites? Libr. 4. Sen. did. 24. ca. 1.
The clergy by shearing of a few hears do signify yt they have cast away ye
abu^da^ce of temporal goods, that they behold the glory of God, that they
have mortified the lust of the ears and eyes: but there is no kind of me^
more ravening, more senslesly dull, more lustful? Why do they not rather truly
perform holiness, than with false and lyeng signs counterfeit a show of it?

Act. xviii.xviii.
that they might be purified: they bewraye their gross ignorance. For it is no
where red of Pricilla: and of Acyla also it is doutful: for that same shearing
may as well be referred to Paul as to Acyla. But, that we may not leave to them
that which they require, that they have an example of Paul: the simpler must
note, that Paul did never sheare his head for any sanctification, i. Cor. ix.x.
but only to serve the weakness of his brethren. I am wont to call such vows
the vows of charity not of godliness: that is to say, not taken in hand for
any service of God, but to bear with the rudeness of the weak: as he
himself says, that he was made a Jew to the Jews. etc. Therefore he did
this, and the same but ones, and for a short time, that he might for a time
fashion himself to the Jews. Number. vi.xviii.
These men, when they will without any use cou^terfait the purifienges of the
Nazarites, what do they else but raise up an other Iewishnesse, when they
wrongfully covet to follow the old Iewishnesse? With the same religiousnesse was
yt decretall Epistle made, Cap. pro hibemus Disti. xxv. i. Cor. xi.iiii.
which, according to the Apostle, forbids clerks yt they should not suffer
their hear to grow, but shere it round like a boowle. As though the Apostle,
when he teaches what is comely for all men, were careful for the round shearing
of the Clergy. Hereby let the reders consider, of what force and worthiness
are those other mysteries that follow, into which there is such an entry.

Austust de oper. monach in fine, Item in Retract.
Whereas at that time none suffered their hear to grow, but nice men, and such
as coueted a smothenesse and trimnesse not mete enough for men: it seemed to be
a point of no good example, if that were permitted to the clergy. Therefore
Clerks were commanded either to sheare their head or to shave it, that they
should not bear any show of womanlyke trimming. But this was so common, ye
certain monks, that they might the more set out their own holiness with
notable and several attire from other men, did let their hear grow long. But
afterward when the fashion turned to wearing of hear, and certain nations
were added to Christia^dome which always used to wear long hear, as France,
Germany, and England: it is likely ye clerks did euerywhere sheare their heds,
least they should seem to covet the gayness of hear. At the last in a
corrupter age, when al old ordinances were either perverted or gone out of kind
into superstition, because they saw no cause in ye shearing of ye clergy (for
they had retained nothing but a folishe cou^terfaiting) they fled to a
mystery, Libr. 4. Senten. disti. 24. ca, 8,
which now they superstitiously thrust in unto us for ye approving of their
Sacrament. The door kepers at their co^secratio^ receive ye keys of ye Chirch,
whereby they may understand yt the keeping of it is committed to the^. The reders
receive ye holy Bible. The exorcistes receive ye forms of exorcismes, which
they should use over mad and them that are to be catechized. The Acolythes
receive the tapers and cruet. Lo these ar the ceremonies, wherein (if God will)
there is so much secret power, that they may be not only signs and tokens, but
also causes of invisible grace. For this they require by their definition, when
they will have them taken among the Sacraments. But to make an end in few
words, I say it is an absurdity that in their schools and canons they make
these lesser orders Sacraments: whereas even by their own confession that
teach this, they were unknown to the primitive Chirch, and devised many
years after. For Sacraments, since they conteyne the promise of God, can not
be ordained of Angels, nor of men, but of God alone, whoes office alone it is
to give promise.

There remain three orders, which they call the greater. Of the Psalm.
Cx.iiii. Heb v.vi et. vii.iii.
without any end, without any successor. He ones offered a sacrifice of
eternal satisfactorie cleansyng, and reconciliation: and now also being
entered into the Sanctuary of heaven, he makes intercession for us. In him we
are all sacrificyng prestes, but to praises and geuyngs of thanks, finally to
offer us and ours to God. It was his singular office alone, with his offryng to
appease God, and to purge sins. When these men take that upon them, what
remains but that their sacrificyng Presthoode is ungodly and full of
sacrilege? Truly they are to wicked, when they dare garnish it with the name
of a Sacrament. As touching the true office of Presthode, which is commended to
us by the mouth of Christ, I willyngly account it in that degree. For therein
is a ceremony, first taken out of the Scriptures, then such a one as Paul
testifies not to be vain nor superfluous, but a faithful Sign of spiritual
grace. i. Timo. iiii.xiiii.
But whereas I have not set it for a third in the number of Sacraments, I did
it because it is not ordinary and common among all the faithful, but a
special rite for one certain office. But since this honor is given to the
Christian ministry, there is no cause therefore why the Popish sacrificers
should be proud. Mathe. xxviii, xix. Mar. xvi.xv. Ioh. xxi.xv.
For Christ commanded distributers of his Gospel and mysteries to be
ordained, not sacrificers to be consecrated. He gave them commandment to
preach the Gospel and to feed the flock, not to offer sacrifices. He promised
them the grace of the Holy ghost, not to make satisfactorye purging of sins,
but rightly to execute and to maintain the government of the Chirch.

John. xx.xxii.
By which Sign he represented the power of the Holy ghost which he gave unto
them. This blowyng these good me^ have retained, and as though they did put
forth ye Holy ghost out at their throat, they whisper over their silly prestes
that they make, Receive the Holy ghost. So leave they nothing which they do not
ouerthwartly counterfeit: I will not say like players (which use their
gesturinges neither without art nor without signification) but like apes,
which counterfeit every thing wantonly and without any choice. We keep (say
they) the example of the Lord. But the Lord did many things which he willed
not to be examples to us. Ioh. xx.xxii. John. xi.xlii. Mat. ix.v John. v.viii.
The Lord said to the disciples, Receive the Holy ghost. He said also to
Lazarus, Lazarus come forth. He said to the man sick of the palsy, Rise and
walk. Why do not they say the same to al dead men and sick of the palsy? He
showed a proof of his divine power, when in blowing upon the Apostles he filled
them with the grace of the Holy ghost. If they go about to do the same thing,
they enuiously counterfeit God, and do in a manner challenge him to strive with
them: but they are far from the effect, and do nothing with this foolish
gesturing but mock Christ. Uerily they be so shameless, that they dare
affirm that they give the Holy ghost. But how true that is, experience
teaches, which cries out that so many as be consecrated prestes are of
horses made asses, of fools made madmen. Neither yet do I strive with them
for that: only I condemn the ceremonye it self, which ought not to have been
drawn to be an example, for as much as it was used of Christ for a singular
sign of one miracle: so far is it of, that the excuse of following his
example ought to defend them.

Lib. 4. Sen. di. 24. ca. 8 et in canon. did xxi. ca. i
than to confess that themselves have devised that which they use without
cause. But in the mean time they consider not, that while they profess them
selves the successors of the sons of Aaron, they are wrongdoers to the
presthode of Christ, which alone was shadowed and figured by all the old
sacrificing presthodes. In him therefore they were all contained and fulfilled,
in him they cessed, as we have sometimes already repeted, and the Epistle to the
Hebrews without help of any gloses testifies. But if they be so much delited
with ye ceremonies of Moses, why do they not hastily take oxen, calves, and
lambs to make facrifices? They have in deed a good part of the old
tabernacle and of ye whole Jewish manner of worshippi^g: but yet this wa^teth in
their religion, that they do not sacrifice calves and oxen. Who can not see,
that this observation of annoynting is much more hurtful than Circumcision,
specially when there is adjoined superstition and Pharisaicall opinion of the
worthiness of the work? For the Jews did set in Circumcision, trust of
righteousness: these men do set in anointing, spiritual graces. Therefore
while they covet to be counterfaiters of the Levites, they are made Apostataes
from Christ, and do putt them selves from the office of Pastors.

This is (if God will) the holy oil ye printeth the mark that can not Exo.
xxx.xxx.
concerning the anointing of the sons of Aaron? But there is also
commandment given, of ye coa^e ye ephod, the hatt, the crown of holiness,
with which Aaron was to be garnished, and of the coats, girdles, and miters,
wherewith the sons of Aaron were to be clothed. There is commandment given
to kill a calfe, and burn the fat of him for incense, to cut rams and
burn them, to sanctify their ears and garments with the blood of an other
ram, and innumerable other observations, which being passed over, I marnell
why the only anointing of oil pleases them. But if they love to be
sprinkled, why are they rather sprinkled with oil than with blood? Forsooth
they go about a witty thing, to make one religion of Christianity,
Iewishnesse, and Paganism, as it were of patches sowed together. Therefore
their anointing stinketh which is without the salt, that is, the word of God.
There remains layeng on of hands, which as I grant in true and lawful
Orderings to be a Sacrament, so I deny yt it has any part in this play, where
they neither obey the commandment of Christ, nor have respect to the end
whereunto the promise ought to lead us. If they will not have the sign denied
them, they must apply it to the thing it self, whereunto it is appointed.

About the order also of Deaconrie I would not strive with them, if he may
subdue to the fear of God those things that perteine to the left side. He
gives him the text of the Gospel, that he may perceive himself to be a
publisher of it. And what belong these things to Deacons? They do even like
as if a man would say that he ordained them Apostles whom he appointed only to
burn frankincense, to trim the Images, to swepe the Chirches, to catch
mise, to drive away dogs. Who could suffer such kind of men to be called
Apostles, and to be compared with ye very Apostles of Christ? Therefore let them
not hereafter lyengly say yt those be Deaco^s, whom they institute only for
their enterludelike plays. Yea and by the very name it self they sufficiently
declare what manner of office they have. For they call them Levites, and will
have their order and beginning referred to ye children of Leui. Which I give
the^ leave to do so that they do not afterward garnish them with ye feathers of
other.



Of Matrimony.
i. Cor. xv xlii:
I will show how wittyly they reason. Paul says, As one star differs
from an other star in brightness, so shall be ye resurrection of ye dead. Lo
here is one Sacrament. Mat. xiii.xxxi. et xxxiii, Esa. ^l.xi Esa. xlii.xiii. i.
These. v.ii. Ioh. xv.i. Ioh. x.xi.
Christ says, The kingdom of heaven is like to a grain of mustardsede. Lo
here is an other. Again, The kingdom of heaven is like unto leaue^. Lo here is
ye third. Esai says, Behold, the lord shall feed his flock as a shepherd. Lo
here is the fowerth. In an other place, The Lord shall go forth as a Giant. Lo
here is the fifth. Finally what end or measure shall there be? There is nothing
but by this mean it shall be a Sacrament. How many parables and similitudes
are in the Scripture, so many Sacraments there shall be. Yea and theft shall be a
Sacrament, because it is written, the day of the Lord is like a thief. Who
can abide these sophisters prating so foolishly? I grant in deed that so often
as we see a vine, Antycira, where grows De^ lebor, a good purgation for
phrentike heads.
it is very good to call to remembrance that which Christ says, I am a vine,
ye be branches, my father is the vinedresser. So often as a shepherde with his
flock comes toward us, it is good also that this come to our mind, I am a
good shepherd, my sheep hear my voice. But if any man add such similitudes to
the number of Sacraments, he is mete to be sent to Antycira.

But they still lay fourth the words of Paul, in which he gives to Ephe.
v.xxix.
he that loves his wife, loves himself. No man ever hated his own flesh,
but nourishes it and cherishes it, even as Christ does the Chirch: because we
are members of his body, of his flesh and of his bones. For this, a man shall
leave his Father and mother, and shall cleave to his wife, and they shall be two
into one flesh. This is a great Sacrament: but I say in Christ and the
Chirch. But so to handle the Scriptures, is to mingle heaven and earth
together. Paul, to show to married men, what singular love they ought to bear
to their wives, sets fourth Christ to them for an example. For as he poured
fourth the bowels of his kindness upon the Chirch which he had espoused to
himself: so ought every man to be affectioned toward his own wife. It follows
after, He that loves his wife, loves himself: as Christ loved the Chirch.
Now, to teach how Christ loved the Chirch as himself, yea how he made
himself one with his spouse ye Chirch, he applies to him those things which
Moses reports that Adam spoke of him self. Gene. ii.xx^^i.
For when Eve was brought into his sight, whom he knew to have been shapen out
of his side: This woman (says he) is a bone of my bones, and flesh of my
flesh. Paul testifies that all this was spiritually fulfilled in Christ and
us, when he says that we are members of his body, of his flesh, and of his
bones, yea and one flesh with him. At length he adds a concludyng Sentence,
This is a great mystery. And least any man should be deceived with the doble
signifyeng of the words, he expresses that he speaks not of the fleshely
conioynyng of man and woman, but of the spiritual marriage of Christ and the
Chirch. And truly it is in deed a great mystery, that Christ suffered a ribbe
to be taken from himself, whereof we might be shapen: that is to say, when he
was strong, he willed to be weak, that we might be strengthened with his
strength: Galat. ^i.xx.
that now we may not our selves live, but he may live in us.

The name of Sacrament deceived them. But was it rightful that chose rather
to put in the word Sacrament, yet in no other sense than Paul had in Greek
called it Mystery. Now let them go and with crieng out rail against the skill
of to^ges, by ignorance whereof they have so long most fowly been blind in an
easy matter, and such as offreth it self to be perceived of every man. But why
do they in this one place so earnestly stick upon this little word Sacrament,
i. Tim. iii ix. Ephesians. i.ix.
and some other times do pass it over unregarded? For also in the first
Epistle to Timothe the Translater has used it, and in the self same Epistle
to the Ephesians: in every place for Mystery. But let this slippyng be
pardoned them: at least the liers ought to have had a good remembrance. Lib.
iiii. Sen. Did. xvii. Cap. iiii. and in Dec. xxvii. quest ii. cap. Cum
Socretas. Gloss cap ^e^ diui. Ibi. Decr. Lib. iiii. Sent. dis. xxxiii cap ii.
et i^ Decre. xxxii. quaest. in. ca Quicquid.
For, when they have ones set out Matrimony with title of a Sacrament,
afterward to call it uncleanness, defyling, and fleshly filthiness, how gyddy
lightness is this? How great an absurdity is it to debar prests from a
Sacrament? If they deny yt they debar them from ye Sacrament, but from the
lust of copulation: they escape not so away from me. For they teach yt the
copulatio^ it self is a part of yt Sacrament, and that by it alone is figured
the uniting that we have with Christ in conformity of nature: because man and
woman are not made one but by carnal copulatio^. Howbeit some of the^ have here
found two Sacraments: the one of God and the soul, in the betrouthed man and
woman: the other of Christ and the Chirch, in the husband and the wife.
Howsoever it be, yet copulatio^ is a Sacrament, from which it was unlawful that
any christian should be debarred: Unless peradventure the Sacraments of
christians do so ill agree, that they can not stand together. There is also an
other absurdity in their doctrines. They affirm that in the Sacrament is
given the grace of the Holy ghost: they teach that copulation is a
Sacrament: and they deny that at copulation the Holy ghost is at any time
present.

Deuter. xviii.vi:
and against the civil government of Moses. That it be not lawful for a man that has put away an adulteress, to mary an other. That spiritual
kinsfolks may not be coupled in marriage. Gossibs.
That there be no marriages celebrate, from Septuagesime to the vtas of Easter,
in three weeks before Midsommer, nor from Aduent to Twelftide. And innumerable
other like, which it were long to rehearse. At length we must crepe out of their
mire, wherein our talk has now tarried longer than I would. Yet I think I
have somewhat profited, that I have partly plucked the lions skynnes from these
asses.

The.xx. Chapter.
Of civil Government.
NOw whereas we have above set two kinds of government in man: and whereas
we have spoken enough of the one kind which consists in the soul or in the
inward man, and has respect to eternal life: this place requires yt we speak
somewhat also of ye other, which pertains only to the civil and outward
righteousness of manners. For the course of this matter seems to be severed
from the spiritual doctrine of faith, which I took in hand to entreat of: yet
the proceeding shall show that I do rightfully join them together, yea that I am
of necessity compelled to do it: specially sith on the one side, mad and
barbarous men do furiously go about to overthrow this order stablished by
God: and on the other side the flatterers of princes, aduauncing their power
without measure, stick not to set it against the empire of God himself.
Unless both these mischeues be met withal, the pureness of faith shall be
lost. Beside that it is no smally for our behofe, to know how lovingly God has
in this behalf provided for mankind, that there may florishe in us a greater
desire of godliness to witness our thankfulness, First, ere we enter into
the thing it self, we must hold fast that distinction which we have above set,
least (as it commonly happens to many) we unwisely mingle these two things
together, which have altogether diverse consideration. For when they hear that
liberty is promised by the Gospel, which acknowlegeth among men no king and
no magistrate, but has regard to Christ alone: they think that they can
take no fruit of their liberty, so long as they see any power to have
preeminence over them. Therefore they think that nothing shall be safe, unless
the whole world be reformed into a new fashion: where may neither be
judgments, nor laws, nor magistrates, nor any such thing which they think
to withstand their liberty. But whosoever can put difference between the body
and the soul, between this present and transitory life, and that life to come
and eternal: he shall not hardlye understand that the spiritual kingdom of
Christ, and the civil government ar things far a sonder. Since therefore that
is a Jewish vanity, to seek and enclose the kingdom of Christ under the
elements of this world: let us rather thinking, as the Scripture plainly
teaches, that it is a spiritual fruit, which is gathered of the benefit of
Christ, remember to keep within the bounds thereof this whole liberty which
is promised and offered us in him. Gala. v.i. i. Cor. vii xxi.
For, what is the cause why the same Apostle which bids us to stand, and not
to be made subject to ye yoke of bondage, in an other place for bids bond
servants to be careful of their state: but because spiritual liberty may
very well agree with civil bondage? Ga. iii.xxviii. Col. iii.xi
In which sense also these his sayenges are to be taken: In the kingdom of God
there is no Jew, nor Grecian, no male nor female, no bondeman nor freeman.
Again, There is no Jew nor Grecian, Circumcision, Uncircu^cision, Barbarian,
Scythian, Bondsman, Freman: but Christ is all in all. Whereby he signifies,
that it makes no matter in what estate thou be among men, nor under the laws
of what nation thou lyuest: forasmuch as in these things consists not the
kingdom of Christ.



be not trobled, yt every man may keep his own safe and vnappeired, that me^
may use their affairs together without hurt, yt honesty and modesty be kept
among them: finally yt among Christians may be a common show of religion, and
among me^ may be ma^like civility. Neither let any man be moved, for yt I do
now refer the care of stablishing of religion to the policy of me^, which I
seem before to have set without ye judgment of me^. For I do no more here, tha^
I did before, give me^ leave after their own will to make laws concerning
religion and the worshipping of God, when I allow the ordinace of policy,
which endeuoreth herunto, yt the true religion which is contained in ye law of
God, be not openly and with public sacrileges freely broken and defiled. But
ye reders being helped by the very plainness of order, shall better understand
what is to be thought of the whole kind of civil government, if we severally
entreat of ye parts thereof. There be three parts of it: ye magistrate,
which is ye governor and keeper of the laws: ye laws, according to which he
governs: the people, which are governed by ye laws, and obey ye magistrate.
Therefore let us first consider of ye office of the Magistrate, whether it be a
lawful vocation and allowed of God, what manner of office he has, and how
great is his power: then with what laws a Christian civil state is to be
ordered: then last of al, what profit of the laws comes to the people, what
reverence is due to the Magistrate.

The Lord has not only testified that the office of magistrates is allowed Ex.
xxii.viii. Psalm, lxxxii.i. and. vi.
he has maruelously commended it unto us. That I may rehearse a few of them.
Whereas whosoever be in place of magistrates are named gods, let no man think
that in that naming is small importance: For thereby is signified that they have
commandment from God, that they are furnished with ye authority of God, and
do altogether bear the person of God, whoes stead they do after a certain
manner supply. This is not my cauillatio^, John x.xxxv.
but ye exposition of Christ. If the Scripture (says he) called them gods to
whom the word of God was given. What is this else, but that God has committed
his business to them, that they should serve in his office, and (as Moses and
Iosaphat said to their judges whom they appointed in every several city of
Judah) that they should sit in judgment, Deu. i.xvi i. Chron. xix.vi.
not for man but for God? To the same purpose makes this that the wisdom of
God affirms by the mouth of Solomon, Pro. viii.xv.
that it is his work, that kings reign, and counselors decree righteous
things, that Princes bear principality, and all the judges of the earth
execute judgment. For this is all one in effect as if it had been said, that it
comes not to pass by the perverseness of men, that the gouernemente of all
things in earth is in the hand of Kings and other Rulers, but by the
providence and holy ordinance of God, to whom it so seemed good to order the
matters of men: forasmuch as he is both present and president among them in
making of laws and in executing vpryghtnesse of iugementes. Which Paul also
plainly teaches, when he reckeneth Gouernementes among the gifts of God, Romans
xii.viii.
which being diversely distributed according to the diversity of grace, ought
to be employed of the servants of Christ to the edification of the Church.
For although he there properly speaks of a Council of grave men, which
in the Primitive Chirch were appointed yt they should have ye rule of ordering
the public discipline (which office in ye Epistle to ye Corynthia^s he calls
Government) yet forasmuch as we se yt the end of civil power comes to ye
same point, ^. Cor. xii xxv.ii.
it is no dout but yt he co^me^deth unto us al kind of just Government. But he
speaks more plainly, where he purposely makes a full discourse of yt matter.
For he both shows yt Power is the ordinance of God, Romans xiii.i.
and yt there are no powers, but they are ordained of God: and yt the Princes
themselves are ye ministers of God, to ye well doers unto praise: to ye evil,
reuengers unto wrath. Herunto may be added also ye examples of holy me^: of
which some have possessed kingdoms, as David, Josias, Ezechias: other some,
Lordshippes, as Joseph and Daniel: other some, Civil gouernements in a free
people, as Moses, Iosue, and ye Judges: whoes offices ye lord has declared yt
he allows. Wherefore none ought now to dout yt the civil power is a vocation
not only holy and lawefull before God, but also the most holy, and the most
honest of all other in the whole life of men.

Psalm. iii.xii.
he does not bid them, giving over their authority, to stake themselves to a
private life, Esa. xlix.xxiii.
but to submit ye power yt they bear to Christ, yt he alone may have
preemine^ce above al. Likewise Esaias, when he promises that kings shall be
fosterfathers of ye Chirch, and Queen's shall be nourses, he does not depose them
from their honor: but rather does by an honorable title make them defe^ders to
the godly worshippers of God: For, yt prophecy pertains to ye coming of
Christ. I do wittingly pass over many testimonies which do each where offer
themselves, and specially in ye psalms wherein al governors have their right
maintained. But most clear of all is the place of Paul, where admonishing
Timothee yt in ye common assembly prayers must be made for kings, i. Tim.
ii.ii.
he by and by adds to a reason, That we may under them lead a quiet life with
al godliness and honesty: in which words he commits the state of ye
Chirch to their defe^se and sauegarding.

Which consideration ought continually to busy ye magistrates themselves, of
God, they must watch with al care, earnestness, and diligence, that they may
represe^t in themselves unto me^ a certain image of ye providence,
preservation, goodness, good will, and righteousness of God. And they must
continually set this before their eyes, Ier. xlviii xi.
yt if al they be accursed, yt do execute in deceit ye work of ye ve^gea^ce
of God, they are much more grievously accursed, yt use themselves deceitfully in
a rightful vocation. Therefore when Moses and Iosaphat minded to exhort their
judges to their duty, they had nothing more effectual to move their minds
withal, tha^ yt which we have before rehearsed, Look what ye do. For ye sit in
judgment not for man but for God: Deute. i.xvi. ii. Chron. xix.vi. Psalm.
lxxxii.i. Esa. iii.xiiii.
namely he which is nere to you in the cause of judgment. Now therefore let ye
fear of ye Lord be upon y^u. Look and be dilligent: because there is no
perverseness with ye lord our God. And in an other place it is said, yt God stood
in ye asse^bly of yt Gods, and sits judge in the midst of the gods, yt
they may be encouraged to their duty when they hear yt they be the deputies of
God, to whom they must one day yield account of the government of their
charge. And worthily this admonition ought to be of great force with them. For
if they make any defaulte, they are not only wrong doers to men who^ they
wickedly vex, but also scaunderers to God himself, whoes holy iugeme^tes they
defile. Again they have also whereupon they may singularly comfort themselves,
when they consider with themselves yt they are not busied in profane affairs
and such as are not fit for the servant of God, but in a most holy office,
namely forasmuch as they are the deputies of God.

As for them yt are not moved with so many testimonies of Scripture i. Samu.
viii.vii.
because they had refused the government of Samuel: why shall it be less
truly said at this day of them yt give themselves leave to rage against al
gouernementes ordained of God? But since the Lord said to the disciples, that
the kings of nations bear rule over them, Luke ixii.xxv.
but that among them it is not so, where he that is the first must be made the
least: by this saying it is forbidden to all Christians that they should not
take kingdoms or gouernementes upon them. O handsome expositors. There rose a
strife among the disciples, which of them excelled other: the Lord, to
suppress this vain ambition, taught them that their ministry is not like
unto kingdoms, in which one man has preeminence above the rest. I beseech
you, what does this co^pariso^ make to the dishonor of kingly dignity? yea
what does it prove at all, but yt the ministry of an Apostle is not the
office of a king? Moreover although among the magistrates themselves there be
diverse forms, yet there is no difference in this behalf, but that we ought
to take them al for the ordinances of God. For Paul also does comprehe^de them
altogether, when he says that there is no power but of God: Romans xi^^ i.
and yt which best liked him of al, is co^me^ded with notable testimony above
ye other, namely the power of one: which because it brings with it a common
bondage of al, (except yt one man, to whoes will it makes all things subject)
in old time could less be allowed of noble and the excellent sort of
natures. Pro. viii.xv. i. Pet. ii.xvii.
But ye Scripture, to mete with their unjust iugeme^tes, expressly by name
affirms, that it is the providence of gods wisdom that kings do reign, and
peculiarly commands the king to be honored.

And truly it were very vain yt it should be disputed of private men,
inequality very well kept in order. Howbeit al these things also are spoken in
vain to them whom the will of the Lord shall satisfy. For if it be his
pleasure, to set kings over kingdoms, Senates or officers over free cities,
whomsoever he makes rulers in the places where we are conversant, it is our
duty to show our selves yelding and obedient unto them.

Now ye office of Magistrates is in this place to be declared by ye way, Iud
xxi.xiv.
that it might flourishe pure and safe under them. But contrariwise the holy
history reckeneth states without governors, among faults, saying that there was
no king in Israel, and yt therefore every man did what pleased himself. Whereby
their folly is confuted, which would have them, neglecting the care of God,
only to apply themselves to be judges of law among men. As though God appointed
governors in his name to decise controversies, and omitted that which was of
much weightier importance, yt he himself should be worshipped according to
the prescribed rule of his law. But a desire to innouate al things without
punishment, moves troblesome me^ to this point, that they wish al reuengers
of ye breach of peace to be taken away. Iere. xxii.ii^.
As for so much as pertains to ye second table, Jeremy warns kings, to
do judgment and righteousness, to deliver ye forceably oppressed from the hand
of ye false accuser, not to grieve ye stranger and widow, not to do wrong, and
not to shed innocent blood. To the same purpose makes ye exhortation which is
red in ye.82. Psalm, yt they should render right to ye poor and nedy, acquit
the poor and nedy, deliver ye poor and nedy from the hand of the oppressor.
And Moses gives charge to the Princes whom he had set in his stead: let them
hear ye cause of their brethren, and judge between a man and his brother and a
stranger, Deu. i.xvi Deu. xvii.xvi.
and not know faces in judgment, let them hear as well the little as the great,
and be not afraied of any man: because it is ye judgment of God. But I speak
not of these things: ye kings should not get to themselves multitudes of
horses, not cast their minds to covetousness, not be lifted up above their
brethren: yt they may be continually busied in studieng upon ye law of the lord
al ye days of their life: ye Judges swerve not to ye one side, nor receive
gifts: because in declaring here ye office of magistrates, my purpose is not
so much to instruct ye magistrates themselves, as to teach other what
Magistrates be, and to what end they are set of God. We se therefore yt they be
ordained defenders and reuengers of innocence, modesty, honesty, and
quietness, whoes only endeavor should be to provide for the common safety and
peace of all men. Of which virtues David professes that he will be an
exemplar, Psalm. xi.
when he shall be aduau^ced to the royal seat: that is, that he will not
consent to any evil doings, but abhor wicked men, sclanderers, and proud
men, and get to himself from echewhere honest and faithful men. But sith they
can not perform this, unless they defend good men from the wrongs of the
evil, let them help the good with succor and defense, let them also be armed
with power whereby they may severely suppress open evil doers and wicked men
by whoes lewdness the common quiet is trobled or vexed. For we thoroughly find
this by experience which Solon said, ye commonweals consist of reward and
punishment, and that when those be taken away, the whole discipline of cities
fails and is dissolved. For the care of equity and justice waxes cold in
the minds of many, unless there be due honor ready for virtue: neither can
the wylfulnesse of wicked men be restrained but by severity and chastisement
of peynes. And these two parts the Prophet comprehends, when he byddeth
Kings and other governors to do judgment and righteousness. Iere. xxi.xii.
and. xxii.iii.
Righteousness is, to take into charge of tuition, to embrace, to defend, to
revenge, to deliver the innocent. Judgment is, to withstand the boldness of
wicked men, to repress their violence, to punish their offenses.

Exo. xx.xiii. Deu. v.xvii. Mat. v.xxi. Esa. xi.ix. and ^xv.xxv.
and the Prophet prophecieth of the holy mount of God, that is, the Church,
that in it they shall not afflict nor hurt; how many magistrates be together
both godly and blood sheders? But if we understand, that the Magistrate in
executing of punishments, does nothing of himself, but executes the very
self iugementes of God, we shall be nothing combred with this dout. The law
of the Lord forbids to kill: least manslaughter should be unpunished, the
law maker himself gives to the ministers the swerd in their hand, which
they should draw fourth against all mansleyers. To aflict and to hurt, is not
the doing of the godly: but this is not to hurt, nor to afflict, by the Lords
commandment to revenge the afflictions of the godly. I would to God that this
were always present before our minds, that nothing is here done by the
rashenesse of man, but al things by the authority of God yt commands, Romans
xiii iiii.
which going before us, we never swerve out of ye right way. Unless parhappes
there be a bridle put upon the righteousness of God, that it may not punish
wicked doings. But if it be not lawful to appoint any law to it, why shall we
cauil against the ministers of it? They bear not the sweard in vain, says
Paul: for they be the ministers of God to wrath, reuengers to evil doers.
Therefore if Princes and other rulers know that nothing shall be more acceptable
to God than their obedience, let them apply this ministry, if they desire to
show their godliness, righteousness, and vncorruptnesse allowable to God.
With this affection was Moses led, when knowing himself appointed by the power
of the Lord to be the deliverer of his people, he laid his hands upon the
Egyptia^. Again, when by slayeng of three thousand men in one day, Ex.
ii.xii. Act. vii.xxviii. Ex. xxxii.xxvii. i. Ki. xi.v.
he took vengeance of the sacrilege of the people. David also, when nigh to the
end of his life he gave commandment to Salomo^ his son to slay Ioab and
Semei. Whereupon he also rehearses this among the virtues of a king, to slay
the wicked of the land, that al workers of wickedness, may be driven out of
the city of God. To which purpose also pertains the praise that is given to
Solomon, Thou have loved righteousness and have hated wickedness. How does
that mylde and ge^^le nature of Moses burn out into so great cruelty, that
being sprinkled and embrued with the blood of his brethren, he runs
throughout the ca^pe to new slaughters? How does David, a man of so great
gentleness in all his life, among his last breathinges make that bloody
testamente, yt his son should not bring the hoare heat of Ioab and Demet in
peace to the grave? But they both when they executed the vengeance committed to
them of God, so sanctified with cruel dealing their hands which they had
defiled with sparing. It is an abomination with kings, says Solomon, Pro.
xvi.xii. Pro. xx.viii. Pro. xx.xxvi. Pro. xxv.iiii. Pro. xvii xv. Pro. xvii.xi.
Pro. xiiii.xxiiii.
to do iniquity, because his throne is stablished in righteousness. Again,
The king which sits in the throne of judgment, spredeth his eyes upon every
evil man. Again, A wise king scatters the wicked and turns them upon the
whele. Again, Take away the dross from the silver, and there shall come fourth
a vessel to the melter: take away the wicked man from the sight of the king,
and his throne shall be fast set in righteousness. Again, He that justifies
the wicked, and he that condemns the righteous, both are abomination to the
Lord. Again, A rebellious man purchaceth evil to himself, and a cruel
messenger is sent unto him. Again, whosoever says to the wicked man, thou art
righteous, him peoples and nations do curse. Now if their true righteousness
be, with drawn swerd to pursue gylty and wicked men: let them put up their
sword, and hold their hands pure from blood, while in the mean time
desperate men do range with murders and slaughters: the^ they shall make
themselves gilti of most great wickedness, so much less shall they get thereby
ye praise of goodness and righteousness. Only let there be no precise and
cruel rigorousnesse, and that judgment seat which may worthily be called the
rock of accused men. For I am not he that either favor extreme cruelty, or
do think that ryghteous judgment can be pronounced, but while clementie the
best and surest cou^seller of kings, as Salomo^ affirms, ye preserver of ye
kings throne is assistent, which a certain man in old time truly said to be
the principal gift of Princes. Yet a magistrate must take heed to both, that he
do neither with rigorousnesse of mind wound rather than heal, or by
superstitious affectation of clementie fall into a most cruel gentleness, if
with soft and loose tenderness he be dissolute to the destruction of many me^.
For this was in old time not without cause commonly spoken under the empire of
Nerua, yt it is in deed evil to live under a prince under whom nothing is
lawful, but much worse under whom al things are lawful.

But since so^time kings and peoples must of necessity take swerd in hand to
execute such public ve^gea^ce, by this reason we may also judge yt the they may
keep down ye seditious stirs of unquiet me^, whereby they may help the
forceably oppressed, whereby they may punish evil doings* can they at fitter
season utter it, tha^ to suppress his rage which trobleth both privately the
rest of every man, and the common quiet of al men, which seditiously makes
vprores, which commits violent oppressions and heinous evil doings? If they
ought to be preseruers and defenders of the laws, they must also overthrow ye
enterprises of al them by whoes wicked doing the discipline of laws is
corrupted. Yea if they worthyly punish those thieves whoes injuries have
extended only to a few: shall they suffer a whole contree to be without
punishment vexed and wasted with robberies? For it makes no difference whether
he be a king or one of the basest of the commonaltie, that inuadeth an others
contree into which he has no right, and spoileth it like an enemy: all are
alike to be taken and punished for robbers. This therefore both natural equity,
and the rule of duty teaches that Princes are armed not only to restrain
private duties with indicial punishments, but also to defend with war the
dominions committed to their charge, if at any time they be enuielike assailed.
And such wars the Holy ghost by many testimonies of Scripture declares to
be lawful.

Augu. epist. v. ad. Mar
he would rather have said this to soldiars when they asked counsel of
salvation, that they should cast away their weapons, and utterly withdraw
themselves from the war. But it was said to them: strike no man, Luke.
iii.xvii.
do no man wrong, let your wages suffice you. Whom he taught that their wages
ought to suffice them, he did verily not forbid them to be warriers. But all
magistrates ought here to take great head, that they nothing at all follow
their own desires: but rather, if they must punish, let them not be born away
with a hedlong angrinesse, let the^ not be violently carried with hatred, let
them not broile with unappeasable rigor, yea let them (as Augustine says) pity
common nature in him in whom they punish his private fault. Or if they must
put on armure against ye enemy, that is, the armed robber, let them not
lightly seek occasion thereof, nor take it being offered unless they be driven
to it by extreme necessity. For if we ought to perform much more than that
heathen man required, which would have war to seem a seking of peace: truly
we ought first to attempt all things ere we ought to try the matter by
war. Cicero of (...).
Finally in both kinds let them not suffer themselves to be carried with any
private affection, but be led only with common feling. Otherwise they do very
ill abuse their power, which is given them, not for their own commodity, but
for others benefit and ministry. Moreover of the same rightful rule of making
war hangs the order both of garrisons, and leagues, and other civil
fortifications. Garrisons I call those that are placed in towns to defend the
borders of the comree: Leagues, which are made with Princes adjoining for this
couenante that if any troble happen in their lands they may mutually help
them, and join their forces in common together to suppress the common enemies
of mankind: Civil fortifications, whoes use is in the art of war.

This also I will last of al add, that tributes and taxes are ye lawful
Ezechiel. x^viii.xxi.
Where although he paint out the spiritual kingdom of Christ, yet he fetches
the exa^plar of his similitude from the lawful kingdom of men. But yet so,
that Princes again on their behalues should remember, that their treasure
chambers are not so much their own private cofers, To. xiii.vi
as the treasuries of the whole people (for so Paul testifies) which they may
not without manifest wrong prodigally wast or spoil: or rather that it is the
very blood of the people, which not to spare, is most cruel unnaturalness:
and let them think, that their impositions, and subsidies, and other kinds of
tributes, ar nothing but the supportes of public necessity, wherewyth to weary
the poor communaltie without cause, is tyrannical extortion. These things
do not encourage Princes to wasteful expense and riot, (as verily there is no
need to add a fyerbrand to their lusts that are of themselves to much already
kyndled) but sithe it much behooves that they should with pure conscience
before God be bold to do all that they are bold to do, least with wicked
boldness come into despising of God, they must be taught how much is lawful
for them. Neither is this doctrine superfluous for private men, that they
should not rashly and stubbornly give themselves leave to grudge at any
expenses of Princes, although they excede common and civil measure.

Next to the magistrate in civil states are laws, the most strong many do
herein verillously err. For there be some that deny that a common weal is
well ordered, which neglectyng the civil laws of Moses is governed by the
common laws of nations. How dangerous and troublesome this sentence is, let
other men consider, it shall be enough for me to have showed that it is false
and foolish. That common division is to be kept, which divides the whole law
of God published into moral, ceremonial, and judicial laws: and all the
parts are to be severally considered, that we may know what of them
perteyneth to us, and what not. Neither in the mean time let any man be
combred with this dout, that judicials and ceremonials also perteyne to the
moral laws. For although the old writers which have taught this division,
were not ignorant that these two later parts had their use about manners, yet
because they might be changed and abrogate, the morals remaining safe, they did
not call them morals. They called that first part peculiarly by that name,
without which can not stand the true holiness of manners, and the
unchangeable rule of living rightly.

Gala. iiii.iiii.
that he himself should be worshipped of us all, and that we should mutually
love one an other. The Ceremonial law was the schooling of the Jews,
wherewith it pleased the Lord to exercise the certain childhode of that people,
till that time of fulness come, wherein he would to the full manifestly show
his wisdom to the earth, and deliver the truth of those things which then
were shadowed with figures. The judicial law given to them for an order of
civil state, gave certain rules of equity and righteousness, by which they
might behave them selves harmlessely and quietly together. And as that exercise
of ceremonies proprely perteyned in deed to the doctrine of godliness (namely
which kept the Chirch of the Jews in the worship and religion of God) yet it
might be distinguished from godliness it self: so this form of judicial
orders (although it tended to no other end, but how the self same charity
might best be kept which is commanded by the eternal law of God) yet had a
certain thing differyng from the very commandment of loving. As therefore
the Ceremonies might be abrogate, godliness remaynyng safe and undestroyed:
so these judicial ordinances also being taken away, the perpetual duties and
commandments of charity may continue. If this be true, verily there is
liberty left to every nation to make such laws as they shall forsee to be
profitable for them: which yet must be framed after that perpetual rule of
charity, that they may in deed vary in form, but have the same reason. For I
think that those barbarous and savage laws, as were those that gave honor to
thieves, that allowed common copulations, and other both much more filthy and
more against reason, are not to be taken for laws: forasmuch as they are not
only against all righteousness, but also against natural gentylnesse and
kyndnesse of men.

This which I have said shall be plain, if in all laws we behold these two
things as we ought, the making and the equity of the law, upon the reason
whereof the making it self is founded and stays. Equity, because it is
natural, can be but one of all laws: and therefore one law, according to the
kind of matter, ought to be the propounded end to all laws. As for makyngs
of Laws, because they have certain circumstances upon which they partly hang,
if so that they tend all together to one mark of equity, though they be
diverse it makes no matter. Now sith it is certain that the law of God,
which we call moral is nothing else but a testimony of the natural law, and
of that conscience which is engraven of God in the minds of men, the whole
rule of this equity whereof we now speak is set forth therein. Therefore it
alone also must be both the mark and rule and end of all laws. Whatsoever
laws shall be framed after that rule, directed to that mark, and limited in
that end, there is no cause why we should disalowe them, howsoever they
otherwise differ from the Iewishe law or one from an other. The law of God
forbids to steal. What pain was appointed for theftes in the civil state
of the Jews, Exo. xxii.i.
is to be seen in Exodus. The most ancient laws of other nations punished
theft with recompense of double: the laws that followed afterward, made
difference between manifest theft and no manifest. Some proceeded to
banishemente, some to whippyng, some at last to the punishmente of death. Deu.
xix.xviii.
False witness was among the Jews punished with recompense of egall pain, in
some places only with great shame, in some places with hangyng, in other some
with the Cross. Manslaughter all laws universally do revenge with blood, yet
with diverse kinds of death. Against adulterers in some places were ordained
seuerer peynes, in some places lighter. Yet we see how with such diversity
all tend to the same end. For with one mouth they all together pronounce
punishment against all the offenses which have been condemned by the eternal
law of God, as manslaughters, theftes, adultery, false witnessings: but in the
manner of punishment they agree not. Neither is the same needful, nor yet
expedient. There is some contree, which unless it show rigor with horrible
examples against mansleyers, should immediately be destroyed with murders and
robberies. There is some time that requires the sharpness of peynes to be
increased. If there arise any trouble in a common weal, the evils that are
wont to grow thereof must be amended with new ordinances. In time of war
all humanity would in the noise of armure fall away, unless there were cast
into men an unwonted fear of punishementes. In barennesse, in pestilence,
unless greater severity be used, all things will come to ruin. Some nation
is more bent to some certain vice, unless it be most sharply suppressed. How
malicious and envious shall he be against the public profit, that shall be
offended with such diversity which is most fit to hold fast the obseruyng
of the law of God? For, that which some say, that the Law of God given by
Moses is dishonored, when it being abrogate, new are preferred above it, is
most vain. For neither are other preferred above it, when they are more
allowed, not in simple comparison, but in respect of the estate of the times,
place, and nation: neither is that abrogate, which was never made for us. For
the LORD gave not that law by the hand of Moses, which should be published
into all nations, and florishe every where: but when he had received the nation
of the Jews into his faith, defense, and protection, he willed to be a
lawemaker peculiarly to them, and like a wise lawmaker, he had in making of
his laws a certain singular consideration of them.

^o. xiiii.iiii.
that he is ye minister of God to us for good: we thereby understand, that he
is so ordained of God, that we being defended by his hand and succors against
the maliciousness and injuries of mischeuous men, may live a quiet and
assured life. If he be in vain given us of the Lord for defense, unless it
be lawful for us to use such benefit: it sufficiently appears that he may
also without ungodliness be called upon and sued unto. But here I must have
to do with two kinds of men. For there be many men that boil with so great
rage of quarellyng at the law, that they never have quiet with themselves
unless they have strife with other. And their controversies they exercise with
deadly sharpness of hatred, and with mad gredinesse to revenge and hurt, and
do pursue them with unappeasable stiffenesse even to the very destruction of
their adversary. In the mean time, that they may not be thought to do any
thing but rightefully, they defend such perverseness with color of law. But
though it be granted thee to go to law with thy brother, yet thou may not
by and by hate him, not be carried against him with furious desire to hurt
him, not stubbornely to pursue him.

if the matter which is in controversy were already concluded and ended by
composition. Some man will here peradventure say, that such moderation is so
never used in going to law that it should be like a miracle if any such were
found. I grant in deed, as the manners of these times be, that there is
seldom seen an example of a good contender in law, yet the thing it self
being defiled with addition of no euel, ceasseth not to be good and pure. But
when we hear that the help of ye Magistrate is a holy gift of God: we must so
much the more diligently take heed, that it be not defiled by our fault.

As for them that precisely condemn all contendings at law, let Act. xxii.i.
et. xxiiii xii. and. xxv.x.
unless peradventure they will accuse Paul of wicked doing, which did both
put away from himself the sclanders of his accusers with declaryng also their
deceit and maliciousness, and in judgment claimed for himself the
prerogative of the city of Rome, and when need was he appelled from an
unrighteous governor to the Emperors judgment seat. Number. xix xviii. Math.
v.xxxix. Deuter. xixii.xxxv. Romans xii.xix.
Neither withstandeth it, that all Christians are forbidden to desire revenge,
which we also do drive far away from Christian judgment seats. For, if the
contention be about a common case, he goes not the right way that does not
with innocent simplicity, commit his cause to the judge as to a common
defender, thynking nothing less than to render mutual recompense of evil,
which is the affection of revenge: or if any matter of life and death, or any
great criminal action be commenced, we require that the accuser be such a
one, as comes into the court being taken with no boylyng heat of revenge,
and touched with no displeasure of private injury, but only having in mind to
withstand the enterprises of a mischeuous manne, that they may not hurt the
common weal. But if thou take away a reuengyng mind, there is no offense done
against that commandment whereby revenge is forbidden to Christians. But they
are not only for bidden to desire revenge, but they are also commanded to wayt
for the hand of the Lord, which promises that he will be a present revenger
for the oppressed and aflicted: but they do prevent all revenge of the
heaue^lye defendor, which require help at the Magistrates hand either for
themselves or other. Romans xiii iiii.
Not so. For we must think that the Magistrates revenge is not the revenge of
man but of God, which (as Paul says) he exte^deth and exercises by the
ministry of man for our good.

And no more do we disagree with the words of Christ, by which he Math.
v.xxxix.
and commands to turn the right cheke to him that has given a blow on
the left, and to suffer him to take away thy cloak that takes away thy coat.
He wills in deed there that the minds of his should so much abhor from
desire of recompensing like for like, that they should sooner suffer doble
injury to be done to themselves, than desire to reacquite it: from which
patience neither do we also lead them away. For Christians truly ought to
be a kind of men made to bear reproaches and injuries, open to the malice,
deceites, and mockages of noughty men: and not that only, but also they must
be bearers of al these euilles, that is to say so framed with all their hearts,
that having received one displeasure they make themselves ready for an other,
promysyng to them selves nothing in their whole life but the bearing of a
continual Cross. In the mean time also they must do good to them that do
them wrong, and wyshe well to those that curse them, Romans xli.xxi. Math.
v.xxxix.
and (which is their only victory) strive to overcome evil with good. Being
so minded they will not seek eye for eye, tooth for tooth, as the Pharisees
taught their disciples to desire revenge, but (as we are taught of Christ) they
will so suffer their body to be mangled, and their goods to be maliciously
taken from them, that they will forgive and of their own accord pardon those
euels so soon as they are done to them. Yet this evenness and moderation of
minds shall not withstand, but that the frendshyp toward their ennemies
remaining safe, they may use the help of the magistrate to the preseruyng of
their goods, or for zele of public commodity may sue a guilty and pestilent
man to be punished, whom they know that he can not be amended but by death. For
Augustine truly expounds that all these commandments tend to this end,
Epist. 5. ad Marcell.
that a righteous and godly man should be ready to bear patiently the malice
of them whom he seeks to have made good men, that rather the number of the
good may increase, not that he should with like malice add himself also to
the number of the evil: then, that they more perteyne to the preparation of
the heart, which is inwardely, than to the work which is done openly: that in
secret may be kept patience of mind with goood will, but openly that may be
done which we see may be profitable to them to whom we ought to bear good
will.

i. Cor. vi.vi.
is also false. It may easily be perceived by his words, that there was an
immeasurable rage of striving at law in the Chirch of the Corynthians: so
far forth that they did make the gospel of Christ and the whole religion
which they professed, open to the cauillations and evil speaking of the
wicked. This is the first thing that Paul blames in them, that by their
intemperance of contentio^s they brought the Gospel in sclander among the
unbelievers. And then this point also, that in such sort they striued among
themselves brethren with brethren. For they were so far from bearyng of
wrongs, that they gredily gaped one for an others goods, provoked one an
other, and being unprovoked did hurt. Therefore he inueyeth against that rage
of contendyng, and not simply against all controversies. But he pronou^ceth
that it is a fault or a weakness, that they did not rather suffer loss of
their goods than to travail even to contentions for the preseruyng of them:
namely when they were so easily moved with every damage, and for most small
causes did run to the court of law and to controversies, he says that this
is a proof that they were of a mind to ready to anger and not well framed to
patience. Christians verily ought to do this, that they had always rather to
yield of their own right than to go to law, from whens they can scarcely get
out again but with a mind to much moved and kindled to hatred of their
brother. But when a man sees that without loss of charity he may defend his
own, the loss whereof should be a sore hindrance unto him: if he do so he
offends nothing against this saying of Paul. Finally (as we have taught in
the beginning) charity shall give every man best counsel, without which
whatsoever controversies are taken in hand, and beyond which whatsoever do
proceed, we hold it out of controversy that they be unjust and wicked.

The first duty of subjects toward their magistrates is, to think i. Pet.
ii.xvii. Prouer. xxiiii.xxi.
But Peter requires somewhat more of us, when he commands that the king be
honored: and Solomon, when he commands God and the king to be feared. For
Peter under the word of Honoryng contains a sincere and well demyng
estimation: and Solomon ioynyng the king with God, shows that he is full of a
certain holy reverence and dignity. This is also a notable commendation in
Paul, that we obey not only for wrath but for conscience. Romans xiii v.
Whereby he means that subjects ought to be led not only with fear of
princes and rulers to be holden in their subjection (as they are wont to yield
to their armed enemy, which see that vengeance shall redily be taken upon them
if they resist) but because the obediences that are showed to them are showed
to God himself, forasmuch as their power is of God. I speak not of the men,
as if the visor of dignity did cover foolishenesse, or sluggishnesse, or
cruelties, or wicked manners and full of mischeuous doing: but I say that the
degree it self is worthy of honor and reverence: that whosoever be rulers may
be esteemed with us, and have reverence, in respect of their being rulers.

Of this then also follows an other thing: that with minds bente Romans xiii i.
Tit. xxxi. i. Pet. ii.xiii.
For he that resists the power, resists the ordinance of God. The same
Paul writes to Titus: Warn them yt they be subject to rulers and powers,
that they obey the Magistrates, that they be ready to every good work. And
Peter says, Be ye subject to every human creature (or rather as I translate
it, Ordinance) for the Lords sake, either to the king as most excellent, or
to the rulers that are sent by him, to the punishment in deed of evil dooers,
but to the praise of well doers. Moreover that they should testify that they
do not feign subjection, but are sincerely and heartily subject, Paul adds
that they should commend to God the safety and prosperity of them under whom
they live. i. Tim. ii.i.
I exhort (says he) that there be made prayers, besechynges, intercessions,
thankesgeuynges for all men, for Kings, and for all that be set in
superiority, that we may live a peasable and quiet life with all godliness
and honesty. Neither let any man here deceive himself. For sith the
magistrate can not be resisted, but that God himself must also be resisted:
although it may be thought that an unarmed magistrate may freely be despised,
yet God is armed which will strongly take vengeance on the dispisyng of
himself. Moreover under this obedience I contemn moderation, which private
men ought to bind themselves to keep in cases touching the public state, that
they do not of their own head entermedle in public businesses, or rashely
break into the office of the Magistrate, and enterprise nothing publicly. If
any thing shall in a public ordinance be behouefull to be amended, let not
themselves raise vprores, nor put their hands to the doing of it, which they
all ought to have fast bound in this behalf: but let them commit it to the
judgment of the magistrate, whose hand alone is here in at liberty. I mean,
that they presume to do nothing vnco^maunded. For when the commandment of the
ruler is adjoined, then are they also furnished with public authority. For as
they are wont to call the cou^sellers of a king, his ears and eyes: so not
vnfittly a man may call them the hands of the prince, whom by his
commandment he sets in authority for the doing of things.

Now forasmuch as we have hitherto described a magistrate such

up by him to punish the wickedness* of the people: that all egally have that
majesty wherewith he has furnished a lawful power. I will proceed no further,
till I have added some certain testimonies or that point. Job. 14.^^ Ose.
xxiii. ii. Esa. 3.4. and 10.5. De. 28.29
Yet we need not much to labor to prove that a wicked King is the wrath of God
upon the earth, for as much as I think that no man will say the contrary, and
otherwise there should be no more said of a King than of a common robber that
violently takes away thy goods, and of an adoulterer that defiles thy bed, of
a murderer that seeks to kill thee, whereas the Scripture reckeneth all such
calamities among the curses of God. But let us rather tarry upon proving that,
which does not so easily settle in the minds of men: that in a most noughty
man, and most unworthy of al honor, if so that he have the public power in
possession, remains that noble and divine power which the Lord has by his
word given to the ministers of his righteousness and judgment: and therefore
that he ought of his subjects to be had in as great reverence and estimation,
so much as pertains to public obedience, as they would have the best King if
he were given them.

First I would have ye Reders to perceive and diligently mark that Dan. ^.^^
he casts away and makes Kings. Again: That ye living may know that the
Hiest is mighty in the kingdom of men, and he shall give it to who^ he will.
With which manner of sentences whereas the whole Scripture abounds, yet that
same prophecy of Daniel specially swarmeth full. Now what manner of King was
Nabuchadonezar, he that conquered Jerusalem, it is sufficiently known, namely
a strong inuader and destroyer of other. Ero. 29.19
Yet in Ezechiel the lord affirms that he gave him the land of Egypt for the
service yt he had done to him in wastyng it. Da^. 2.37.
And Daniell said to him: Thou King art the King of Kings, to whom the King
of heavens has given a mighty, and strong, and glorious kingdom: to thee, I
say, he has given it, and all the lands where dwell the children of men, the
beasts of the wood, and fowls of the air: he has delivered them into thy
hand, and has made thee to bear rule over them. Again he said to his son
Belsasar: The hyeste God has given to Nabuchadonezar thy father kingdom and
royalty, Dan. 5.1^
honor and glory: and by reason of the royalty that he gave him all peoples,
tribes, and languages were trembling and fearful at his sight. When we hear
that a King is ordained of GOD, let us thereof call to remembrance those
heavenly warnynges concerning the honoring and fearing of a King: then we shall
not dout to account a most wicked tyrant in the same place wherein the Lord
has vouchesaued to set him. Samuel, when he gave warnyng to the people of
Israel, what manner of things they should suffer at the hands of their Kings,
said: 1. Samu, 8.11.
This shall be the right of the king that shall reign over you: he shall take
your sons and put them to his chariot, to make them his horsemen, and to plow
his land, and reap his croppe, and to make instruments of war. He shall take
your daughters, that they may be his dressers of ointmentes, his cooks and
bakers. Your lands, your vineyardes, and your best Olive plattes he shall take
away and give to his bond servants. He shall take tithes of your seeds and
vineyardes, and shall give them to his eunuchs and bond servants. He shall
take away your bond men, your bond women and your asses, and set them to his
work. Yea and he shall take tithes of your flocks: and ye shall be his bond
servants. Uerily Kings should not have done this of right, whom the Law did
very well instruct to al continence: but it was called a right over the people
which it behooved them of necessity to obey, and they might not resist was if
Samuel had said, The wilfulness of Kings shall run to such
licenciousnesse, which it shall not be your part to resist, to whom this only
thing shall be left, to obey their commandments and harke^ to their word.

Ier. xxvii v.
says the Lord, and the living creatures that are on the ouerface of the
earth in my great strength and stretched out arm, and I will deliver it to him
whom it pleases in mine eyes. And now therefore I have given all these lands
into the hand of Nabuchadnezar my seruante, and all nations and great Kings
shall serve him, till the time shall come of that land. And it shall be as a
nation and a kingdom that has not served the King of Babell, I will visit that
nation in sword, famine, and pestilence. Wherefore, serve ye the King of
Babell and live. We se with how great obedience the Lord wylled that cruel
and proud tyrant to be honored, for no other reason but because he possessed
the kingdom. And the same was by the heavenly decree, that he was set in the
throne of the kingdom, and taken up into kingly majesty, which it was
unlawful to violate. If we have this continually before our minds and eyes,
that even the worst Kings are ordained by the same decree by which the
authority of Kings is stablyshed: these seditious thoughts shall never come
into our mind, that a King is to be handeled according to his deseruinges, and
that it is not mete that we should show our selves subjects to him that
does not on his behalf show himself a King to us.

In vain shall any man object that this was a peculiar commandment to the
Israelites. For it is to be noted with what reason the Lord confirms it. I
have given (says he) the kingdom to Nabuchadnezar. Wherefore serve ye him
and live. To whom soever therefore it shall be certain that the kingdom is
given, let us not dout that he is to be obeyed. And so sone as the Lord
aduaunceth any man to the royal estate, he therein declares his will to us
that he will have him reign. R^oue. xxviii.ii. Job. xii.xviii. I^re. xxix vii.
For thereof are general testimonies of the Scripture. Salomo^ in the xxviii.
Chapter. Many Princes are because of the wickedness of the people. Again Job
in the xii. chapter. He takes away subjection from Kings, and girdeth them
again with the girdle. But this being confessed, there remains nothing but
that we must serve and live. There is also in Jeremy the Prophet an other
commandment of the Lord, wherein he commands his people to seek the peace
of Babylon, whether they had been led away captive, and to pray to him for it,
because in the peace of it should be their peace. Behold the Israelites being
spoiled of al their goods, plucked out of their houses, led away into exile,
and cast into miserable bondage, are commanded to pray for the safety of the
Conqueror: not as in other places we are commanded to pray for our
persecuters: but that ye kingdom may be preserved to himself and quiet, that
they themselves may also live prosperously under him. So David being already
appointed King by the ordinance of God, and anointed with his holy oil, when
he was without any his deserving unworthily persecuted of Saul, yet the head of
him that laid wait for his life, he esteemed holy, which the Lord had hallowed
with the honor of kingdom. 1. (...). xxiiii.vii.
Far be it from me (said he) that I should before the Lord do this thing to
my Lord the anointed of the Lord, that I should lay my hand upon him,
because he is the anointed of the Lord. 1. Samu. xxvi.ix
Again, My soul has spared thee, and I have said, I will not lay my hand
upon my Lord, because he is the anointed of the Lord. Again, Who shall lay
his hand upon the anointed of the Lord, and shall be innocent? So sure as the
Lord lives, unless the Lord strike him, or his day be come that he dye, or he
go down into battle: far be it from me that I should lay my hand upon the
anointed of ye Lord.

Finally we owe this affection of reverence yea and devotion to all Ephesians. vi.i
Ephe. v.xxvi.
Let parents and husbands depart from their duty: let parents show
themselves so hard and vnpleasable to their children, whom they are forbidden
to provoke to anger, that with their peevishness they do vnmeasurably weary
them: let the husbands most despitefully use their wives, whom they are
commanded to love, 1. Pet. iii.vii.
and to spare them as weak vessels: shall yet therefore either children be
less obedient to their parents or wives to their husbands? But they are
subject both to evil parents and husbands and such as do not their duty.
Yea, whereas all ought rather to endeavor themselves not to look behind them
to the bag banging at their back, that is, not to enquire one of an others
duties, but every man set before him that which is his own duty: this ought
chefely to have place among those that are under the power of other. Wherefore
if we be unmercifully tormented of a cruel Prince, if we be rauenously spoiled
of a covetous or ryotous Prince, if we be neglected of a slothful Prince,
Dani. ix.vii.
finally if we be vexed for godlinesses sake of a wicked and ungodly Prince:
let us first call to mind the remembrance of our sins, which undoubtedly are
chastised with such scourges of the Lord. Thereby humility shall bridle our
impatience. Let us the^ also call to mind this thought, yt it pertains not
to us to remedy such euells* but this only is left for us, Pro. xxi.^ Psalm.
lxxxii.i. Psalm. ii.^.
yt we crave ye help of ye Lord, in whoes hand are the hearts of Kings, and
the bowinges of kingdoms? He is ye God that shall stand in the assembly of
gods, and shall in the midst judge the gods from whoes face al Kings shall
fall, and be broken, and all the judges of the earth that shall have not kissed
his anointed, that have written unjust laws to oppress the poor in
judgment, and do violence to the cause of the humble, Esa x.i.
to make widows a pray, and rob the fatherless.

Ex. iii.vii Iud. iii.ix etc.
by the Chaldees: the boldness of Babylon, by the Medians, and by the Persians
when Cyrus had subdued the Medians. And the vnha^kefulnesse of the Kings of
Judah and Israel, and their wicked obstinatie toward his so many benefits, he
did beat down and bring to distress sometime by the Assyrians, sometime by
the Babilonians, albeit not al after one manner. For, ye first sort of men when
they were by the lawful calling of God sent to do such acts: in taking armure
against Kings, they did not violate that majesty which is planted in Kings
by the ordinance of God: but being armed from heaven they subdued the lesser
power with the greater: like as it is lawful for Kings to punish their Lords
under them. But these later sort, although they were directed by the hand of God
whether it pleased him, and they unwittingly did his work, yet purposed in
their mind nothing but mischefe.

Parlamentes.
that I affirm that if they wink at Kings wilfully raging over and treading
down the poor communaltie, their dissembling is not without wicked breach of
Faith, because they deceitfully betray the liberty of the people, whereof they
know themselves to be appointed protectors by the ordinance of God.

But in that obedience which we have determined to be due to the Dan. v^.xxii.
After this reason Daniell denied that he had any thing offended against the
King, when he obeyed not his wicked proclamation: because the King had passed
his bounds, and had not only ben a wrong doer to men, but in lifting up his
horns against God he had taken away power from himself. On the other side
the Israelites are condemned, because they were to much obedient to the wicked
commandment of the King. Osc. v.xiii. 1. Kin. xii.xxx.
For when Ierobeam had made golden calves, they forsaking the temple of God,
did for his pleasure turn to new superstitions. With like lightness their
posterity inclined themselves to the ordinances of their Kings. With this the
Prophet sharply reprocheth them, that they embraced the commmaundementes of the
King: so far is it of, that the pretense of humility may deserve praise,
wherewith the flatteres of the court do cover themselves and deceive the simple,
while they say that it is not lawful for them to refuse any thing that is
commanded them of their Princes: as though God had resigned his right to
mortal men, giving them the rule of mankind: or as though the earthly power
were minished, when it is made subject to the author of it, before whom even
the heavenly powers do humbly tremble for fear. I know how great and how
present peril hangs over this constantie, because Kings do most
displeasantly suffer themselves to be despised, whoes displeasure (says
Solomon) is the messenger of death. But since this decree is proclaimed by the
heavenly harald Peter. Ac. v.xxix
That we ought to obey God rather than men, let us comfort our selves with this
thought, that we then perform that obedience which the Lord requires, when
we suffer any thing rather whatsoever it be, 1. Cor. vii xiii.
than swerve from Godliness. And that our courages should not faint, Paul
puts also an other spur to us. That we were therefore redeemed of Christ
with so great a price as our redemption cost him, that we should not yield our
selves in thraldom to obey the perverse desires of men, but much less should
be bond to ungodliness.

Praise be to God. T.N.

What Chapiters are contained in the books of this Institution.
In the first book which entreats of the knowledge of God the Creator. Are
contained, XViii. Chapiters.
1 THat the knowledge of God, and of our selves, are things conjoined: and how
they be lincked the one with the other. 2 What it is to know God, and to what
end tends the knowledge of him. 3 That the knowelege of God is naturally
planted in the minds of men. 4 That the same knowledge is either choked, or
corrupted, partly by ignorance, and partly by malice. 5 That the knowledge of
God does shiningly appear in the making of the world and in the continual
government thereof. 6 That, to attain to God the Creator, it is nedeful to
have ye Scripture to be our guide and maistresse. 7 By what testimony the
Scripture ought to be stablished, that is by the witness of the Holy ghost,
that the authority thereof may remain certain. And that it is a wicked
invention to say that the Credit thereof does hang upon the judgment of the
Church. 8 That so far as man's reason may bear, there are sufficient proves
to stablishe the credit of Scripture. 9 That those phanaticall men, which
forsaking Scripture, resort unto revelation, do overthrow all the principles
of godliness. 10 That the Scripture, to correct all superstition, does in
comparison set the true God against all the gods of ye gentiles, reckening him
for none of them. 11 That it is unlawful to attribute unto God a visible form,
and that generally, they forsake God, so many as do erecte to themselves any
images. 12 That God is severally discerned from idols, that he may be only and
wholly worshipped. 13 That there is taught in the Scriptures one essence of God
from the very creation, which essence contains in it three persons. 14 That
the Scripture even in the creation of the world and of all things does by
certain marks put difference between the true God, and feigned gods. 15 What a
one man was created: wherein there is entreated of the powers of the soul, of
the image of God, of free will and of the first integrity of nature. 16 That
God by his power does nourishe and maintain the world, which himself has
created, and by his providence does govern all the parts thereof. 17 Where to
and to what end this doctrine is to be applied, that we may be certain of the
profit thereof. 18 That God does so use the service of wicked men, and so boweth
their minds to put his judgment in execution, that yet still himself
remains pure from all spott.
In the second Book which entreats of the knowledge of God the Redemer in
Christ, which knowledge was first opened to the fathers in the time of the
laws, and then to us in the Gospel. Are contained, XVII. Chapiters.
1 THat by Adams sin and falling away, mankind became accursed, and did
degenerate from his first estate: wherein is entreated of Original sin. 2
That man is now spoiled of the freedom of will, and made subject to miserable
bondage. 3 That out of the corrupt nature of man proceeds nothing but
damnable. 4 How god works in the hearts of men. 5 A confutation of the
objections that are wont to be brought for the defense of Free will. 6 That man
being lost must seek for redemption in Christ. 7 That the law was given, not
to hold still the people in it, but to norishe the hope of salvation in Christ
until his coming. 8 An exposition of the moral law. 9 That Christ although
he was known to the Jews under the law, yet was delivered only by the
Gospel. 10 Of the likeness of the old and new testament. 11 Of the
difference of the one testament from the other. 12 That it behooved, that Christ
to perform the office of the Mediator should be made man. 13 That Christ took
upon him the true substance of the flesh of man. 14 How the two natures of
the Mediator do make one person. 15 That we may know to what end Christ was
sent of his Father, and what he brought us: three things are principally to be
considered in him, his Prophetical office, his Kingdom, and his Priesthod. 16
How Christ has fulfilled the office of Redemer, to purchase salvation for us,
wherein is entreated of his Death, and Resurrection, and his Ascendyng into
heaven. 17 That it is truly and proprely said, that Christ has deserved Gods
favor and salvation for us.
In the third Book which entreats of the manner how to receive the grace of
Christ, and what fruits come thereof to us, and what effects follow of it.
Are contained, XXV. Chapiters.
1 THat those things which are spoken of Christ do profit us, by secret
workyng of the Holy ghost. 2 Of faith, wherein both is the definition of it,
and the propreties that it has are declared. 3 That we are regenerate by
faith, wherein is entreated of repentance. 4 That all that the Sophisters babble
in their schools of penance, is far from the pureness of the Gospel, where
is entreated of Confession, and Satisfaction. 5 Of the supplyings which they
add to satisfactions, as Pardons and Purgatory. 6 Of the life of a christen
man: And first by what arguments the Scripture exhorts us thereunto. 7 The
sum of a Christian life: where is entreated of the forsaking of our selves. 8
Of the bearyng of the Cross, which is a part of the forsakyng of our selves.
9 Of the meditation of the life to come. 10 How we ought to use this present
life, and the helps thereof. 11 Of the Justification of faith, and first of the
definition of the name and of the thing. 12 That to the end we may be fully
persuaded of the free justification, we must lift up our minds to the
judgment seat of God. 13 That there are two things to be marked in free
justification. 14 What is ye beginning of justification, and the continual
proceeding thereof. 15 That those things that are commonly bosted concerning the
merits of works, do overthrow as well the praise of God in geuyng of
righteousness, as also the assuredness of salvation. 16 A confutation of the
sclanders, whereby the Papists go about to bring this doctrine in hatred. 17
The agreement of the promises of the Law and the Gospel. 18 That of the
reward, the righteousness of works is ill gathered. 19 Of Christian
liberty. 20 Of Prayer which is the chief exercise of faith, and whereby we
daily receive the benefits of God. 21 Of the Eternal election, whereby God
has predestinate some to salvation, other some to destruction. 22 A
confirmation of this doctrine by the testimonies of the Scripture. 23 A
confutation of the sclanders, wherewith this doctrine has always ben unjustly
charged. 24 That Election is stablished by the calling of God: and that the
reprobate do bring upon themselves y^ just destruction, to which they ar
appointed. 25 Of the last Resurrection.
In the fowerth Book which entreats Of the means or helps whereby God
calls us into the fellowship of Christ, and holds us in it, are contained
XX. Chapiters.
1 OF the true Church with which we ought to keep unity, because it is the
mother of all the godly. 2 A comparison of the false Church with the true
Church. 3 Of the teachers and ministers of the Chirch, and of their election
and office. 4 Of the state of the old Chirch, and of the manner of gouernyng
that was in use before the Papacy. 5 That the old form of government is
utterly overthrown by the tirannie of the Papacy. 6 Of the supremicie of the Sea of Rome. 7 Of the beginning and encreacyng of the Papacy of Rome, until
it advanced it self to this heyght, whereby both the liberty of the Church
has been oppressed, and all the right government thereof overthrown. 8 Of
the power of the Church as touching the articles of faith: and with how
unbridled licentiousness it has in the Papacy been wrested to corrupt all
pureness of doctrine. 9 Of Counsels and of their authority. 10 Of the power
in making of laws: wherein the Pope and his have used a most cruel tirannie
and butcherie upon souls. 11 Of the jurisdiction of the Church, and the abuse
thereof, such as is seen in the Papacy. 12 Of the discipline of the Church,
whereof the chief use is in the Censures and excommunication. 13 Of vows, by
rash promisyng whereof echeman has miserably entangled him self. 14 Of
Sacraments. 15 Of Baptism. 16 That the Baptism of infantes doothe very well
agree with the institution of Christ: and the nature of the sign. 17 Of the
holy Supper of Christ: and what it avails us. 18 Of the Popish Mass, by
which sacrilege the Supper of Christ has not only ben profaned, but also
brought to naught. 19 Of the five falsely named Sacraments: where is declared,
that the other five which have been hitherto commonly taken for Sacraments,
are not sacraments: and then is showed what manner of things they be. 20 Of
Civil government.
A Table of the chief matters contained in this Book.
A.
ADams fall. the. 2. Book first chap. Angels. the first Book. 14. chap.
Anointing. See unction. Ascending of Christ into heaven. the.2. Book.16. chap.
B.
Baptism. 4. Book. 15. chap. Baptism of Infantes. 4. Book. 16. chap.
C.
Chirch. 4. Book. first chap. Comparison of the true and false Church. 4.
Book. 1. chap. Jurisdiction and discipline of the Chirch. 4. B. chap. 11. and.
12. Power of the Chirch. as touching making laws. 4. book. 10. chap. Power of
the Chirch as touching articles of faith. 4. B. ^. cha. The state of the old
Chirch. 4. B. 4. chap. Order and ministeries of the Chirch. 4. B. chap. 3.
Christ. The godhead of Christ. 2. Book. ^4. cha. How the person of Christ is
one in two natures. 2. B. 14. chapter Whereto Christ was sent. 2. B. 15. chap. How
Christ has deserved for us Eternal life. 2. B. 17. chapter How Christ is the
Mediator. 2. B. 2. chapter Christ the Redemer. 2. B. chapter ^^. Christ a Prophet,
king, and pressed. 2. B. 15. chapter Death of Christ. 2. b. 16. chapter Desce^ding of
Christ to hell. 3. Book. 16. chap. Resurrection of Christ. 2. Book. 16. chap.
Christian liberty. 3. Book. 19. chap. Christian life. 3. B. 6. chap. Civil
government. 4. B. 20. chap. Civil judgments. 4. B. 20. chap. Confession and
Satisfaction popish. 3. B. 4. chapter Confirmation popish. 4. B. 19. chap
Conscience. 3. B. 19. chap. Councels and their authority. 4. B. 9. chap.
Creation of Man. 1. Book. 15. chap. Cross. Bearing of the Cross. 3. B. 8.
chap.
D.
Death of Christ. 2. Book. 16. chap. Descending of Christ to Hell. 3. B. 16.
cha. Deuells. 1. book. 14. chap. Discipline. See Jurisdiction.
E.
Election. The eternal Election. 3. B. 21. chapter The eternal election of God is
stablished by vocation. 3. Book. 24. chap* Essence of God one and Persons
three. 1. Book. ^^. chap.
F.
Faith. 3. B. 2. chap. See Justification and power of Church. Fasting. 4. B.
12. chap. The Forsakyng of our selves. 3. B. 7. chapter Freewill. 1. Book. 15. chapter
and. 2. Book. cha. 2. and ^.

G.
God. See Image. Knowledge of God. Godhead of Christ. 2. Book. 14. chap.
Government civil. 4. B. 20. chap.
H.
Hands. See laying on of hands. Heretics and Schismatikes. 4. B. 1. chap.
Holy ghost and his offices. 3. B. 1. chap. The secret workyng of the Holy
ghost. 3. book. 1. chap. Sin against the Holy ghost. 3. Book. 3. chap.

I.
Idols. first Book. 11. and. 12. chap. Jesus. Name of Jesus. 2. B. 15. chap.
Image of God. 1. B. 15. chap. To saine an image of God is unlawful. 1. B. 1.
chap. Indulgences or pardons. 3. B. 5. chap. Intercession of Saints. 3. B. 20.
chap. Judgment Civil. 4. B. 20. chap. Jurisdiction and discipline of the
Chirch. 4. Book. 11. and. 12. chap. Justification of Faith. 3. B. 11. chap.
Beginning and proceeding of Justification. 3. B. 14. chap. In Justification what
things are to be noted. ^. book. 23. chap.
K.
Knowledge of God. first Book. that God is Known naturally of all men. 1. B. 3.
chap. whereto the Knowledge of God tends. 1. B. 2. chap. That the knowledge of
God is choked either by the ignorance or malice of men. 1. Book. 4. chap.

L.
Law. 2. B. 7. chap. Laws. 4. B. 20. chap. The law: the end, office, and use
thereof. 2. B. 7. chap. Exposition of the moral Law. 2. B. 8. chapter See power of
Church. Liberty Christian. 3. B. 19. chap. Life. Life of a Christian man. 3.
B. 6. chap. Meditation of the Life to come. 3. B. 9. chap. How present Life is
to be used. 3. Book, 10. chap.
Love of our neighbor. 2. B. 8. chap.
M.
Mass popish. 4. Book. 8. Chap. Matrimony. 4. Book. 10. chap. Mediator
Christ. 2. B. 12. chap. Merits of works. 3. B. 15. chap. Ministeries of the
Chirch. 4. B. 3. chap. Monkerie. 4. B. 13. chap. Moral law expounded. 2. B.
8. chap.
N.
Neighbor. Love of neighbor. 2. B. chap. 8.
O.
Offense. 3. Book. 19. chap. Order and ministeries of the Chirch. 4. B. 3.
chap. Orders ecclesiastical of the Pope. 4. Book 1^. chapter. Original
sin. 3. Book. chap. 1. Oath. 2. Book. chap. 3.
P.
Pastors, their election and office. 4. B. chapter 3. Penance. True Penance. 3. B.
3. chap. Popish penance. 4. B. 19. chap. Power of the Chirch as touching
articles of Faith. 4. Book. 8. chap. Touching making of Laws. 4. Book x. chap.
Prayer. 3. B. 20. chap. Predestination of God. 3. Book. 1. chap. Prestes.
Unmaried life of prestes. 4. Book 12. chapter. Promises of the law and the
Gospel agreed. 3. B. 17. chap. Providence of God. 1. B. 16. chap. Purgatory.
3. B. 5. chap.
R.
Redemer Christ. 2. Book. 16. chap. Regeneration. 3. Book. 3. chap. Repentance.
See Penance. Reprobate do by their own fault bring upon themselves the
destruction to which they are predestinate. 3. B. 24. chap. Resurrection of
Christ. 2. B. 16. chap. Last resurrection. 3. B. 25. chap. Reward. Of Reward
the righteousness of works is ill gathered. 3. B. 18. chap. Romish see. The
supremicie of it, and the beginning of the Romish papacy. 4. Book. 6. and.
7. chap.
S.
Sacraments. 4. B. 14. chap. Sacraments falsely so named. 4. B. 19. cha.
Satisfaction popish. 3. B. ^. chap. Schismatikes. 4. B. 1. chap. Scripture.
The authorit^e thereof. 1. Book 6. chap. That the doctrine of the Scripture is
necessary for us. 1. B. 9. chap. Sin against the Holy ghost. 3. B. 3. chap.
Sin original. 3. B. 1. chap. Spirit. See Holy ghost. Supper of Christ. 4.
B. 17. chap.
T.
Testament. The likeness of the old and new testament. 2. B. chap. 10.
Traditions of men. 4. B. 10. chap Trinity. 1. B. 15. chap.
U.
Unction. 4. Book. 19. chap. Unmaried life of prestes. 4. B. 12. chap.
Uocation. By vocation the eternal election of God is stablished. 3. B. 24.
chap. Every man ought diligently to look upon his own vocation. ^. B. 7. chap.
Uowes 4. B. 13. chap.
W.
Wicked. How God uses the works of the wicked. 1. B. 18. chap. Works. See
Merits* and wicked. World. The World create, norished and governed of God.
1. Book. 16. chap.
FINIS.
IMPRINTED AT LONDON in Paul's Churcheyard by Reynolde Wolf and Richard
Haryson. The year of our Lord. 1561. The.6. day of May.

Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.


