A Prognostication for ever, made by Erra Pater, a Jew, borne in Jury, Doctor
in Astronomy and Physic: Very profitable to keep the body in health: And
also Ptholomeus says the same.



Printed by Thomas Este.



ERRA PATER.
The Prognostication for ever, of Erra Pater.
AS I find in the Science of Astronomy, there be four manner of Cholers in
man's body, of the four complections.

The first is blood, the second black Choler, the third Flumes, and the fourth
yelow choler, and if one of the four lack, all the body will be forthwith
dead. Forasmuch sustaineth one of them the body as the other.

And every each of them ought to be at a certain, for if one of them surmount
the other, all the body shall have dommage thereby, and all four be
perilous, for if the blood surmount the other, he will the sooner destroy and
overcome the body, and make him to dye, for he gathers and likewise
congealeth even right on the heart and the breath, and in that manner,
(lessening) by little and little, is overcome and dead, but all that time when
the great course takes him, he may soon be assuaged to less him a little,
so take away a little blood from him, and then all will assuage of this peril.
Also the black coler is right perslous, and they surmount all the other, they
make great damage to the body by many and diverse means, for they may cause and
make the body to fall as the evil sickness, and lose his wit and knowledge,
and beecome a fool, and cause all the body to be full of evil scabbes, and
often times to be mesill, and makes a man to be fearful and a coward, and of
many evil manners.

And when they surmount the other, they be right grievous and damagious. And
by herbs, flowers, fasting, abstinence, drinks and medicines, they may be
assuaged.

The flumes that be white be perilous, when they surmount the other cholers
of the body, they do great damage and hurt, for they engender goutes, and many
other evil sicknesses that be cold, and they hurt also the feet, the hands,
the raines, the knees, the legs, and the teeth, and make the mouth and the
breath stinking, and the nose and the cares, and causes many other diseases
and sicknesses, and they may be assuaged by herbs, flowers, roots, drinckes,
medicines, and also by vomiting.

Also the yealow cholers be perilous, for when they surmount the other
cholers in a man's body, they assorbent the heart, and travail the brain, and
makes all the members feeble and soft, and takes away the will and appetite
from the body, that he may neither eat nor drinck, and also they change a
man's Cholers and makes him to lose his sight and become blind: and they may
be assuaged, as by herbs, flowers, roots, and by vomiting.

The four humors be of four complections, and they have the domination of
the body four times in a year.

And each of them a quarter of a year. etc.

It is to be understood, that in the year is twelve months, and in the
twelve months is fifty and two weeks, and in the fifty and two weeks is
three hundredth threescore and five days, and in the three hundredth and lxv
days, does contain eight thousand, seven hundredth and lx. hours.

A farthing a day is i. d. ob. q. the week. The month vij. pence. The yeexe
vij. s. viij. d. q. A half penny a day is iij. d. ob. the week. The month
eighteen pence. The year fifteen s. ij. d. ob.
The disposition of the first season of the year, Capricornus, Aquarius, and
Pisces.
The first season of the year that has domination of the body of man, is
three moonethes, and they be named these three signs, Capricorn, Aquarie, and
Pisces.

And these three signs have power of fleumes of the body of man and woman, and
they he cold and moist, and they beegin to reign the xxiiij. day of December,
and dureth to the four and twenty day of March.

The disposition of the second part of the year, Aries, Taurus and Gemini.
The second part of the year is other three months, and these are their
signs, Aries, Taurus and Gemini. And they have power in the body of man, of
the breast, and they be hot and moist. And they beegin to reign the four and
twenty day of March, and dureth unto the four and twenty day of June.

The disposition of the three seasons of the year, Cancer, Leo, and Virgo.
The three seasons of the year, are other three months, and these be their
signs, Cancer, Leo, and Virgo. And they have power in the body of man, of the
yelow collers, and they be hot and dry, and they beegin to reign on the
four and twenty day of June, and dureth unto the xxiiij. of September.

The description of the fourth part of the year, Libra, Scorpio, and
Sagittarius.
THE fourth part of the peer be other three months, and these be their
signs, Libra, Scorpio, and Sagittarius. And they be cold and dry, and they
beegin to reign the xxiiii. day of September, and dureth unto the xxiiii. day
of December.

And by the manner of these four seasons, every man may keep him from all the
contraries of meats, drincks, and clothing, and from all other contraries. And
if a man will keep him after the manner which is rehearsed in this book, he
shall never have infirmities of the body by the grace of God.

Take Peliter of Spain and chaw it in thy mouth, for it is good to spurge the
head and the body. And eat Fenell seed and Comin seed, for each of these
seeds destroy the flumes, that all those evils in any man's body come off.

East.
Ignus inuentus and Aestas.
The water red and thin, the gross male red and hard, the spittle thick and
clammie. The signs, Aries, Leo, and Sagittarius, is engendered of choleric,
hot, and dry, and oriental, and the sickness be taken in these signs, it is
great peril, unless he have his medicine cold and moist, and his diet of the
same complexion. Then be may be healed by the grace of God.

West.
Are adolescentia ver.
The water red and thick, the gross male red and thin, the spittle thin and
sweet, the extremitiues out of course. The signs Gemini, Libra, and Aquaria,
is engendered of sanguin hot and moist and Occidentall, the cure is cold and
dry, with the diet of the same complexion.

Cassia fistula in Aqua vite.

North.
Terra Senectus Autumnus.
The water white and thin, the gros^ male black and thick, the spittle thick
and sower, the extrematiues uneath seld.

The signs Taurus, Virgo, and Capricorn, he is engendered of Malancholy cold
and dry Septentrionall, the cure hot and moist, with the diet of the same
complexion.

South.
Aqua senium and Hiems.
The water white and thick, she gross matter white and thick. The spittle thin
and sweet. The extrematiues feeble, the signs, Cancer, Scorpio, and Pisces,
he is engendered of Flumes, cold and moist, Meridionall, the cure hot, dry,
and of the same complexion, Trauit Aqua vitae, or in Potage.

Here he shows of all the dismal or perilous days that comes in the
year.
Masters of Astronomy and Physic, that this craft first found, tells the
most perillons and the most dangerous days in the year. In which if any man
or woman be let blood of wound or vein, they shall die within xxi. days
following. Or who so falls in sickness in any of these days, they shall
never escape it till they be dead. And who so takes any great iourny in any of
these days, to go from home he shall be in danger to die or he come home
again. And who so weddeth a wife in any of these days, hastily they shall be
departed, or else they shall live together with much sorrow.

And who so begins in any of these days any great work, it shall never
come to good end, and these are the days following.

That is to say.
In January are eight days, that is to say, the first, the second, the
fourth, the fifth, the tenth, the fifteenth, the seventeenth, and the
nineteenth.

In February are three days: the viii the x. and the xvii. ii In March are
three days, the xv. the xvi and the xix. iii In April are two days, the xv
and the xxi. iii In May are three days, the vii. xv. and the xx. v In June are
two days, the iiii. and the vii. vi In July are two days, the xv and the
twentieth. vii In August are two days, the xix and the xx. viii In September
are two days, the sixth and the seventh. ix In October is one, the sixth day. x
In November are two days, the sixth and the ninteenth. xi In December are three
days, the sixth the vii and the xi. Et alii dicunt, the xv and the xvi. xii

And who so will learn the Canicular days, which are days of great danger
and peril, as Clerks say, and they begin the xv. Kalend of August, and dureth
to the fourth Nonas of September, which season is very perilous to take
sickness, and it is also perilous to take drinckes or medicines, or to let
blood, but if it be great need, and that it must be after the midst of the
day.

Here begins the distance between the signs.
It is to be understood that there is a circle in the Firmament that is called
Zodiac, and is divided into twelve even parts, and of those parts be called
the xii. Signs in the Latin, and these be their names.

Aries, Taurus, Gemini, Cancer, Leo, Virgo, Libra, Scorpio, Sagittarius,
Capricornia, Aquarius, and Pisces.

These twelve Signs are in complexion like unto the four Elements, that is
to say, the Fire, the Air, the Water and the Earth: the Fire, is hot and
dry, his Element is likened unto the Ram, the Lion, and the Shooter, for these
be hot and dry, also the Air is hot and moist, his Element is likened to the
Children, the Balance and the water bearer, for they be hot and moist. The
water is moist and cold, for to the water is likened the Crab, the Scorpion,
and the Fish. The earth is dry and cold, to the Earth is likened the Bull, the
Maid, and the Goat, for they be dry and cold.

And every one of the signs is divided into thirty even parts, and these
parts are called degrees, and every degree is divided into three score even
parts, and these parts are called Minutes, and every minute is divided into
three score even parts, and these parts be called seconds, and so forth to
the thirds and fourthes.

It is to be understood, that there is seven Planets, as Saturnus, Jupiter,
Mars, Sol, Venus, Mercurius, and Luna. These be the seven moveable Stars.

The aforesaid twelve Signs takes great power and might of the seven
Planets, and the seven Planets takes great power of the twelve signs, for
the Planets be to the Signs as the soul to the body, and the signs to the
Planets as the body to the soul. For like as the body may do naught without
the Soul, no more may the Soul without the body, no more may a sign without
the seven Planets.

Saturnus is the highest, and next beeneath Saturnus is Jupiter, beneath
Jupiter Mars, beneath Mars, Sol, beneath Sol, Venus, beneath Venus, Mercurius,
beeneath Mercurius, Luna.

The wise Philosophers say, it is from the Earth to Luna, xv. M. vii. C. l.
miles. From Luna to Mercurius, is xii. M. viii. C. xii. miles and a half.

From Mercurius to Venus as many.

From Venus to Sol is xxiii. M. iiii. C. and xxxviii. miles.

From Sol to Mars is xv. M. vii. C. and five and twenty miles.

From Mars to Jupiter is three score and eight thousand seven hundred and xxi.
miles.

From Jupiter to Saturnus as many.

From Saturnus to the Firmament, is vi score M. iii. C. lxxxv. miles.

The sum of all these miles is seven score and xviii. M. four C. lxiii.
miles.

Hereafter follows a conjunction of the change of the Moon.
Here is a rule of the change of the Moon, when the Prime is on this letter
A. the third day before the Prime, the xix. hour shall be ye change of the
Moon.

And ye shall begin to tell your hours at midnight, for a day natural is
from midnight to midnight. When the Prime is on this letter B. iii. day, then
it shall change the iiii. hour, that is to say, after midnight. When it
changes on this letter C. iiii day, then the viii hour.

When it is on this letter D. iiii day, then the xx. hour. When it is on this
letter E. iiii day, then the xviii hour. When it is on this letter F. iii.
day, then the xvi hour. When it is on this letter G. iii. day, then the xvi.
hour.

The disposition of the xij. Months upon blood letting.
January.
IN the month of January, let thee not blood in the first day, for it is
perilous, nor the second day, nor the fifth day, nor the x. day, nor the xv.
day, nor the xix. day, nor the xx. day, nor the xxv. day, but as often as thou will drinck good white wine fasting, and also take good heed of the days that
be above written for they be perilous for to bleed on except the sign be
right good for blood letting.

February.
In the month of February, eat no potage made of hocks or mallows, for that
is venim. And if thou have need to bleed on thy wrest, or thy thomb, bleed not
on the fourth day, nor on the vi. day, nor on the viii. day, but on ye xiii
day, nor on the xvi. day, nor on ye xxviii day, but that the sign be very
good, and thou may choose.

March.
In the (...) eat Figs, Reisons, and (...) and drinckes, and hot meats ^^d
let thee blood on the right arm on the fifth day, or on the vii. day, or on
the xvii. day, for that is good against all manner of Fevers, but beware bleed
not the first day, nor the xv. day, nor the xvi. day, nor the xix. day, nor
the xxviij. day, and thou may choose, and if thou do, look the sign be
very good.

April.
In the month of April bleed on the left arm on the third day, or on the
xi. day, or on the xv. day, and thou shall have no great head ache, nor leese
thy sight of all that year, and use fresh and hot meats, but bleed not the
vij day, nor the vitj. day, nor the x. day, nor the xx. day, for these days be
not good for bleeding.

May.
In the month of May, rise early, and eat and drink betime, use good
meats and drincks, but eat neither of head nor foot while that last, and let
thee blood on the first day, or on the eighteenth day, on which arm thou will,
or an ye xxvij. day, or on the xxvitj. day, and it shall much help thee against
all manner of evil, but beware that thou bleed not the third day, nor the sixth
day, nor the xxv. day.

June.
In the month of June some Physicians say, that it is good every day to drinck
a quantity (...) cold water fasting, and rule thee of thy meat and drink, and
if thou have need bleed on the xxvitj day, for that is good, but beware that
thou bleed not on the vij day, nor on the x day, nor on the xv. day, nor the
xvi. day, nor the xx. day.

July.
In the month of July, keep thee from Lechery, for then the brain and the
humors are always open, and bleed not in this mooneth, but if thou have
great need, and then beware always that thou bleed not on the xitj. day, nor on
the xv. day, nor on the xix. day, nor on the xx. day, for it is dangerous.

August.
In the month of August eat no manner of woorts, nor any manner of hot
meats and drincks of Spicerie, nor bleed not the first day, nor the xx. day,
nor the xxix. day, nor the xxx. day. The other days thou may bleed for
great need, if the sign be good for blood letting, but not else, and if thou
love to keep thy body in good health.

September.
In the month of September, all manner of fruit that is ripe and not infected is
good for to eat, and bleed not the xvii. day nor on ye xviii. day, of the
dropsy, frenzy, palsy, nor of the falling evil, dread thee not of all that
year, and if thou have need to bleed more, beware that thou bleed not the
third day, nor the iiii day, nor the xvi day, nor the xxi. day, nor the xxii.
day.

October.
In the month of October, drinck good and wholesome wine, and bleed not but if
great need make thee, and look that the sign be very good, but yet beware
that thou bleed not on the third day, nor the sixth day, nor the xxiiii. day,
and thou will do well.

November.
In the month of November bleed not but for need, for all the blood is
gathered that time upon the head vein, bath not but vent thee a little of
grasing, for then all the humors be ouerquick to bleed, and if case be that
thou have great need for to bleed, beware of the fifth day, the vi. day, the
xv, and the xix, day, the xxviii. day and the xxix.

December.
In the month of December bleed not but if thou have great need for the case,
and bleed on the xxvi, day, for it is right good. And in case thou have more
need to bleed, beware of the vii. day, the xv. days, the xvi. day, the xvii.
day, and the xxii. day. and in this month come not nigh the fire with thy shanks.

For to understand and know the year that shall be plentious, and in great
abundance of goods.
In die Dominica. That is Sunday.
In the year that January shall enter on the Sunday, that winter shall be
cold and moist, the Summer shall he hot, and the time of Harvest shall be
windy, and rainy, with great abundance of corn, of wines and other grains,
and of all garden fruits and herbs, there shall be little Oil, abundance
shall be of all manner of flesh, some great news shall men hear spoken of
Kings and Prelates of the Church, and also of great Princes, great wars and
robberies shall be made, and many young people shall dye.

In die Luna. That is Monday.
In the year that January shall enter on the Monday, the Winter shall be
peaceable enough, and the Summer shall be very temperate. Then shall be great
floods of water that shall break out of their limits and bonds, and many ships
upon the Sea shall perish, and in that year shall reign diverse sicknesses,
and changes of great Lords shall be made, many women shall perish in
trauayling with Child, many great Lords shall die. That year shall be little
grass and Mustard seed, but there shall be plenty of Corn and Wines and
good cheap flesh, but little Oil.

In die Martis. That is Tuesday.
IN the year that January shall enter on the Tuesday, the winter shall be
changeable and not steadfast, for in the Prime, of truth it shall freese, and
that shall hurt sore the Rye, the Vines, and the flowers, that Summer shall be
dry, hot, and burning, insomuch that the herbs of the Gardens shall have no
power to come out of the ground.

All things shall be dear save only Corn, many men shall dye of the bloody
flix, there shall be no tidings of Thunder, lightning, and tempest, but all
flesh shall be dear, many wines shall turn.

In die Mercurij. That is Wednesday.
In the year that January shall enter on the Wednesday, the Winter shall be
temperate, but in the end there shall be Snowes and Frosts, the prime time
shall be rainie, great abundance of all Corn, of Wine, of Fruits, of Hay
(...) Grass, and generally of all good things. The Summer shall be little
cloudie, by the which thereof shall come great sickness. Poor laborers, as
handy crafts and artificers shall gain meetly well that year, many thieves
there shall be, by whom the mean^ people shall be sore pilled and discomfited,
great war, battle and slaughter shall be toward the midst of the year,
by the which shall come great good to some men. In the end of the year shall
be diverse pestilences, botches, and falling evils, especially next the Sea.

In die Iouis. That is Thursday.
In the year that January shall enter on the Thursday, the winter shall be
long and most part dry, and the year shall be very wholesome. The Prime time
shall be very wholesome, the Prime time shall be very windy, the Summer shall
be temperate and harvest shall be most part rainenie, so that the waters shall
sore break out of their bounds, the Wheat and Wines shall be good cheap,
there shall be of Oats, Hay, Grass, and of fruits competently enough. Great
war and division shall be beetweene the Church and the Kings and Princes,
and in the end, the Princes shall have victory of their enterprises.

Women shall set themselves much to lechery, people shall be well cased of
taxes and tallages.

In die Veneris. That is Friday.
In the year that January shall enter on the Friday, the winter shall be
long and dry, and the summer unwholesome, harvest shall be dry, all corn shall
be dear, the vintage shall be good enough, and abundance of Oil, of fruit,
of hey, of grass, and of Garden herbs, the world shall be sore persecuted
with diverse sicknesses as sore eyes and of all Etiks, many young children shall
dye, great Thunder, Lightening and tempests shall be, that shall grieve sore
all the ground, there shall be Earthquakes, and good cheap cloth, poor people
shall gain little or nothing, many beasts shall die for hunger, for the
diversity and malady of the time.

In die Sabbati. That is Saturday.
In the year that January shall enter on the Saturday, the winter shall be
temperate sufficiently, and in the Prime time shall be Frostes, the which shall
destroy the Trees, the Vines, the Oils, and the fruits, the Summer shall be
meetely temperate, the harvest time shall be dry, the Dates and other Corn
shall be good cheap, all garden herbs shall be cheap enough, and flesh shall
be good cheap, many old people shall dye. Fever tertians shall grieve sore the
world, and shall be sick through evil heat: and many murmurations, wars
and murders shall be done by one against the other, and neighbors against
neighbors, and many other causes shall be oftentimes committed and done.

Of the signification of Thunder on every day in the week.
If it Thunder on the Sunday, there will be a great death of Clarks and Judges
and also perverse people by signification.

If on the Monday it chance to Thunder, many women shall dye then, and the
corn will suffer Eclipse, by signification.

If it Thunder on the Tuesday, it beetokeneth great plenty of corn.

If on the Wednesday it chance to thunder, it betokens that year common
women and light wenches, and foolish women shall die, and then shall be great
bloudsheding.

It it Thunder on the Thursday, then shall be great cheap and much plenty of
Corn.

If on the Friday it chance to thunder it beetokeneth that a great man shall
be slain, and diverse other murders, and other perils.

If on Saturday it chance to thunder, it betokens that then shall be a great
general pestilence, plague, whereof many shall dye.

The saying of Erra Pater to the Husbandman.
IF the day of Saint Paul be clear,
Then shall betide an happy year:
If it do chance to snow or rain,
Then shall be dear all kind of grain.
But if the wind then be a loft,
Wars shall vex this realm full often:
And if the clouds make dark the Sky,
Both Neat and Foul this year shall dye.
FINIS.
Hereafter follows the Reigns of the Kings of England, since King William
the Conqueror.
KIng William Conqueror, began his reign the xiiii. of October, in the year
1066. and dyed the ix. of September, the year 1087. and was buried at Cane in
Normandy.

K. William Rufus beegan his reign the 9. day of September, in the year 1087.
and died the first of August, in the year. 1100. and was buried at Winchester.

K. Henry the first began his reign the first day of August, in the year 1100
and died the second of December, in the year 1135 and was buried at Redding.

K. Stephen began his reign the second day of December, in the year 1135 and
died the 25 day of October in the year 1154 and was buried at Feuersham.

K. Henry the second began his reign the xxv day of October in the year 1154
and died the vi day of July, in the year 1189 and was buried at Font Euerard.

K. Richard the first, beegan his reign the vi. day of July, in the year
1189, and died the vi day of April, in ye year 1199 and was buried at Font
Euerard.

K. John began his reign the vi. day of April 1199 and died the xix of
October 1216 and was buried at Worcester.

K. Henry the third began his reign the 19 of October 1216 died the 16. of
November 1272, buried at Westminster.

K. Edward the first began his reign the xvi. of November 1272. died the
seventh of July 1307. buried at Westminster.

K. Edward the second beegan his reign the vii. of July, 1307. dyed the xxv.
of January. 1326. buried at Gloucester.

K. Edward the third, beegan his reign the xxv, of January, 1326 dyed the xxi
day of June, 1377. buried at Westminster.

K. Richard the second beegan his reign the xxi. of June, 1377 died the xxix.
of September, 1399. buried at Westminster.

K. Henry the fourth began his reign xxix. of September, 1399. dyed the xx.
day of March, 1412. buried at Canterbury.

K. Henry the fifth beegan his reign the xx. of March, 1412. dyed the 31 of
August 1422. buried at Winsor.

K. Henry the sixth beegan his reign the 31. of August, 1422. dyed the 4. of
March 1460. buried at Winsor.

K. Edward the fourth beegan his reign the fourth of March, 1460. dyed the ix.
of April, 1483 buried at Winsor.

K. Edward the fist began his reign the ix. of April, 1483. dyed the 15. day
of June 1483.

K. Richard the third beegan his reign the 22 of June, 1483. dyed the 22. of
August, 1485. buried at Leycester.

K. Henry the seventh began his reign the 22. of August, 1485. dyed the 22.
of April, 1509. buried at Westminster.

K. Henry the eight began his reign the 22. of April, 1509. died the 28. of
January 1546. buried at Winsor.

K. Edward the sixth began his reign the 28. of January, in the year 1546.
and died the vi day of July, in the year 1553. buried at Westminster.

Queen Mary began her reign the vi. day of July, 1553. dyed the 17. of
November, 1558. buried at Westminster.

Queen Elizabeth began her reign the 17. day of November, in the year of our
Lord God 1558. Died the 24. of March 1602. Buried at Westminster.

King James began his reign the 24. of March, 1602. To whom GOD grant long to
reign. Amen.

FINIS.
A rule to know when the Terms begin and end, with their Returns.
Hillarie Term begins the xxiij. of January, and ends the xij. or xiij
day of February, and has four returns: that is Oct. Hill. Qui. Hill. Cra.
Pur. Octa. Pur.

Easter Term begins xvij days. after Easter day, and ends the monday
her^ after the Ascension day, and has five returns: that is, Qui. Pas. Tree.
Pas. Men. Pas. Qui. Pas. Cra. Asc.

Trinity Term begins the Friday next after Trinity Sunday, and ends the
Wednesday fortnight after, and has four returns, that is, Cra. Tri. Octa.
Tri. Qui. Tri. Tree. Tri.

Michaelinas Term begins the ix. or x day of October, and ends the xxviij
or xxix of November, and has viij. returns: that is, Oct. Mi. Qui. Mi. Tres.
Mi. Mense Mi. Cra. Any. Cra. Mar. Octa. Mar. Qui. Mar.

Eight days before any Term begin the Erche. opens, except Trinity Term,
for then it opens but four days before.

FINIS.

