A FAYTHFVLL and most Godly treatise concerning the most sacred Sacrament of
the blessed body and blood of our savior Christ, co^piled by Ihon Caluyne, a
man of no less lernyng and lytterature then Godly study, and example of
living. And translated into Latin by Lacius a man of like excellency. And now
last of all, translated into English by a faithful brother, no less desirous
to profyt the weak brotheres then to exercise the talent of the Lord to his
honor and glory. In declaration whereof, he has set before this little book
an Epistle to the reader much more effectuous then in the first edicion.

Whereunto the order that the Church and congregation of Christ in Denmark
does use at the receyuyng of Baptism, the Supper of ye Lord, and Wedlock: is
added.

Miles Couerdale.

Luke.xix. Chapter. Be doing till I come.

To all them that profess the christian name, the translatour wysheth mercy
from God the father through our only advocate and mediator Jesus Christ,
whose spirit (the gyuer of all godnesse) lead you in to all gostlye
knowledge. Amen. *
AS the authoure of this little book moved with the desire to profit as well the
rude and unlearned as the lettered and professers of knowledge, wrote it in his
vulgar tongue: even so I (most dearelye beloved brethren) moved also with
the desire to brofyte my natural countremen so much as shall lie in my little
power have thought it my bounden deuty to employe my diligence to the
translatyng thereof.

And because it has pleased the lord to give me more knowledge in the latyne
tongue then in the frence (wherein this book was first written) I have
translated it after the Latin copy, putting the faithful reader out of doubt
that I have not in any point gone from the true meaning of the authoure, but
have thoroughly observed the phrases of both tongues, avoiding in all that I
might the dark manner of translatynge after the latin phrases, to the intent
the English reader might have the full understanding hereof without any
knowledge of the latyne tongue And that the Godly minds of the studiouse
readers may be the more steated to read the matter with indifferent judgment,
I shall without dissimulacion assure them that herein is no matter of contencion
at all. But cheritably without any word of reproach as well the right use of
the Sacrament of the body and blood of Christ, as the abuses and errors
concerning the same, are set forth so playnelye that no man (unless he will
wyllingly shut up the eyes of his conscience against the manifest troth) can
read the book thorowlye, but he shall easelye perceive what great abuses have
these six hundredth years ben, and are at this present day mayntened and
defended as concerning the ministracion thereof.

First for that the popyshe church have and do abuse it in offering it up as
an healthful sacrifyce for the redemption of the souls of the congregation,
for in their Cannon (why the they call the secrets of the mass) are these
words. Pro redemptione animarum ecclecietue. That is to say, for the
redemption of the souls of thy church, where they hold opinion and teach,
that by offering up this sacrifice (as they call it) they apply to, or make
partakers of the passion of Christ, all them that here or hyre such masses as
they have invented dashed full of whysperynges, douckynges and crossynges
besides the demure countenance in their turn and half turn. I will speak
no more as concerning their fond inuencions about the ministration of this
most sacred Sacrament. Lest I should thereby be an offense or stomblynge stock
to the weak brothers whose consciences are not yet fullye satisfied as
concerning the true believe of this holy mystery, I mean lest I should give
the^ occasion to do, as certain fond talkers have of late days done and at
this present day do invent and apply to this most holy Sacrament, names
of dispitie and reproach, as to call it Iake in the box, and round Roben, and
such other not only fond but also blas phemouse names, not only voyed of al
edificacio^ (which ought to be the end of al our doings and sayings) but
very sclau^derouse also. For though the thing being so turned from the
right use as it is, be abominable, so that it is l^afull for us to speak
irreverently of it in the abuse: yet is it not mete for them that profess
charity, nothing to refrain for conscience sake. The conscience I say of the
weak brothers not yet strong in the truth and so much the more for that
many Godly minded persons (which by the persuasions of certain discrete and
modeste brothers, have been made, of Romyshe Idolaters and diligent students of
duncicall dregs, disciples of great hope in the sincere and true euangelyke
doctrine) have by the hearing of these names of reproach and dispitte, taken
occasion to think that the knowledge which those men did profess (which
would be so outragiouse as to mock and jest at the remembrance of our
redemption) could not proceed of the spirit of God. And have through this
persuasion, returned to their old leven again, thynkyng them to be the true
teachers of gods doctrine which offend in the contrary, making it so divine
a thing that it should be of no less importau^ce then the whole Trinity,
the father the son and holy ghost, for so they affirm saying, that for as
much as it is the body of Christ, and that Christ is in all places at ones
with his father, and his father with him and the holy ghost: it must neades
follow that in it is the whole trinity, the father, the son and the holy
ghost. For these are not, nor can not be separated.

I will say for these men that they have the zeal of god, but it is not
according to knowledge. For as the Jews (were from time to time, Act. vii.
taught and believed that God dwelled in the temple that Solomon builded) could
not abide to hear that God should not dwell in a temple made with man's
hand, nothing consyderyng that he is immensus and can not be contained (for
heaven is his seat, and the earth his footstool) even so these men through a
fond persuasion of the essenciall presence of Christ in the Sacrament: can
not abide to hear that the whole trinity should not be really contained
under a piece of bread, yea under every little crombe thereof. I speak not this
as one puttinge no difference between that sacramental bread and our common
bread, but that I may thereby declare and open the great blyndnesse of them
that knowing and confessyng the immensurable nature of God, would have him
reallye and naturallye contained in so small a thing.

Heaven is my feate (says he) and the earth is my footstool, and yet will
they trusse him so short that they will bring him into alytle pire wherein a
man can not turn his fyste.

He fylleth all places, and is contained in no place, and yet will they at
their pleasure place him in the chalyce, he was never visible to the mortal
eye, and yet will they make him appear at every knaves request that will do
as other men do, I mean pay their ordinarye shote, and so doyinge he shall
not only se him but also eat him up every morsel I would the men would
delygentlye peruse the words of saint Augustine in their lege^de on Corpus
Christi day, which are these taken out of the. xxvi. treatise upon Johan. S.
August.
He that eats my flesh and drinks my blood tarieth in me and I in him. To
eat that meat therefore, and to drink that drink, is to tarry in Christ and
to have Christ tariynge in us. And by this he that taryeth not in Christ and
in whom Christ tarieth not: no doubt he does not spiritually eat his flesh,
nor drink his blood, al though he do carnallye, and visibly crushe with his
teeth the sacrament of y^ body and blood of Christ but he does rather eat
and drink, to his damnacion, the sacrament of so noble a thing. Here is your
transsubstanciacion utterly denied. For saint Augustine puts a plain
difference between the sacrament and the, thing it self. Again the same
Angustine, in the same place adds these words. The sacrament of this thing,
that is of the unity of the body and blood of Christ is in some places
prepared every day, in some other places but certain days as on the sundaye,
and is taken of the table of the Lord, to some persons, to life, to some other
to destruction but the thing it self, in to all persons, Note.
to life, and to destruction to no man, that may be pertaker thereof, What
needs it to rehearse any mo witnesses, seeing these are sufflicyent, either to
prove saint Augustine an heretyke, other else to declare this
transsubstanciacion to be both foolyshe and abominable.

Both for that it trusse the together the diuinytie, and inlargethe the
humanytye, beyond all measure, thrutchyng up into a corner yearte which no
place can conteyne, and setting at liberty to be in all places, that which
must needs be in one place only. If every man will follow his conscience in
this matter I doubt not but they shall sone be persuaded how far wide this
transsubstanciacion is from the truth. But now take they hold of the words
of the Lord at the first institucion of this most sacred Sacrament, which
are these.

This is my body, which shall be delivered for you. This is my blood which
shall be shed for you and many into remission of sins. What natural,
essencial, and real presence they build upon these words, is abundantlye
declared in the Bishop of Wynchester and docter Smythes books.

I shall therefore most humblye desire the readare utterly to shake of all
supersticious^ perswacyous of old v^ages, geueynge him self wholly to y^
teaching of the spirit of god who teaches inwardlye in the heart, all them
that give over them selves to his teaching and informacion. And I for my part
yelding me to y^ same spirit, shall in this case write y^ thing only, which
my conscience shall give me to be of the spirit of the living God, and my
trust is that the good spirit of god is my leadare. As concerning the
understanding of the words of Christ, you shall know that the manner of
teaching is double, that is to say by words and by signs.

By words we teach when we declar^ unto the hearers, by words, the th^nge
that we would they should know. By signs we teach when we do some thing
whethy the beholders may gather our meaynyng: (...) quinius superbus did when
he struck of the tops of the highest poppyes, declaringe thereby that his
advise was to have the greatest rulers beheaded. We teach also both by words
and by signs, when we add unto the words some action to declare and as it
were to expound the words withal. Act. xxi.
As is mentioned in the Acts of the apostles of a prophet which declared
unto Paul the persecution he should endure at Jerusalem whyther he was
going, and to make the matter more plain, he took Paul's gyrdle from about
him and ^yed his feet with all saying: the man whose gyrdle this is, shall be
thus bounden at Jerusalem. Even so (good christian brethren) our savior
Christ, willing to declare to his apostles, the wonderful paticipation that
all faithful christians should have in his body and blood: took bread
which is the chyefe, and in scripture compted the only food of the body of
man, and when he had (after his accustomed manner) given thanks, he blessed,
not crossynge the bread with the three hinder fyngers having the forefynger
and the thombe fast joined to gether. No he made no sing of the cross at
all. For, to make the sign of the cross was in those days none other, then
it is now to make the sign of a galowe tree. He blessed therefore after the
manner that the fathers the prophets and patriarchs used, that is, he innocated
and called upon y^ name of his father, desyring him toac co^ply she inuisibly
in all his faithful dearlynges, the thing which he intended to declare unto
them by y^ vysible sign. The^ said he to his apostles, take ye, eat ye, this
is my body, which shall be delyvered for you. Not meaning that he had changed
the nature of bread into the nature of flesh, making the bread that he held
in his hand his natural body, for then had he given unto them a mortal and
corruptible body to eat which thing is so much ungodly that very nature
abhors it. But he gave them the bread to eat, saying: this is my body,
which shall be delivered for you. No^.
I became man for none other purpose, but y^ my body should be torn and rent
for to satifye for your sins, y^ your souls might be fed and have like
participation thereof, as your bodies have of this bread, and you (which be my
faithful) are as this bread is, one body made of many bodies, for every little
grain whereof this bread is made, is of him self a body, and yet joined to
gether they are but one body. In like manner you that believe in me though ye be
many, yet joined together by faith ye are but one body I am your head. This
mystery can you not understand with out some visible sign which may
represent unto you y^ verity thereof, take ye this bread therefore and know for
certentie that like as it is one so are ye one if ye remain in faith. And as
it nourishes the body, so does my passion nouryshe the soul which has no
life but in me and by me. In like manner when he had supped, he took y^ cup
saying, take ye, and drink ye all of this, this is the cup of y^ new
testament in my blood, which shall be shed for you and many into remission of
sins. Do this so often as you drink in my remembrance, An other sign to
declare this misterye by.

This cup of wine is but one body, and yet is it made of many grapes, and so
are you but one body although you be many, so long as you be joined
together by faith. It comfort the heart and the lively spirits of the
body, and so does my blood shed on the cross comfort the soul. By this
action have I declared unto you the mystery of the paticipation you have in me
by faith. Use you the same that this your delyueraunce by me may never slip
out of your mind. We have eaten the lamb which puts us in remembrance of
the wonderful delyuerau^ce out of the captivity in Egypt, which was done
more then a thousand years paste. So shall you eat this bread and drink this
cup in remembruance of your redemption and deliuerau^ce our of the spiritual
Egipte, and from the spiritual Pharao the dyuell. And when you shall be demanded
what you mean, by this eating and drinking, you shall say. We where through
the sin and transgression of the first man Ada^, made bond me^ and captynes
to the dyuel, out of which bondage we could by no means be delivered till it
had pleased God the father to send his only begotten son to take our
nature upon him, that he might dye and be an acceptable sacryfyce to pacyfye
the fathers wrath. Wherefore the night before he suffered he declared unto us
by these visyble signs, what co^munyon we have in him of all that ever he
deserved for us. And then he commanded us to use the same because we should
be always put in remembrance of that our redemption and delyueraunce, none
other wise them Moses did to the Israelytes the night before he did by the
wonderful might of God, bring them out of the great captiuytie where in they
were holden in Egypt. The words of saint Paul to the corhinthians, do teach
no less them I have here written. For he says, i. Corhin. xi.
so often as you eat this bread and drink this cup, you shall declare the
death of the lord till he come. And therefore who so ever eats of this bread,
or drynketh of this cup unworthily does eat and drink his own dampnation.
Here is a plain declaration of the end and purpose of Christ when he
instituted this most sacred sacrament. Forsooth to keep in remembrance his
most dolorouse death and preciouse blood most ple^teously shed upon the
cross. And who so ever eats and drinks it vnworthly (that is to say for
any other purpose the^ for the same it was ordained for) the same eats and
drinks his own da^pnation. I think not contrary but y^ most men will
think this a strange interpretation of this place (for as much as the most
ancient (yea all) ye doctors that make any mention of this place, and Calvin
him self in this book which I have translated) do apply the unworthiness in
receyuynge of this Sacrament, to the unpenitent heart of the person which
receives it. And in very deed such one is far unworthy to receive so worthy
a Sacrament for as much as he is not the membre nor servant of Christ, but a
membre of the devil and servant to sin. And this interpretation is no less
godly then fruitful. For thereby are the members of Christ put in fear to
presume to come to the table of the lord unless they have first examined and
found them selves the true members of Christ, endued and adorned with perfyt
faith, hope and charity. But if we will go to the natyue sense of the text: we
shall perceive, that in this place Paul speaks of the small regard the
Corhinthians had to this most sacred Sacrament, not vsyng it with so much
reverence as they ought to do. For he adds these words. Putting no
difference of the Lords body. As he should have said esteamyng it nothing
better then the common bread wherwyth they fed their bodies. The phrase of
speaking gives this interpretation, for if I say. This man was not worthily
enterteyned. I mean not that the party which enterteyned him was not worthy
to enterteyne so noble a man: but that he was not used as was beseamyng for
such a man to be used. So that to receive the Sacrament unworthily, is to
receive it otherwise or for an other purpose then it ought to be receyned for,
y^ is after any other form or for any other purpose then y^ words of y^ first
institution do declare. For when ye use of good things is altered from y^
purpose and end they were first ordained for: then are they unworthily
handled. Al they therefore which do privately receive the Sacrament, either to
merit them selves or other, other that do make it a sacrifyce for the
redemption of sin, or to pacify gods wrath in any condition, or after any
other form, or for any other purpose the^ is declared in the words of the
first institution: do receive it to their dampnation, putting no difference of
the Lords body, but using it as a matter of marchaundyse, or occupacion to
get their living upon. They only receive it worthily, which receive it as a
most worthy Sacrament and sign representynge unto us the communion and
partipacion we have in all that ever Christ did or purchased for us, by taking
our nature, and sufferyng therein al manner of most miserable afflicions, and
finally, by his most cruel and dolorouse death. Therefore to hoyse it over
their heads, to dance it over the cup, to carry it in the streets with a
great pomp and glory, to bow their knees and to knock their breasts before
it, and to lock it up in a pire to have it ready to serve at al hours, all
such chapmen as shall call for it: is but a polytyke cast of the merchants
which displeye and set abroad to be seen such marchaundyse as they would
faynest sell As they do offend which neglecte and contemn this most holy
mystery, esteaming it no better then the common bread wherewyth ou^e bodies be
fed: so do they also offend which honor it with divine honor, making
it thereby an ydol of all other most to be abhorred both for that (as they use
it) it is a plain Antichriste, spoylynge Christ of his victory atchyued by
the ones offering of him felfe for all: and al^o for that it pulls the
beleauers thereon, from the true adoracion of God the father, and makes them to
ho^our for the invisible, imme^se, and eternal god, that visible, mensueable,
and corruptible bread and wine. Yea (as they use it) it is not the communion
of Christ's body and blood at all, but a fond inuencion of their own. For
Christ did not make so many crossynges and blessings and then eat it up all
him self. But we must believe that they recey^^ it for us and in all our names.

We must believe that their receauynge of it is the application of Christ's
merits to us. We must believe that they can thereby releue y^ souls in y^
bitter pains of purgatory. We must believe that our being present at this
their sacrifice (as they call it) shall give us good spead in all our affairs,
be they never so deuely she. We must believe that a priest, (being neu^^ so
ungodly in his lyuinge, never so much subject unto sin, never so much the
deuels member) is the ministre of God, and that his prayer and sacrifice in the
mass is acceptable to God. In fine, we must believe that their masses be of
strength to purchayse the assistence of god in all dayngers, and a present
remedy against plage, penurye, and all diseases both of man and beast, against
wars, robberyes and all incursions of enemies both bodily and gostely. How
can these assertions stand with the communion of Christ's body and blood? did
Christ show the bread to his apostles and then eat it him self to certifye
their consciences thereby? Did he bid any one of them, take bread and wine and
show them to the residewe of the faithful so often as they would communicate
his body and blood: and then eat and drink all him self in stiede of all
the faithful that should be present? I think no man is so much without
shame ones to think it. But I know y^ (...) of their error. They say that
as Christ was the high priest or bishop, to ministre unto his apostles the
communion of his body and blood, which he did in dead offer on the cross to
his father: so did he ordain his apostles and in them all that should succeed
them: priests to offer up the self same (say they) to apply the sacrifice
done by Christ with the merits of the same, to the^ that are present there at,
or that shall by any means have it done for them. Oh blind bussardes. Where
are your spiritual eyes become? Did Christ (being the hight priest)
distribute the bread to his apostles, to y^ intent that they, and all other
their successoures^ should show the bread and wine to the people, and the^ eat
and drink all them selves? A man that has so much gostely knowledge as the
grain of a mustarde seed, would not fail to say that Christ meant rather
that the Apostles and priests should distribute the bread and wine among
the faithful people, wyssynge them to certifye them selves thereby that they
are partakers of the body and blood of Christ. For what says the text? So often
as you shall do this: ye shall do it in the remembrance of me. But what was it
that they should do in the remembrance of him? For soeth divide bread and
wine amongeste them. The private receynynge of the bread and wine therefore:
can by no means stand with the institucion of Christ: which was, that
according to his example, we should by the diuidynge of bread and wine
amongeste us: certifye our selves that we are all partakers with Christ in
his redemption through the rau^some that he paid for us on the cross. How
stands this with our heareynge of mass (to the intent to speed the better
thereby) when we go about our worldely businesses, be they honest or
dishonest, godly or ungodly? Forsoeth (I suppose) even as much as the carrying of
bread in man's pourse (in the night time, or in a tempest) ser^eth to keep him
from blastynge with evil airs. So that I dare be bold to affirm, that this
heareynge of mass is no better then me^e supersticion, and the mass it self,
so far from the i^stitucion of Christ: that it seameth not to be any part
of the co^memoracion of Christ's passion: But a mere invention of man, ^^epte
into the church by the subtle suggestion of our most cruel and maliciouse
enemy the devil, who has always endeavored to poysone all the wholesome food
of man's soul, as it appears right well by the great abuse that this most
sacred Sacrament is grouen unto. This was and ought to be so necessary a food
to the soul: that without it no christian can ^arie in Christ, another have
Christ tarry ynge in him, whereby it is plain that without this food no soul,
has any lyffe in it. For Christ is the life that is in the christian soul.
No less necessary therefore is this food to the souls of the congregation:
the^ sinews be to the body to hold the ioynetes together. Our aduersarye
therefore could in no case be quiet till he had poisoned this so necessary
food, corruptinge therein the virtue and strength to vnitte and knytte the
christians to Christ their head, making it of force to draw them quytte from
him, by puttyng their confidence in it, trustyng to redeame their sins by
often offering up thereof, in so much that they fell to foundynge of Abbayes,
chauntreis, and anniuersaries: for the salvation of their souls, for so was it
always specifyed and condicioned in the wrytynges made between the founders of
such abbayes, chauntries, and anniuersaryes: and the receyuers of the yerelye
rentes, given to that use. Yea rather abuse

And in this miserable estate has it continued even these.vi. hundredth years,
poysonynge the souls of them that should have been fed thereby. But here
must I beware that our enemy do not poysone these words of mine also,
causeynge men to understand me as one that would deny it to be possible for
any man to tarry in Christ or to have Christ taryinge in him unless he
receive these visible sacraments or signs bread and wine. No doubt
(christian reader) the belefe and trust in Christ, is the mea^e whereby Christ
taryeth in us and we in him. But this belief and trust are established and
confirmed by the use of these visi^le signs. As this belief and trust
therefore, are necessary to the abiding in Christ: so is the use of these
holy Sacraments also, for that it is the establyshment and confirmyng of the
said believe and trust. To all them therefore to whom this believe and trust are
necessary: are these sacred Sacraments also necessary. Where upon I conclude
that all Christians which are of age and discresion to deserne the faith in
Christ: ought also to use these most holy Sacraments to establyshe and
confyrme this faith withal. And Christ knowing the weakness of man, and how
hard it was to beat into his head the understanding of the high mystery of the
perticipation and communion that all faithful should have in his merits:
used these visible signs, that we might in them (even with our senses)
perceive this wonderful distribucion of the body and blood of Christ among his
faithful, which our gross nature could no more compass without these
visible signs, then the carnal and fleshly Jews could when Christ told
them of the eating of his flesh and drynkyng of his blood by beleuyng in him.
To help our wekenes therefore, it pleased the almyghtie wisdom of the Lord, to
declare unto us by our senses, the thing that ye same senses caused the Jews
to abhor. The manner I say of our perticipation and communion in Christ and
all that ever he deserved for us. For even as we se that we being many are
partakers of one loofe of bread, by eating thereof, and of one cup of wine
by drynkyng thereof: so are we certified by that participation, that we (being
many) beleuynge in Christ: are by that belefe, made partakers of Christ, and
with Christ in all that is his, none otherwise then all the members of one
body be partakers of all joys and pleasures that chance to the head. For as
the lofe whereof we eat is made of many graynes: and the Cup of wine whereof
we drink is made of many grapes, and yet is but one Cup of wine, and the
lofe but one lofe: even so are we that believe in Christ, but one body with
him and he our head, notwythstandyng we be many in number, and of diverse
nations, estates and conditions.

For as in the body be diverse members serving to diverse uses: i. Corhin. xi^.
so are there in the congregation of Christ (which Paul calls the body of
Christ) diverse estates. Some Apostles, some preachers, and some teachers.

And as in the body is no membre where unto is not appointed his peculiare and
necessary office: So in the congregation of Christ is there none estate or
condition but it is profitable, yea necessary to the other. This is a great
misterye (says Paul) the misterye I say of Christ and his congregation,
for it is his body, Thesalo. v.
of his flesh and of his bones. Not that the congregation or church is that
natural body that dyed on the cross, nor we (the members of the same
church) the flesh and bones of the same: But for that it was that
congregation, it was we (the members of this church) that caused Christ to
take our nature upon him, that therein he might satisfye for our sins,
making us partakers with him in this satisfaction, and so are we his body and
members, that is to say, his body and members were, and are the price
wherewyth we were redeamed out of the captivity and thrawledome that we were
in* This misterye is great, and far above the beastelye man's capacity. But
if we will be given to the spirit: the spirit shall minister unto us
abundauntly, the understanding thereof. For it is a common phrace or manner of
speaking amongeste us when any has bestowed his money upon any kind of
marchaundyse, we say, Lo, here is my.xx.li. or here are his hundredth marks,
showynge forth the wares that were bought with my.xx.li. or his hundredth
marks, so that here the thing boughte bearethe the name of the price. In like
manner does Paul call the congregation redeamed by Chistes body: his very
body, his flesh and his bones, because it is the machau^dice that was bought
with his body his flesh and his bones. The most sacred sacraments, also of
the body and blood of Christ: are called his body and blood, because they
declare unto us, what the body and blood of Christ be unto us, none other
wise then I call this book the suppet of the Lord, because it declares the
supper of the lord, so that here thou may se (gentle readar) wherein thou
have been so farte and so long deceived. Forsoeth in that thou haste not
known nor considered the causes why these most holy sacraments bear the
names of that they represe^t, show or declare unto us* But haste grosselye
persuaded thy self with the carnal and fleshly Jews, y^ Christ spoke
carnallye minding to turn the substaunc^ of the bread and wine, into the
substance o^ his body and blood: when he said unto hi^ disciples, this is my
body. But doubtless^ (good christian brother) our most cruel ene^mye, has
in this point uttered even the grea^test part of his maliciouse practyse. He
hat^ not faylled always to beat into our heads the omnipotency of God, who
could by his word make al things of naught, his verity, which will not
suffer him to leave ought undone that he says is or shall be done, and then
his words at his last supper. This is my hody etc. Here labors he with
toeth and nail (as they say) to keep us in the plain letter that we measure
not these words by the scriptures of like phrace. Note the subtyltie of the
devil.
The verity it self (says he) has spoken it, wherefore it can not be
otherwise. The only almyghtye which created all things by his word, has
said it: it is not therefore impossible that it should be so. Thou art a
christian man and have professed to beleaue all the words of Christ to be
true, though thy reasone can not comprehend the manner how. And will thou
with the carnal and fleshly Jews doubt in the perfourmance of the words that
thy Savior shall speak? He said that a vyrgyne should bring forth a
child: and will not thou beleaue it because thou canste not by reasone be
persuaded that it is possible for a vyrgyne to bring sorth a child? what
could the obstinate Jews do more, then blyndely and obstinately say: How
can this man give us his flesh to eat and his blood to drink? And will
thou be as obstinate as they and think it impossible for him to give the his
flesh (yea his very natural flesh) and blood under the form of br^ade and
wine? Oh subtylle serpent. Oh crafty dissembler. Now chaungeste thou thy self
into an angel of light. Thou ^adest the Jews abhor Christ's words because
the law (which they professed) taught them that it was abominable to eat the
raw flesh or drink the blood of any beast, much more of a man. And because
they should not consider and understand the spiritual eating of his dodye and
drinking of his blood by faith: thou put them in mind of the corruptible
Manna that the fathers did eat in wilderness. And that, notwythstandyng, that
bread came from heaven: yet was it not of such lyuelye force that it might
preserve the eaters thereof from death. Yea thou heldeste them in opinion that
it was not possible for Christ to give them his flesh to eat and his blood
to drink, after such sort that their stomakes might away with all. Wherefore
they said. How can this fellow give us his flesh to eat and his blood to
drink. But here thou come unto us with the contrary. Thou byddest us
beleaue that he was able to change bread and wine into his flesh and blood
that we might thereby away with the deuouryng thereof Thus thou playest on both
hands, with them because they should not look for any spiritual eating or
drynkyng of Christ's flesh and blood. And with us, that we should not
regard the spiritual eating and drinking, but that we should most regard
the fleshely devouring of the bread and wine. So that neither the Jews another
we^ can come to the true eating of Christ's flesh and drynkyng of his blood
by unfeigned faith in him and his merities. Here mayeste thou plainly se (most
dearly beloved in the lord) by what means our gostely enemy has spoiled us
of the use of these most preciouse Iewelles, the sacraments of Christ^s body
and blood: and how he labors daily in his members (the wicked papists)
to with hold from us the knowledge of the spiritual eating and drinking of
Christ: which begins now to spread the world over all. Let us run
therefore, unto our present and only succor in this great danger. To
Christ I say let us run, most humbly besekyng him our (Savior and
redeamer) plenteouslye to pour out, of his spirit of knowledge upon us all,
that we may daily more and more, find out the hid and secret
abhominacions, to the utter extirpacion and rowtyng out of the same. And in the
mean time let us pray to gyther that it may please the Lord to augment the
nu^bre of his faithful tournynge Saules in to Paul's that the hard hertes, may
be molified by hearing the persecutours preach Christ whom they persecuted. The
spirit of truth be with you al. So be it.

It is the spirit that quyckeneth, the flesh profits nothing at all.

John.svi. FOr as much as the most holy supper of our lord Jesus Christ has
of long time ben lapped up in manyfold and great errors and even of late
days wrapped in many opinions and contentions, nothing so quiet as was
besemyng: no marvel though certayue weak conscienced persons, can not well
determyne what thing they ought chyflye to follow, but do, with indeferente
and suspense mind, look when the servants of God settinge all contention a
part shall agree among them selves, and bring the matter to some concord
and unity. And seeing that such kind of doubt has no small incommoditye
annexed, and that it is a thyngee most dayngerouse, to have no certain
determinacion of that mistrye, the knowledge whereof is so necessary to our
salvation: I have thought it a thing most profitable, bryeflye to spoke of
the chief sum of the matter and yet plainly to declare what thing we ought
chyeflye to stick unto therein. More over, certain honest men perceiving the
matter to require no less: desired me earnestly to take it in hand whose
request I could by no means deny unless I would have been slake in doing
my duty. And that the difficulty thereof may the more easily be opened it is
neadfull to declare what order we intend to follow herein.

First I shall declare for what cause, and to what end, the Lord has
instituted this most holy sacrament. Then what ^ruite we take thereof, and
herein I will declare how the body of Chryst^ is given us in it.

Thyrdlye, what is the right use thereof. Forthlye, I shall rehearse the erroures
and superslicions whereby it has been defaced, and so will I declare, how the
servants of God ought to differ from the papists.

Finallye, I will declare the original of that contencion, which has been so
ernestlye mayntayned even of the same men which in our time, have applied al
their study to bring the gospel to light again, to replenish again the
congregation, and to restore the sincere and pure doctrine. As concerning the
First

When it pleased the almighty our God by baptism, to chose us into the
congregation, that is to say into his house which he will nouryshe and
defend: and that he has received us, not only as household servants, but
also as his children: it behooves him (if he will play the part of a good
father) to bring us up, ministrynge unto us all things necessary to food
and clothing.

But as concerning the things that pertayne to the educacion of the body,
because they be common to all men, so that as well the evil persons as y^ good
be partakers thereof: they are not to be taken as for things appertaynyng to
his household only. No doubt, in that he feadeth and defends our bodies, and
whiles we be partakers of al those good things which he most ple^teously and
liberally gives us, is declared a great toke^ of his father^y goodness toward
us. But in like manner as the life wherein he has regenerate us, is spi^ituall:
so is it neadfull that the meat wherewith we should be sustained and
stre^gthed, be al^o spiritual. For we must understand, y^ we are not called
to possess the celestial inheri^aunce, in time to come only: but y^ through
^ope we are in manner set in possession thereof ^l ready. So y^ he has not only
promised us life, but delyueringe us from death, he has al ready led us into
it in very deed. And this thing opteyned we, when he begat us a new with the
sede of immortality, y^ is to say his word, which through the holy ghost he
has prynted and fastened in our hertes. That we there fore may defend and
sustain this life, we must not seek y^ caducal and corriptible meats,
wherewith the bealy is fed: but we must provide for our souls much better and
more excellent food. And the whole scripture witnesses, y^ the self same
words, whereby the lord has begotten us a new, is y^ spiritual bread whereby
our souls are sustained and fed: the reasone is this, by cause in it, Christ
our only life is given and ministered unto us. For when god would that al
abundance of life, should remain in Christ to the intent y^ by him, he might
make us partakars thereof: he ordained the word also, whereby Christ and all his
mercyes might be ministered unto us. This sentence therefore is infallibly true,
that our souls are fed and nourished, with none other food then Jesus Christ.
Not y^ visible signs but y^ things sign^^d.
Wherefore the heavenly father being careful for our educacion, gave us none
other food: yea rather he committed this unto us, singularly.

And for as much as it is sufficient enough for the recreacion and
sustenaunce of our souls, he wyll^d us to content our selves therewith, and
that our souls should rest t^gether therein: because we may by no means be
with out that food, which being taken away, none other can be found. Now
do we perceive after what sort Christ is y^ only food wherwyth our souls be
sedd^^^ut because he is distributed unto us by the word of y^ lord as by the
instrument appointed for the same purpose: he is named bread and wine. And
that which is spoken of the word, appertains also to the sacrament of the
supper, whereby the Lord leads us unto the partakyng of Christ. For because
we be so weak and feeble, that we can not (with unfeigned trust of mind)
receive him, when he is offered unto us in the bare preaching of the doctrine:
the father of mercy wyllyng to accommodate him self unto our infimitie
therein, Our infirmity was cause of y^ sacrament.
has joined unto the word a sign to be seen with the eyes, whereby he might
represent unto us the very substance of his promesses, that al doubt and
wauerynge taken away, we might be co^fyrmed and strengthened in him.

Seeing therefore this misterye is high and hard to attain to: and that we
can not by wit comprehend, or by study understand how the body and
blood of Christ may be communicate unto us: and that we be so rude and
ignorant, that we understand not even the very least of the divine matters:
it was neadefull to declare and open this misterye after such sort as the
ability of our wit might away with all.

And for that cause did the Lord institute the supper* that he might print in
our consciences those promesses wherwyth he has in the gospel promised, to
make us partakers of his body and blood: and that he might establysh us in
this persuasion, our spiritual life to be remaining in him, that we, receyuyng
so noble a pledge, may conceive a sure hope of salvation. Forthermore, that we
should be exercised in acknowledgynge his great goodness toward us, Note (...)
what end the supper was instituted.
and in celebratyng and setting forth of the same with all land and praise.
Thyrdly, that we should be provoked to embrace holiness and innoncencie, The
use of y^ Sacrament.
for as much as we acknowledge our selves to be the members of Christ, and
that above all other, we set forth and maynteyne frendshyp and brotherly
concord, whereof we have an especial commandment. When we have well and
diligently marked these three causes (to which no doubt the Lord had respect
when he instituted the supper) an entrye shall be opened unto us that we may
the better understand what fruit we receive thereby, and by what mean we may
use it a right. We must therefore now come unto the second part, that we
may declare what wholesome fruit the supper of the Lord brings unto us: so
we will understand and gather the same. And that shall we know when we will
digentlye perpende our own great lack which if succurreth. No remedy we
must neades be vehementlye troubled and vexed in mind, so often as we consider
what we are our selves, and when we examyne all that is in us. For there is not
one of us that can find so much as one little crombe of justice in him self:
Of our self, we have none other thing but sin.
but contrary wise, we are defiled with so many vices and wicked deeds,
stouffed full of so great a multitude of sins, that there neadeth none other
accuser then our own conscience: another neadeth it to seek for any other judge
to give sentence against us. Whereof it follows, that the ire of God is styred
against us, and that none of us can be able to escape the judgment of
eternal death.

And unless we will be very dreamars and blockeheades no remedy we shall,
through this horrible cogitacion, be ve^ed and troubled, as it were with a
continual hell fire. For we can not remember the iudgmente of God, but
incontinent our own damnation is before our else. We are therefore al ready
swalowed up by the devouring sincke of death, were it not that almighty God
delyuereth us. And what hope of resurrection may we have when we consider our
own flesh, so rotton and full of all corruption? And therefore whether we
consider body or soul, nothing can be more miserable then we are, so long as
we shall consider but our selves only: and whylse we perceive so great
miseries, no remedy we must neades be miserably tormented, and affected with
extreme heaviness. That the heavenly father therefore might succure this our
calamity, he gave unto us the supper, as a glass wherein we might behold
Christ crucified and raised again. Crucified, that our sins might be
forgynen. Raised again, that we delivered from corruption and death, might
be restored to the heavenly immortality. Follow this guide.
This singular consolacion take we of the lords supper, that it directs and
leads us unto the cross and resurrection of Christ: that we may know for
certentye, that we (although we be wicked and unclean) be acknowledged and
received of the lord, yea and taken for just: and that by him we are restored
to life notwithstanding that we be hedged in Wtin al kindness of death: and
that we be replenished with all kind of felicitye, notwythstandyng that we be
miserable and full of calamity. Or to make the thing more plain. When there is
no goodness at all remaynyng in us, neither any one thing, of those things
which should help to the op^aynynge of salvation: the supper does
abundauntly witness unto us, that we have ^ptayned all things profitable and
wholesome, in that we be partakers of the death and passion of Chist, Wherefore we
may affirm, that whiles the lord admits us in to the felowshyppe of the
goods and richesses of Christ, he opene^h the treasorye of his mercyes. Let
us remember therefore that in the supper is given unto us, The carnal ate can
not see these things in this glass.
as it were a glass, wherein we may behold Christ, crucified, to deliver us
from death and dampnacion and raised up again to iustifye us, and give us life
everlasting And all be it that the same mer^cye is given unto us in the Gospel:
yet, for that in the supper, we have more certentie and fuller frui^yon, we can
do no less but acknowledge that we receive this profit thereof.

But for because the merytes of Christ appertain nothing unto us, unless he
him self be ou^^s before: it is most expedyente that in the Supper he be
given unto us, that those things whereof we have spoken, may in very deed,
Not y^ natural substancd as ^^^pysters do fa^^e.
be performed in us. And therefore have I used to say. That Christ is the
mattire and substance of the Sacraments and that the mercies and benefytes
which we get by him, are the efficacy and strength thereof. To conclude, the
hole strength and energye of the supper consists in this thing, to confirm
the reconciliacion with God, made by the death and passion of Christ. To
certifye us that our souls be washed in his blood, (...) that we be made just
through his obedience. And ^o conclude. To prynt surely in our minds, that
hope of salvation which we have in all those things that he has done for us.

Upon this must we necessarilye conclude, that there is a substance annexed
unto this virtue: otherwise should we have no stydfastnesse or certentie
therein, we must therefore conclude, that in the supper are given unto us two
things, As we receive him so is he given unto us. y^ is spiritually
that is to say Christ, as fountain, origyn and mattier of all good things:
and the fruit and efficacy of his death and passion, which thing, even the
very words y^ be spoken in the supper do a bundau^tly declare For when he
bed us eat his body and drink his blood: he adds, that his body was
given for us and his blood shed for the remission of our sins, wherein he
does first declare that his body, and blood are not simply with out any other
consideracion, communicate unto us: but that we must also consider the fruit
that comes unto us by his death and passion. In fine. How may we be able to
come to the fru^cion of so exceeding good things, unless we be partakers of
the body and blood of him that has produced these things, and given them
unto us.

Now enter we into that question, which has been so greatly tossed both in
time paste and in these our days also: how those words are to be
understand, wherein Christ calls his body bread, and his blood wine.
Which words may easily be opened, if we keep in memory those principles
which I have before set forth: that is to say, that all the fruit we seek
for in the supper, is brought to naught, unless Christ be given unto us
therein, as the foundation and substance of all the whole matter. And if we ones
grant this thing, then no doubt we shall grant also, that there is given
unto us naught else but an unprofitable and vain Sacrament* if we deny that in
it is given unto us the very participacion of Christ: which thing were
execrable and shame full blasphemye. Forthermore, if the manner of the communion
with Christ be such that we be partakers of all the mercies and benifites
which he gate for us by his death: then are we not partakers with the spirit
only but with y^ ma^boode also: wherein he performed perfect obedience to God the
father, to the intent he might pay our det es. Although, to say the truth
the one can not be without the other. For when he gives him self unto us, he
does it to the intent we should possese him whole. And therefore, as I have
said, that his spirit is our life: even so does he his own mouth declare
that his flesh is our food, The mouth of the soul (y^ receives this fode)
is faith.
and his blood our very drink. If this be not spoken in vain, no remedy
our life must neades consiste in him, and our souls be nourished with his
flesh and blood, as with their proper and peculyar food. Of that thing have
we testimony in y^ supper, when it is said of the bread that we should take it
and eat it and that it is his body: and of the cup, that we drink it and
that it is his blood here are the body and blood named, to the intent we
should learn to seek the substance of our spiritual life therein. Now if any
man would demand of me whether the bread be the body of Christ, and the
wine his blood: thereto would I answer, that the bread and wy^e are visib^l
signs, representynge unto us the body and blood of Christ, and that they be
called the body and blood because they be as it were instruments whereby the
lord Jesus Christ distributeth them unto us. This form of speaking agrees
very well with the thing

For not wythstandynge that oureeyes, (...) nor our wits can not comprehend
the communion that we have in the body of Christ yet is it there openly
showed before our eyes. We have, in a like thing, an example very fytte for
the purpose. When the lord would that his spirit should appear in the
baptism of Christ, he showed him under the shape of a dove* John the Baptyste
recytyng that hystorye says that he saw the holy Ghost descen dynge. But if
we mark it well, we shall find that he saw naught else but a Dove. For the
substance of the holy Gooste is muisible.

But for that he knew that vision to be no vain figure, but the most sure
token of the presence of the holy ghost: he doubted nothing at all to affirm
that he saw him: because he was represented unto him under soche sort as he
was able to abide. Even so must we say as concerning the communion that we
have in the body and blood of Christ. It is a spiritual misterye, which
can neither be seen with the eyes, another comprehended with the wit.
Therefore, as the weakness of our nature requires, it is set forth with
visible figures and signs: but yet under such sort that it is not a bare and
simple figure, but joined unto his verite and substance. The bread therefore is
not vnworthylye called the body: for as much as it does not only r^present
it unto us, but also bring unto us the same thing. I can be right well
content therefore* to grant: that the name of the body of Christ be
transferred unto the bread because it is the sacrament and figure thereof.

But this one thing will I add. The substance of a sacrament is y^ free
mercy ther^n p^^mised.
That the sacrametes of the Lord ought by no means to be separate from his
substance and verytye And yet is it not only mete, but also very necess^ry: so
to set them a sunder, that they be not confounded. But to divide them so, that
the one should be made perfyt without the other is most vnsemley. When we
therefore, do behold the visible sign: we must consider what it represents,
and who gave it us. For the bread is given to the intent that it should be y^
figure of the body of Christ* and we are commanded to eat it. It is given I
say, of God the certain and unchangeable verity. If so be y^ God can neither
disceyue nor lie: it follows y^ he does in very deed perform, and fulfill,
all that he does there signifye. No remedy therefore, It is faith y^ mouth of the
soul, that receives this body and blood
we must neades unfeignedly receive the body and blood of Christ in his
supper for as much as the Lord offers unto us herin, the communion for them
both. For what should this mean, that we should eat bread and drink wine,
to the intent that they shoud declare unto us that his flesh is our meat and
bys blood our drink, if he letteynge the spiritual veritye pass, should
give us naught else but bread and wine? had he not then instituted this
misterye faynedlye and in vain? And as we say in the French tongue, under
disceyuable signs? And therefore must we neades grant, that if the
representation which the Lord gives in the supper be no sayned thing, Only
the faitheful receive this substance.
that then the inward substance of the Sacrament is annexed to the visible
signs: and that in like manner as the bread is distributed in the hand, so is
the body of Christ communicate unto us, to the intent that we should be
partakers thereof. And doubtless if there were no more but this one thing,
yet ought it to satisfye us aboundantlye, for as much as we understand that
in the supper. Christ gives unto us the very substance of his body and
blood: that we may with full tyghte possess him, and in possessynge him, be
called into the society of al his good things. For in that we possess him,
all the treasures and heavenly goods, which be secretelye laid up in him,
are set out unto us, to the intent that they should be ours, and that we
should enjoy them with him. Brefely therefore to defyne the profit of the
supper: we may say y^ in it Jesus Christ is offered unto us: that we may
possess him, him self, and in him abundance and plentye of all the mercyes
and benefytes that the mind can desire. Which thing is an exceadynge great
help unto us in stablishynge our consciences in that trust which we ought to
have in him. An other utility is, that by it we are more steared and
admonished to acknowledge the benefytes which we have and do day lie receive of
the Lord Jesus Christ that we may give unto him honor and glory: and that
(as mete is) we celebrate his most holy name with continual praises. For by
nature we are very negligent, and in remembrance of the goodness of our god,
neither do we think there on at any time, unless he do awake our
slougyshnesse and provoke us to our duty.

And with sharper pricks ca^ we not be pricked, then in that he compels us
(as it were) to se with our eyes, and to handle with our hands, yea openly
to know and perceive, the greatness of the inestimable benefyt in that he
feadeth, and refreshes us with his own proper substance, which thing he would
should be declared and made open unto us, in y^ he byddeth us declare his death
till he come. If so be that it be a thing so necessary to salvation, not to be
unmindful of the mercies and benefits that god has showed unto us, but rather
diligently to call them a gain to memory, and to extolle the^ greatly to
other men, that we may by mutual admonicio^s be stered up: we se therein a
singular commodity of the supper, Use this commodity.
which calls us back from the vice of unthankfulness, and suffers us not to
forget y^ great benefit which Christ showed us when he died for our sakes: but
it brings us to this pass, that we give thanks unto him, and do (as it
were) with an open testimony, confess how much we are bound unto him. The
third kind of vtiliti^ consists in this thing, that we be thereby more
veheme^tlie stered up, to sanctimonie and purity of life and are with more
force of persuasions, dryue^ chieflye and before all other, to keep charity
and friendship among ourselves. For, seeing that we be made the members of
Christ, being granted into his body, and are joined to gether with him, as
with our head: it is but mete, that we chiefly be facioned after his purity,
and ^nnocencie, and that there be especially such concord among us, as ought to
be among the members of one body. Although to have y^ true understanding of
this vtilite, we ought not to think, that the lord does only exhort and
stere us up, other inflame us with an external sign. For this is the chief
thing that he with his spirit works intierlye in us, God works by his
sacraments as the Geometricia^ does by his de^o^stracion.
to add force and efficacye as his ordinance which he has appointed as it
were an instrument serving him to this purpose, that he might accomplysh and
finishe his work in us, therefore, because the power of the holy ghost is
coupled with the sacraments, when they be received so as they ought to be: we
ought to hope and trust, that they be an help unto us that we may go forward
in holiness of life and especyally in charity.

Now must we come to the third of the chief parts which we have purposed
in the beginning of this little book, that is to say to the right use, that we
may reuerentlye observe the institution of the Lord. For who so ever comes
unto this sacrament, with a certain comtempte, negligentlye or without
regard, nothing careful to hold his purpose, and to persevere in that where
in the Lord has called him: he does frowardlye abuse it, and in abusing
fylthyly contaminate it.

But to contaminate and pollute the thing that god has so holyly consecrated,
is a great and intolerable sacrilege. Neither is it in vain that Paul
declares so greuouse and cruel dampnation to all them that receive it
unworthily. For if there be nothing, either in heaven, either in earh, that
is more worthy then the body and blood of the Lord: it is no small fault to
dispice it, Note what it is to receive a Sacrament unworthily.
and to receive it without consyderation, and to come thither not well and
diligently prepared. Forthermore, he does advertise us to prove our selves,
that we may use it even as the thing requires. If so be that we understand
what probation that ought to be: we shall also perceive what use that is which
we look for, but great and wise circumspection must be had in this thing. For
as we can not be to diligent in examinynge our selves, as the Lord has
commanded: even so did the sophihical doctors (whyl^e they required I can
not tell what kind of probation, These, loode the consciences of men.
and diligence in examinyng of a man's self, such as never man could be able
to perform, hold the miserable consciences to much pe^plexe, casting them
into wonderful daungerouse anxietie, yea rather into horrible torments. And
to be delivered from these inrollynges of perturbacions, we must (as I have
said before) reduce all things to the institution of the Lord, as to the
rule, which if we follow, we shall neither slide nor err. And following it
we ought to consider whether we feel in our selves unfeigned repentance and
faith. Which two are so joined between them selves, that it is not possible
that the one can by any means con^yste without the other. For if we do suppose
that our life remains in Christ: then must we acknowledge that in our
selves we are dead.

If we seek our force and strength in him: then must we understand that we
destituted of all strength, do faynte. If we put all our felicity in his
mercy: we must neades perceive how great our misery is, when that is a way. If
our quietness and tranquilite be reposed in him: the^ must we feel naught else
in our selves but unquietness, troublesome ears, and solicitudes. And such
affection can not be in us but it will engender in us a cartayne displeasaunce
of our whole life, besides the care^ulnes and fear, and at the last, the love
and desire of justice. For he that knows the filthiness of his sin and the
m^serie of his estate whilse he is exiled from God, is so gr^a^ly a bashed,
that he is constrained, to be out of conceyt with him self to condemn him
self, and for very dolor of heart to weep and syghe. To these things, is the
judgment of. God objected incon^mente, which thrutcheth the conscience of the
sinner in wonderful straites, when he perceives y^ he can by no means
escape, and that there is no place of defense remaining. When we acknowledginge
our own misery after such sort are able to taste of the goodness of God
then do we desire to direct all the order of our life unto his will, that
(abiectinge the things which we followed before (we may in him be made a new
creature. If we, therefore will have that communyon, which is be seming for us
to have, the communion of the most holy supper of the Lord: Let us with a
frime confidence of mind take Christ for our justice, He y^ trusts not in
Christ only, has no part with him.
life and health: let us embrace his promesses supposing them be to certain
and constant: let us renounce al succors to the contrary, which strive
therewith, and all confidence of the same: that we distrustynge our selves and
al other creatures may be quiet in him only, and content our selves with
his only mercy which thing because it can not be done, unless we know how
much neade we have of help and succure: no remedy we must neades be most
sharply pricked and dug as it were with a goade, through that fealing of our
misery: that we as me^ half^ famished, may desprously look for him. For how
fond a thing were it to seek for meat without any manner of appetit: And to
get an appetite to meat, the next way is to have an emptye stomach, but in
such taking that it may admit meat Of this it follows y^ it behooves our
souls to be hungry, and seruentlye to desire meat, that they may in the
supper of the Lord find their nu^rimente. Forthermore, it is to be noted that
we can not desire Christ unless we do aspire to y^ justice of god: which
consists in the denial of our selves, (...)
and the obedience that ought to be given unto him. For it can by no means
agree, that we should be of the body of Christ. (...) uyng in the mean (...)
f^lthily, volt^ptuously, and without ^ule Sc^^ge that in Christ is naught
else but all puritye, contin^nce, gentl^nesse, sobriety, veritye, humbleness
and other like vertu^s: it behooves us (if we will be members of his body) to
be clear from al voluptuousness and riotte from arrogance, intempetance,
vanity, pride, and other vices. For we can not mingle those with him without
great shame and reproach. It behooves us all way to rem^mbre, that there is no
more concord between him and iniquity, then is between light and darkness.
The ima^e of repentance.
Lo by what means we may come to perfyt repentance: by appoyntynge our
journey so, that our life be fashioned after the example of Christ. But,
although this thing be commune to all parts of the life: yet take they place
chieflye in charity: which in this Sacrament is singulerlye commended unto us.

By reason whereof, it is also called the bond thereof. For as the bread,
which for the use of all men, is there sanc^ifyed, is made of man^^ grayn^s,
so compacte to gyther that one can not be separate and discerned from the
other: even after the same rate ought we to be joined together with the
indissoluble bond of frendshyppe. And so do we all receive one body of
Christ, to the end we may be his m^mbres. Discord destroyethe that concord
has builded.
But if we be full of discordes and di^cencions:: we do as much as in us
lies, tear Christ and poule him in sunder neither shall we be gyltye of
smaller sacrilege, then if we had done the thing in deed, Let us not therefore
be bold to come thither, if any hatred or evil will toward any man, and
chiefly a christian and joined to the unity of the church^ do remain in us.
We must also (for the keeping and following of the order of the Lord) bring
with us an other affection: that is to say, that we confess with mouth and
declare in very deed how much we are bound to our Savior: and that we may
give thanks unto him: not only that we may give glory to his name, but
that we may also instruct one an other, and that our neighbors may, through
our example, learn what they ought to do.

But for that there can no man be found, that has so profited in faith and
sanctity of life, but that he lacks yet very much: it were danger lest
very many godly consciences should be troubled with those words that I have
spoken, unless I would return myttigatynge those precepts which I have
Believe and dispeare not
given of faith and repentance.

For that kind of teaching is very daungerouse, wherein some men, leaving the
perfyte trust and repentance of the mind, will that all men which be not
endued with such things, be excluded. For so should all men, be excluded, not
one man excepted.

And to prove that thing to be true, who can boste that he has no point of
diffidence in him? and that he is depraved with no spot of mind, or with no
kind of weakness? A necessary prayer
Certes the children of God have such faith that it is neadful for the^
always to pray unto the lord that he be present and help their incredulity.
For this disease is so fast rooted in us, that we can by no means be healed,
before we be delivered out of the bounds of this body. Yea the holiness of
our life is such, that we must neades pray daily to get remission of
sins, and grace to amend.

And, although some be more imperfyte then some, yet is there no men but he
falls in many things. And therefore, if that integr^tye of faith and life be
required, wherein wants no^hynge at all: the supper should not be only
unprofitable unto all men, So the Devil would have it
but also very hurtful, which thing, no doubt, is most wide from the mind and
purpose of the Lord which gave unto his congregation, nothing more wholesome
then that. When we therefore, shall feel in our selves a faith not yet perfyte,
and shall not be endued with so pure a conscience but that it accuse us of many
vices: that ought not to let us for coming to the Lords sacred table: so be
that we, voyed of al hypocri^y and simulation, do in y^ weakness trust for
health in Christ, wyllyng to direct our life after the rule of y^ gospel. But
namely I say that there be none Hypocrisy: This hypocriis daughter ^o c^re
shryfte.
because very many do disceyue the^ selves with vain flat crynges, persuaring
them selves that it is sufficient if they condemn their vices although^ they
do nourishe the same: or else it suffices if they abstain from them for a time
and intend to return to the same again incontinent. But the true
repentance is firm and constant. And therefore it brings to pass that we
strive against the evil that we our selves carye with us, nor for a few
days or months but through all the time of our life: without any manner
intermission. When we fel^ that vices do s^ displease us, and that the vnf^in^d
hatred for them protedyng from the fear of god, is graffed in us, and that we
be also led with the desire to live well and holylye: we are apt and mete to
receive the supper of y^ Lord: although there be yet remaining in us very many
fragmentes of infirmities. Yea unless we were weak, None has made of
medicine but the sick
subject to diffidence, and imperfect life: the sacrament were unprofitable
for us, and the institution thereof had not ben necessary. Seeing therefore it
is the remedy wherwyth God would succure our weakness, stre^ghthen our faith,
increase our charity and set us forward in sanctity of life: we ought so
much the rather to use it, how much more grievously we feel our selves
oppressed with the magnytude of y^ disease. Much less ought it to be an
impediment unto us. For if we do lay for excuse that we be yet weak in faith,
and not of life perfyte enough, to the intent we may with draw our selu^s
from the use of the supper it were even like as if a man would abstain from
physyke because he were sick.

The weakness therefore of faith and the vices of our life ought to admonish
us to come to the supper, as to the chyefe remedy, that they might be amended
and corrected.

So that we come not, void of all faith and repentance. Whereof the first is
hyd in ye mind and therefore our conscience must bear us witness before God.
The later is declared in action and work: and therefore it is requisyte y^ it
appear in our life.

As concerning the time of celebratynge the supper, it may not be appointed
and prescribed unto all men. For there is no man but he shall sometime have
such pryuate impedyment^s, as may excuse a man though he abstain. Besides
that we have no precepte. whereby all men be compelled to use it so often as it
may be offered unto them, but yet if we have respect unto the end where unto
the Lord leads us: Once in aye^e is to lit^e of conscience.
we shall know that the use thereof ought to be much more common thn it is
commonly among many men. For, look how much more we be ^^pressed with weakness
so much the more often ought we to be exercy sed in it, because it may and
ought to be profitable unto us, both for the confirmacyon of our faith, and
also for the setting for ward of the holiness of life. Wherefore in all
congr^gacyo^s well ordered, ought to be such custo^ that the supper be celebrate
so often as may be and so much as y^ people shall be able to receive And every
private person ought, so much as in him lies, to be ready to receive it so
often as it shall be celebrate in a common assemble: unless he be by very
urgent causes constrained to absteyne. For, all be it, that the time is not
assigned nor the day expressed by any precepte or commandment: yet ought
this thing to suffice, that we know it to be the Lords will we should use
this Sacrament of y^ times. Otherwise we know not the profit that comes
These be the suggestio^s of the devil
unto us thereby. The excuses that some men lay, are voyed and vain. Some say
they are not worthy: and by that pretexte they absteyne all the year. Other do
not only consider how unworthy they be: But they do also lay for them, that
they can not communicate with such as they see come thither unprepared. Also,
other suppose that the often use of it is superfluous: neither do they think
that it ought to be so often iterated and repeted, after that we have once
received Christ. I ask of those first, which lay for them selves their
own unworthiness: how their conscience can sustain so great miserye more
then an year, and dare not call upon the lord accordyngly. For they will grant
it to be a point of rashness, to call upon god as a father, unless we be
the members of Christ. Which thing can not be done unless the substance and
verity of the supper be fulfilled in us.

And if we have the verity it self* we are with much better reason, mete to
receive the sign.

Whereby we perteyue, that they which would exempte them selves from the
supper as unworthy, do rob them selves of that great commodity of
inuocatyng and prayinge to god. But I would not compel them whose consciences
be troubled and feared by any religion, to the intent they should
intermingle them selves rashlye: But rather I counsel them to tarry for a
season, until the lord shall voultsafe to deliver them from that anxietie. In
like manner if there be any other cause I do not deny but it is lawful to
defer.

I do only purpose to declare, that no man ought to continewe long in this
thing that he may absteyne for unworthiness.

For so is the congregation robbed of the communion: Christ is (...) health.
wherein all our health consists.

Let him rather endeavor to fight against all the impedimentes wyche the
devil casts against him, lest he be excluded from so great a good thing,
and consequently robbed of all the benefytes to gyther.

The other men's reasone is more aparaunt: because they use this reasone. That
is to say, if it be not leaful to eat commune bread with them that name them
selves brethrens, and do, yet nevertheless* live fylthyly and lycen
cioussye: much less that bread, which is consecrated for this intent, that
it may represent and give unto us the body of the Lord.

But it is no hard thing to make answer to these also, that it perteyneth
not to every private person, to judge and decerne, who ought to be admit^ed,
and who to be depelled: but to the whole congregation, other else the sheep
he^de and elders, whose help he ought to use in the orderyng and gouernyng of
the congregation. For sayncte Paul commands us not to examyne other, but
our selves

It is our duty, to admonish them that live viciouslye: and if they will not
here us to make relacion to the shepeherde: that he may finishe the matter by
the authority of y^ congregation. But we may not so wythdrawe our selves we
may not do iuel for a good intent.
from the company and assemble of the wicked that we forsake the communion of
the congregation. Bysydes these things, it shall often times chance, that the
crimes be not so magnifest, that it may beleaful to proceed to
exco^municacion. For, although the shepeherde shall in his mind judge any man
to be unworthy: yet may he not pronounce him to be such a one or prohibit him
the supper: unless he have co^uicted him by the judgment of the congregation,
which thing when it chances, there remains none other remedy, but that
we desire god that he will deliver his church from al offenses: in this mean
time whylse we look for the day of indgement, wherein the chafe shall be
severed from the good grain. The third, have no kind at all of the
lyklinesse of the truth. For this spiritual bread is not given unto us, to
the intent we should be glutted incontinent, but rather, that tastyng the
swetnesse thereof, A good thing can not be to often used.
we should hunger the more after it, and use it as often as it should be
proffered unto us. This is the thing that I have expounded before: that Jesus
Christ is never so communicate unto us (so long as we be in this mortal
lyffe) that our souls may be saciate with him, but that he may be an
acustomed nouryshement unto them.

To come to the fourth part. When the devil perceived that the lord left to
the congregation, nothing more profitable than this sacrament: he did (after
his accustomed manner) employe him self (even incontine^t upon the first
institucion) to co^taminate it with diverse Satan's old practiese.
errors and supersticions, to y^ intent he might corrupt and distroy the
fruit thereof: neither did he sease to labor his purpos, until he had put
away the institucion of the lord, and turned it into a lie and vanite. It
pertains not to my purpose to assygne in what time every disceyte and error
had his begynnyyg. It shall be sufficient for me articularly to note the
erroures y^ the devil has invented, which we must beware of if we will have
the supper of the Lord uncorrupted. First therefore wha^ the lord gave the
supper unto us, to the intent it should be distributed among us, that it might
represe^t unto us the communion which we have in his body, and also that we
might be partakers of that sacrifice, which he offered unto his father, to
purge our sins: men have on the contrary, by their own wits commented,
that it is a sacrifyce whereby we obtain of god remission of sins. Which
thing is detestable sacr^lege, and not to be suffered by any means. For
unless we acknoledge, and believe stedfastlye that the death of the lord Jesus
Christ is the only sacrifice, whereby he reconciled us to god the father,
putting away all the sins whereof we were giltye in his judgment: we
overthrow and distroye his force and efficacy. Unless we grant that Christ
is the only pryest by whose inte^cession we are comen again into favor with
his father: we rob him of his honor, and do him great injury. Seeing
therefore, that, that opinion which fayneth that the supper of the lord is a
sacrifice whereby we get and obtayn^ remission of sins, fyghteth against
the same, it must be taken away and condemned as diuyllyshe. That it
repugneth is most. certain For how ca^ these things agree? That Christ in
dyinge, offered sacrifice to y^ father: whereby once for all he optayned pardon
and remission of all our sins: and that we must sacrifyce again daily,
that we may obtain that thing which is to be sowght in his only death?

This error was not at the higheste incontinent Every pope put to his por^ion
upon the beginning, but increasynge by little and little, it was at length
brought to this point. It is manifest y^ the fathers of old time called the
supper a sacrifice. But they show a reason why, because the death of Christ is
represented there in. Their saying therefore, is to this purpose, that because
the supper is the memory of that only sacrifice, wherein we ought utterly to
content our selves, therefore is that name attributed. Neither can I blame the
custom of the old congregation, because they did in their gesture and riete
figurate a certain image of a sacrifice, with the same ceremonies in manner, that
were in use under y^ old law: this one thing excepted, y^ in stead of a
^east, they used bread for their sacr^fice. Which thing for that it pricketh
to nere the Iewyshe mark and is not agreeable to the institution of the Lord,
I do not allow it.

For in the old testament (the time of figures) the lord instituted such
ceremonies, to be observed, until that sacrifyce were celebrated in the flesh
of his most dear beloved son, which was the truth of them all.

Seeing therefore, all this is finished, there remains no more but that we use
the communion thereof. It is therefore superfluous, to declare that thing, with
figures. Therefore, by the instruction of Christ, we are not commanded to offer
or sacrifyce: Then is the mass the popes sacrifice.
but to take and eat the thing that is al ready offered and sacrificed. And
although the au^cientes, did somewhat offend in that observation: yet was not
the impiety so great as that which did afterward crepe in. For the thing that
was proper and peculiar to the death of Christ, was utterly transposed to the
mass: that it might satisfye to god for our offenses, and that we might be
reconcyled by it. Besides these things, that office which was Christ's, was
attributed unto them which called them selves priests that they might
sacrifyce unto god, and that they might pray before him with their sacrifices
to obtain pardone and remission of our sins. I will not disse^ble in these
solucio^s which the enemies of y^ truth do bring in this matter. That the
mass is no new sacrifyce, The Devils solusion.
but the applicacyon of that only sacrifyce whereof I have spoken. Although
they go about to cover their abhominacion with some manner color: Yet does it
manifestlye apeare to be a mere cauillacion. For it is not only said that the
sacrifice of Christ is but one: but also that it ought not to be iterate,
s^ynge that the force and efficacy thereof is perpetual. It is not said that
Christ was ones offered up to the father, that other should afterward v^e
the same oblacion: that they might apply unto us the force of his
intercessyon: but that he is entered into the sanctuarye of heaven, and that he
apperethe there to the intent he may make the father merciful unto us,
through his intercession. As concerning the applycacyon of the merits of his
death, that we may feel the fruit thereof: that is done, not after such sort
as they of the popyshe church think it to be done: but when we receive the
tidings of the Gospel, The heareing of the gospel applies Christ's merits
unto us.
even such as the ministers whom God has ordained as embasatours, do in
their preaching proteste: yea such as he has sealed with sacraments as with
seals. All, as well teachers as pastors have allowed this opinion of the commone
people wherein they supposed, that man to deserve mercy and iustifcacion (even
for the works sake) which would hear or bye a mass.

But I say, that if we will take any profit of the supper, we must bring
thither nothing of our own, to the intent to deserve the thing that we look
for: but that we must only receive with faith, the mercy that is in it
offered unto us. Measure al y^ is spoken of y^ sacrament: by this sentence.
And yet does not that mercy remain in the sacrament: but as it comes from
the cross of Christ, even so it sends us back again to the same. Nothing
therefore, is so contrary to the true understanding of the supper, as to make
thereof a sacrifice. For it will not fuffer us to acknowledge the death of
Christ to be the only sacrifice, which shall continewe for ever. These
things well understand, it shall be evident, that al those masses wherein is
no such communion of the supper as the Lord instituted, are naught else but
very abominacyon. For the Lord did not ordain that the prist only should
severally satisfy him self after he had fynished his sacrifice: but his will
was y^ this sacrament should be distributed in an open assemble, like unto the
first supper which he celebrated with his apostles. But after y^ this
detestable opinion was invented, this unhappy custom proceeded out of it as
out of an hell mouth, wherein the people contenting them selves with being
present at the action, as though they should thereby obtain some great merit,
do in the mean time abstain from the communion: because the pressed bosteth
that he offers sacrifice for all and chiefly for them that be present. I let
pass the disceytes and illucions wherein* is so much vnseamelynesse, that they
are not to be spoken of: as to attribute to eueri little saint his appropriate
mass: and to transfer unto ^atte and will (as we say in the French
proverb) the thing that is spoken of the supper of the lord. Also to make
marchau^dise thereof. With the other puddell of filthynesses which have spronge
of this name sacrifice. An other errowre follows which the devil has sown
to the intent to corrupt this high mistcrie that is to say, in that he
commented the tra^ssubstanciacion of the bread into the bodyeand of the wine
into the blood of Christ, Herin rests y^ whole mattier.
after the words should be pronounsed with the intent to consecrate.

First that comment has no foundation at al in the scripture, neither has it
any testemonie of the old congregation: and therefore can it by no means agree
or stand with the words of the lord. Is not such an interpretacion to
violent and to much wrasted? To say, that when Christ showing bread, calls
it his body, the substance of the bread is co^s^med, and that the body of
Christ succedeth in the place thereof? But it neadeth not to call the matter
into question, saying that the bright and splendiferouse verity is of it self
able to confute so absurd a vanity. I let pass infinite testimonies both of
the scripture and of the fathers also, wherein the sacrament is called bread.
I say this only, that the nature of the Sacrament requires: that the
material bread remain for the visible sign of the body For it is a general
rule among y^ sacraments: that the signs which we se in them, ought to have
some similitude with the spiritual thing that they represent. As we are
therefore in baptism, certifyed that our souls be inwardlye washed, when the
water, y^ washes the fylth of the body, is powered upon us to declare y^ same
thing: even so must there neades be in the supper material bread, that it may
be declared unto us that the body of Christ is our food. For what
declaracyon were it, if the quality wytnes should represent unto us that
body. We know therefore manifestlye, that unless the substance of bread do
there remain, all the representacion, which the lord (willing to accommodate
him self to our infirmity) gave unto us: does utterly decay and peryshe.

For the words which the lord spoke sou^de no less then if one would say.
Let ne what these words this is my body, do signifi.
In like manner as man's body is nouryshed and sustained with bread: so is my
flesh the spiritual food wherwyth the souls be quyckened. Besides these
things. For what purpose does Paul propone that similitude? as one lofe is
made of many graynes, mingled and joined to gether one with an other: even so
we (for as much as we take part al of one bread) ought to be fast joined
together one with an other. And if the whytnesse only should remain without
the substance, were it not a thing to be laughed at to here a man speak as
Paul does? Wherefore without any doubtyng at al I conclude that this
transsubstanciacion is the deuylles interpretation, to deprave y^ truth of the
supper.

Many dotynge castes have followed of this lie: and would God they had not ben
more then doting castes, and that they had not ben also horrible abhominacio^s.
For me^ (imagining, I can not tell what manner of placelye presence) have taught
y^ both the divinity and the humanitye of Christ are fastened unto y^ whitenes,
nothing co^syderyng what inco^uenie^ses followed upon the same. Although the
old doctors of Sorbone have reasoned very subtllly, Oxforde and Cambridg be
not all void of these doctoures.
how the body and blood be joined with the signs: yet can it not be denied,
but that in the popyshe church, was received both of high and low, and is at
this day with fire, sword, murder, and al kind of torments cruelly defended
and holden, this opinion: that Christ is contained under these signs and that
we ought to seek him there.

Which opinion if they will maynteyne: no remedy they must also grant, that
the body of Christ (as a thing infinite) is contained in no place, other
else that it is in diverse places at once. And in the affirmynge hereof, they
come at length to this pass, that it differs nothing at all from a
fantastical apparicion. To appoyn^e therefore such kind of presence enclosed
in a place, Mar^ians here^^ie.
wherein the body of Christ should be included in, or as they say locallye
joined to the signe^ is not only a thing folly she, but also an execrable
error diminishing the glory of Christ^ utterly destroying all that ought to be
bel^ued as co^cerninge his humane nature. For y^ scripture teaches in every
place that like as in earth Christ took our humanity, even so, he pluckynge
the same out of this mortal estate, and yet nothing chaungynge the nature
thereof, carried it up into heaven. And for this cause ought we when we speak
of the humanity of Christ, to consider two things. The first, that we
diminishe nothing of the verity of his nature. The other, that we derogate
nothing of his glorious estate. And to do this thing in his kind, we must
left up our minds into heaven, that we may seek out redeamer there. For if we
will cast him from us under the corruptible Elements of this world: Bread
and wine are corruptible.
we shall both destroy those things which the scriptures do wytnes as
concerning his humane nature: and also bring to naught his most glorious
ascension. But because many me^ have abundantly handled this matter: I had
rather let it pass then to wade, further therein. My mind was to note, by the
way, this thing only. That to think that Christ is shut up under the
bread and wine, other else to join the^ so together, y^ our mind cleave fast
there and is not erected into heaven: is a diuelyshe dottage, which thing I
shall also toutche in an other place. And when this perverse opinion was once
received, it engendered many other supersticions. First that carnal adoracion,
which is none other thing but mere idolatry. For if a man would prostrate him
self before the bread, and honor Christ there, as if he were there present,
contained therein: were not that the setting up of an idol in stead of the
Sacrament? For we were not commanded to honor, but to eat. We ought not
therefore so rashely to attempt that thing. Forthermore this was an observation
in the old congregation, to admonish the people before the supper should be
celebrated, that they lift up their hertes, to the intent they should
understand, that they ought not to styke in the visible sign, Understande
this conjunction aright.
if they would honor Christ a right. But we shall not long contend as
concerning this article: if the presence and conjunction of the verity with
the sign be well understand: whereof I have all ready spoken and will
hereafter declare at large. Out of the same fountain are sprongen the residewe
of the supersticiouse ceremonies: as to carye the Sacrament through the streets
once in the year* as it were in a pomp, an other season to set up a taberancle
for it, and to keep it all the year long shut up in a pire or case, that the
people may give head there unto as unto god, which shynges because they are
all not only invented by man's wytie without the word of god, but also plain
repugnante to the institucion of the supper: they ought of all Christians
utterly to be rejected.

I have declared whe^se this calamity of the papisticall church, that the
people does all the year long absteyne from the communion of the supper, had
his beginning: because it is counted as a sacrifice which one man must offer
up in the name of the whole multitude. But although we may use it but once
every year, yet it is then miserably pulled in sunder, and as it were torn in
pieces. For where as the sacrament of the blood ought to be distributed to the
people, as it apeareth by the express commandment of the Lord: they decree
that the people ought to be contented with the one half part. Yea and that is
half marde in ye dressinge.
So are the miserable christians, by most wicked gyle robbed of the benefyte
that God gave the^ neither is it any small benefyt to have the communion of the
blood of the lord to nouryshe us with all: and it is to much crueltye to
take that thing violently from them unto whom it belongs of right.

Wherein we may easelye perceive, with what fool hardiness and frowardness
the pope has exercised tyranny against the congregation of God, after time
that he only held the impery, when the lord had commanded his disciples to
eat the bread that was sanctified in his body: and then coming to the cup
he said not only drink ye, but he added exprestely, al. Would we have a
thing spoken more openly? he byddeth us eat the bread using no universal
word therein. But of the cup he byddeth us all drink. Whense comes this
difference: but that he intended there by to prevent this malice and subtyl
craft of the dyuell? Nevertheless, the pope is of such arrogancye and pride:
that he dare be bold to command to the contrary: look that ye do not all
drink. And that he may declare him self to be wyser then God: The pope
seeeth yt Christ* saw not
he says it is right and agreeable to reasone, that the priests have some
prerogatyue more then the people, to the end that the dignity of a priest
should be honored. As though the Lord had not been of discrecion nor had
consyde^ed after what sort the one ought to be known from the other. Besides
this he obiecteth the dangers that might befall if the cup should be given
commonly unto al me^. Some drope forsooth, might chance to be shed as though
the Lord hadnot forsene that thing.

Does he not lay negligence to the Lords charge, that says he co^fou^deth
the order that he should observe, and that he has cast his people into this
danger without any manner of reasone? And that they may declare that there
ensue^h no great inco^moditie upon this change, they say that the whole is
comprehended under one kind, because the body can not be separated from the
blood. As though the lord had disc^uered the^, the one from the other. For
if the one part may be left as superfluous: it had been folyshe and vain for
both to be distinctly, and severally given unto us. But some of the popes
band, perceyuyng that this so great abhominacion could not otherwise be
defended then impudentlye, went about to cover it by some other means. They
say, The^ he spoke not to our pristes.
that when Christ instituted this Sacrament, he spoke unto his apostles
only who^ he had as then promoted to the order of priesthode. But what answer
will they make to Paul, which says, that he has taught the christen people
the thing that he learned of the lord, that every one should eat of the bread
and drink of the cup? But who has reueyled unto these men that Christ gave
the supper unto his apostles as unto priests? The words sou^de to the
contrary in that he does afterward command, that they following his example,
should do the same. He prescribes therefore a rule which he would should
continewe in his church for ever. And this rule was in the ancient time
observed: unto such time as Antichrist ruling alone, auaunced him self, and
stretched up his horns against God vertitie, to the intent to destroy it
utterly. We se therefore that it is intolerable frowardnes, so to divide and
tear this Sacrament y^ those parts should be disceuered which god has
joined. That I may conclude the more briefly: I will comprehend in one
chapter, the thing that else might have been divided. That is to say, y^ the
devil, has (without any doctrine of the supper) brought in this manner of
celebratyng, And yet must all ^e holy.
setting up in the stead of the doctrine, ceremonies, some fylthy some
unprofitable, some also noisome and daungerouse: whereof have ensued very
many euylles. In so much y^ the mass which is used in y^ popish church in
stead of the supper, if I should define it a right, is none other thing,
then a mere apishe emulation and disguised masking. I call it an apishe
emulacion, because that like as apes do play the wa^tons in imitatyng, rudely
and without reason, the works of men: eue^ so do they imitate the Lords holy
supper in such wise, y^ with their prepesterous inue^tions, they corrupt the
hole truth thereof. And to declare this to be true, is not this the chief
thing hat the Lord left with us, that we shoude celebrate this mystery with
perfyte and true understanding? Then is it y^ doctrine that nourishes.
where upon it follows that the substance thereof consists in doctrine.

And that once taken away, there remains naught else but a ceremonye, could
and without virtue or strength. Not only scriptures are witnesses of this
thing, but also the popes own laws: wherein there is a sentence alleged, in
which Augustine asks what other thing baptism should be without the
word, then a corruptible Element. Wy^h the word, as he adds incontinent,
not in that it is pronunced, but because it is understand etc. Whereby he
declares that the sacraments do take their force and energy of the word of
the lord: when it is preached after such sort as it may be understood.
The residewe, is not worthy the name of a sacrament. But in the mass, it is
so far unlike that any doctrine should be intelligibly hard, that contrary
wise all the whole mystery is thought to be profaned unless all things be
said and done privily and covertly to the intent nothing may be perceived or
understand. So, that their consecration differs nothing from a kind of
inchau^tme^t. For after the manner of an inchau^ter, they think that with
whysperynges and diverse gestures, they bring Christ out of heaven into their
hands: Whereby we perceive, that the mass so ordained, The true definicion of
the mass.
is rather a manifest and open prophanacion of the supper, then the observation
thereof: and that the peculier and chief substance of the supper wants: which
consists in this thing, that the mystery be truly opened to the people, and
the promesses rehearsed with open voice: not that the priest: with out other
reason or understanding, should stylly whysper out an hummyng that can not be
understand. I call it a play or maskyng, because there is naught else seen but
the folyshnes and gestures of players, which things would become a play
much better then the sacred supper of the lord. No doubt, the sacrifices of
the old testament were celebrated with diverse ornaments and ceremonies. But
because they had a good significacion, and were all ordained to instruct and
exersice the people in godliness: they were far unlike unto these, which serve
for none other purpose at all, but that without any manner profit they may
occupye and hold suspense, the mind of the people. To conclude, because these
mass mo^gers (if I may so call them) do allege this example of the old
testament, for the defense of their ceremonies, it shall be good to note what
difference is between that which they do, and that which was by god commanded
to the Iewysshe people.

For if I lay for me this one thing, what so ever was then done was founded
on the commandment of God: and that their foolyshe tryfles hane none other
foundation than on man's inuencion: were not there a great difference? But I
have things to disprove the^ with, that be much greater then these be. For it
was not for naught that the lord prescribed such a form for a time, to the
intent that at y^ length it should have an end and be abrogate No doubt
because he had not as then declared his doctrine so plainly, he would so much
y^ rather y^ his people should be exercised in figuers: that the thing which
wanted in that testament, might be repared in the other. But sense that Christ
apeared in the flesh: look by how much more the doctrine is lyghtened, so
much more are the figures diminished. Seeing therefore we have the body* we must
leave the shadows. For if we will replenisshe the abolyshed ceremonies: we
shall patche again that veil* that Christ brake in sonder by his death and so
shall we obscure and darken the light of the Gospel. Thus do we perceive, that
this multitude of cerimones, which is seen in the mass, is the form of the
Iewyshe law, utterly contrary to the christian relygyon. I am not of that mind
that I would disprove al ceremonies, which do serve to honesty and a publyke
order, whereby the more reverence is given to the sacrament: so that they do
well agree to the purpose, Honest ceremonies are not to be despised
and be sober. But that immensurable laborynthe, may by no means be
sufferred: for as much as it has engendered infite supersticio^s, and made the
people as it were am^sed with out any manner edificacion. By this it may easily
be perceived wherein those, unto whom god has opened the understanding of his
truth, ought to deffer from the papists* First, they shall be out of doubt y^
it is abominable sacreledge, to count y^ mass as a sacrifice, whereby remission
of sins may be obtained other to repu^e y^ priest for a mediatoure, which
may apply the merits of Christ's passion unto the^ y^ bye masses, or be
present at y^ doing of them, or do with devotion worship them. But they shall
rather believe that the death and passion of Christ, The^ ar mass pense lost.
is the only sacryfice whereby the ire of god is pacified, and perpetual
justice gote^ unto us. And by sides these things that the lord Jesus is
entered into the celestial sa^ctuarie: that he may there show him self for us,
and by the virtue of his sacrifice, pray for us. But yet they shall esealy
grant, that the fruit of his death is communicate unto us in the supper, not
by the merit of the work, but for the promesses that are made unto us therein,
so that we embrace them with faith. Forthermore they ought in no case to
grant that the bread is transsubstanciated (as they say) into the body of
Christ, or the wine into blood: but they must in that thing constantly believe,
that the visible signs do retain his substance, that hey may represent unto
us, that spiritual verity whereof I have spoken before. Thyrdlye* although they
ought to be surely persuaded with themselves that the lord does in very deed
give the same thing that he does represent: and so that we do unfeignedly
receive the body and blood of Christ: Learn to seek Christ.
yet shall they not seek if as included under y^ bread, or fastened (as they
say) locally unto the visible sign: much less ought they to hono^re the
sacrament, but to stretch up the mind into heaven, that they may there receive
and honor Christ.

Hense shall it come to pass that they shall dispice and condemn for
ydolatrye, all those supersticiouse ceremonies, as well of the carrying forth of
the sacrament in po^pe and processio^s, as of the buyldyng up of those
tabernacles wherein it is set forth to be honored. For the promesses of the
lord stretch no farther, then to y^ use which he committed unto us.
Forthermore they shall judge the institucio^ of the lord to beviolated and
broken, in that the people is robbed of the one part of the sacrament: and
that it is necessary, that both parts be wholly dystributed, if it should be
observed aryght, In fine, they shall suppose, that it is not only superfluouse
but also dayngerouse, and that it becomes not the chrystian religyon, to use
so many ceremonies, taken of the Jews, more tha^ the symplicitie wherein the
apostles instructed us. They shall also judge that it is even of an ungodly
frowardness, so to celebrate the supper with gestures* and maskers mouinges,
that no doctrine at al may there be herd, but is rather buried, as though it
were a certain kind of magycall art. To conclude at the last, we must now
come to the last of the chief parts. That is to say, Yet by this was y^
truth tried out.
to that contencion which in our time is steared in this matter, which for
as much as no doubt it was of the devils stearyng upon to let, or rather to
break the course of the Gospel, I would wyshe it to be forgoten for ever:
much less can I be delyted in the rehersynge of the same.

But because I do perceive very many godly minds: which know not whyther to
turn them selves: I will briefly say the thing that I shall think necessary
to declare how they may deliver them selves.

First I desire and beseech al faithful persons even for the names sake of
the living God, that they be not greatly offended, because this controversy is
moved among them that were the chief capiteynes, in restorynge and brynging
in again of the doctrine of the gospel. For it is no new thing for the lord
to suffer his servants to be ignorant in some things: and suffer them to
contend among them selves: not that he would suffer them to err
continuallye, but for a time: The apostles varyed in some things
to the intent he might make them more humble. And no doubt if all things had
chanced prosperoussye to this day, and had flowed according to our will,
perchance men would have forgotten them selves: other else the mercy of god
should not have been so much known as it ought to be. And therefore the lords
will was to take away from men aloccasyon of gloriynge: that glory might be
given unto him only.

Forthermore, if we consider with how great darkness the world was beset,
when they which moved this controversy, began to lead us back again to
the light of the verity: in deed we will merueyle nothing at all though they
knew no^ all things even from the beginning. It is rather a notable miracle
of god, that they, in so little space of time, were so illumined, that they them
selves might escape and lead other out of that synke of errors wherein we had been so long time drowned.

But there is no better way, then to rehearse the matter it self even as it
was done. For thereby it shall apeare, that there is not so much matter of
offense in this behalf, as is co^monlye supposed to be.

When Luther began to teach, he handeled the matter of the supper so, that
as concerning the corporal presence of Christ, he seamed to leave it such,
as all men did then conceive. For condemnynge transsubstanciaon, he said that
the bread was the body of Christ, because it was joined together with him.
Besides this, he added certain hard and gross similitudes. But that he did
by co^pulsion, because he could not otherwise declare his mind. For it is an
hard thing to expound so hard a matter: and not to use some things, not
all of the fittest for the purpose. After this did zuinglius, and Ecolampadius
begin to grow. Which when they considered the gyle and disceyt that the
devil bad brought in, inestablishing that carnal presence: which had been
taught and believed. v^. hundredth years before: they supposed it wickedness to
dissemble a matter of so great importance. And chiefly because there was
annxed unto this erro^te, To honor a creature as God is idolatry.
an e^ecrable ydolatrye, that Christ should be worshypped as included under a
piece of bread. But because it was very hard, to pull back this opinion,
which had been long and deaplie roted in the hertes of men, they applied all
the force of there wit, to impugn the same, teaching that it was a most
gross and absurd ^rroure not to acknowledge those things which be throughout
the whole scripture, testified of the ascencion of Christ. That he, in the
nature of man, is received in to heaven, and that he shall tari^ there until he
descend to judge the world. But whylse they were very much bente unto this
purpose: they omited to declare what presence of Christ in the supper we ought
to believe, and what communion of his body and blood is there received. In so
much y^ Luther suposed the^ willing to leave naught else but y^ bare signs
void of y^ spiritual substance. And therefore he began to resyst openly: in so
much y^ he declared the^ worthy to be co^pted for heretics. And after the
co^te^cio^ wared ones hot, in progress of time it was so increased and
inflamed, y^ it was to fiercely stered to and fro, about a: ^v. yers to gether,
duringe which time, neither party would, with indifferent and quyete mind here
other. For although they did once confer between the^ selves: yet was there
so great ali^nacion of minds, y^ they departed the purpose not brought to
pass. For when they should have come to some co^corde, they recoyled more and
more: myndyng naught else but to defend their opinion and to confute the
contrary, we perceive therefore in what thing Luther erred and also wherein
zinglius and Ecolampadius did err: It was Luthers duty: at the beginning to
admonish that it was not his purpose to stablyshe such a local presence as
the papists do dream. Also, to proteste y^ he sought not in this place,
Learn here the truth.
to have the Sacrament honored as God. Thyrdlye to absteyne from those rude
similitudes, most hard to be understood: or else to use them moderatlye, and
to interpret them so, that they might not have been cause of any offense. To
conclude, sense that contention was moved, he passed al measure both in
declarynge his opinion, and also in rebukynge other, with to much^ rigor of
words. For when he should have expounded his mind so, that it might have been
received: according to his accustomed vehemence, to the intent to impugn them
that held the contrary, he used incredible fourmes of speaking: which
could not well be suffered of them whose minds were but sklenderly appointed
to give credence to him. The other also, offended in that they did stick so
styefely in the impugnynge of that supersticiouse and fantastical opinion of
the papists, as concerning the placely presence and the adoration that followed
thereof, employinge their diligence to the rooting out of vices, rather the^ to
the establishing of y^ thing which was profitable to be known.

For notwythstanding that they denied not the verity: yet did not they teach
it openly as was beseamyng. This do I understand, that whylse they gave them
selves studiouslye and diligently, to affirm that the bread and wy^e were
called the body and blood of Christ because they be ye signs thereof: they
thought not that they ought in the mean time to do this thing also, to add
to that they are the signs after such sort that the verity is nevertheless
joined unto the^. This verity is the ^remercie promised therein.
Neither did they declare y^ they went not about to deface the true communion,
which the lord gives us in his body and blood.

Of truth neither of them was unworthy blame, for as much as they did not
sustain to here one an other, that all affection laid aparte, they might
follow the verity, on which side so ever it should appear. But yet ought not
we therefore, to let pass our duty toward them, least we forget the
mercyes and benefytes which God gave unto them, and distributed unto us by
their hands For unless we be unthankful, and vnmyndeful of those things
which we owe unto them: absteyning from all reproach and evil report, we shall
easyly forgive these and much greater things. To conclude, seeing that we
know they were both of Godly conversation and excellent doctrine, and that
they also which at this day be on live, be no less: we ought neither to
speak nor judge of them, otherwise the^ with great modesty and reverence.

And chieflye because it has pleased our lord God so, that after he had by
this means instructed them to humility, he made an end of this unlucky
contencion, or at the least qualifyed it for the time, so that in the mean
season it might be fynished. This have I spoken because there is as yet no order
published, wherein that concord is appointed: which thing were very
nessarie. But this thing shall be when God will that all they which should
set an order in these things, His will be doene.
do agree in one. In the mean time this ought to suffice you that there be a
brotherlye frenshyppe and con^unction between the congregation: as belongs to
the Christian communion. With one voice therefore we will confess, that when we
do according to the institution of the Lord receyu^ the Sacrament with faith,
we are undoubtedly made partakers of the substance of the body and blood of
Christ How this thing should be done, some men can better define and more
plainly expound, then other. But this thing is chiefly to be remembered, that
we exclude all carnal imagination, and that the mind ought to be erected into
heaven, and that we think not our Lord Jesus Christ to be so vile that he may
be contained in corruptible elements. Again, lest the force of this most
sacred mystery, should be diminished, we must think that it is wrought by the
secret and wonderful power of God: and that his spirit is the bond of this
partaking: which is for that cause called spiritual.

Finis.
The order that the church and congregation of Christ in Denmark, and in
many places, countries and cities in Germany does use, not only at the holy
supper of the Lord, but also at the ministration of the blessed Sacrament of
Baptism and holy Wedlock.
TO all that hunger and thyrst the glory of God and wealth of their
neighbors, be grace mercy and peace from the same everlasting God our most
dear father in heaven through our Lord and only Savior Jesus Christ. It
were to me a singular comfort (my right dear and intierly beloved brethren,
and systers in Jesus Christ) if I might be with you my self continuallye, and
comunicate unto you some part of that little tale^t, which I have received of
the Lord my God for your sakes, and all the lawefull ways that I could
deuyse, I have sought this great while, to opteyne license of the higher
powers for the same purpose. But it will not be. Wherefore though I be hyndred
and kept from you by all the means that Satan and his members can imagen,
yet shall ye have my poor heart, yet will I not cease to wyshe you good, yet
will I do the best for you that I can, although it be but with my pen. In
token whereof, I have set forth unto you the order and manner that many which
have received Gods word unfeignedly, do use not only at the most h^lye
supper of our Lord, but also at the ministracion of the blessed Sacrament of
Baptism, and when any couple of persons are joined into holy wedlock. And
this have I done, to the intent, that when ye have spyed and do se, that this
order is agreeable unto Gods word not varying from the most wholesome doctrine
thereof. Ye may wyshe in your hertes to have Gods truth prospere likewise
among you in the realm of England: And pray unfeignedly with me and all
other sinners, that the father of mercy and God of all comfort will ^o lyghten
and illuminate the hertes of our rulers, that they may follow the earnest
monicion of the second Psalm, and be no more without understanding, but be
wise by times and embrace the son of God, while he offreth him self unto
them And not only to suffer the word of God to have the upper hand above all
other doctrines, but also them selves to lay to their hands in abolishyng the
blasphemous and dampnable abuses that are here (as yet* suffered about the
forsayed three principles of Christ's religion, wherefore dear brethren, when ye
compare this order under written (which is the doctrine of Gods word, and
practice of the primatyue church) to the vain ceremonies used here yet (after
the church of Rome) lift up your hertes to almightye God and beseech him,
that for Christ's ^ake (...) will once grant, that these three (his holy
Supper, holy Baptism, holy wed^ocke) may be truly and sincerelye ministered
and practiced also among us. To the glory of his blessed name and increase of
his kingdom for ever. Amen.

The order taken for the due ministration of the holy Supper of the Lord.
FOr thy better instruction thou shalt first understand, that the blessed
Sacrament of the body and blood of the Lord (the worthy memorial of our
redemption) is at no time denied to any christen man (where gods word is
truly preached) if he lawfully require it. And as none does minister it save
the priest which is the officer appointed thereto. So is it not ministered, but
when there be other present to receive it as well as the pryeste.

Now because that where gods word is truly preached, me^ do se the fruit of
the said holy Sacrament, therefore resort they the oftener to the same holy
supper of the lord and delight the more therein. But specially to se what a
nu^bre come to it on the so^daye, and how reverently, it would do ones heart
good. And because they may the more fruitfully be partakers thereof, therefore
on the saturday when the preaching is done (every day they have a sermon) all
such as are appointed in them selves to be partakers of the Lords supper come
(one after an other) to the priest: of who^ they learn, not only what the
Sacrament is and the right use thereof, but also they being repentaunt and
sorye for their sins, and professing amendment, receive there gods promises
for their absolucion, to the singular comfort of their conscience: and are
exhorted by the priest, to do against the morrow, as the holy Apostle Paul
bids them: that is even to try, examen, and prove them selves, whether they
ca^ be content unfeignedly in their hertes, to take better hold on the
kingdom of God, then they have done in times paste, to be more steadfast in
faith and hope toward god and his promyses, to bemore fervent in prayer and
love toward God, and for his sake to show unfeigned soue toward every man, to
forgive hertely as they would be forgeuen, to mortyfie their flesh dalie more
and more by reasonable abstynence and godly exercises of the spirit and
virtuous occupacion of the body, to be glad in distrybutynge the works of
mercy to the poor etc.

And when the pryest, preacher, or curate for all is on thing) has given
every one, this or such a like exortation, and enioyued each one his penance
according to his estate as subjects to be true and obedient to their rule^s
servants to be faithful and diligent in waytyng on their masters
conmaundement, children to honor and ob^ie their parents* and to learn virtue
while they be young, householders to keep their houses in the fear of God, and
so forth) when the priest (I say) has enjoined them thus to live and to
increase in the same well doing, he commytteth them to God and to the word of
his grace, And so they depart.

On the sunday in the morning (at.vi. of the clock in So^mer, and at.vii. in
winter) the bell ryngeth, and the people, prepare them selves to the church,
so that sone after the bell has ronge the second time, the church is almost
full of men, women and children, Then a little a fore the hour is expired, they
ring y^ bell the third time, which ceasseth not till the hour stryke: And at
the quere door beside the table of the Lord, stand two good sober synginge
men, which (commenly a quarter of an hour a fore the sermon) begin a psalm
and all the people both old and young with one voice do sing with them,
after such a fashion that every note answers to a syllabe, and every sillabe
to one note commenly and no mo: so that a man may well understand what
the^synge. But first for the most part they sing the Pater noster in their
mother tongue, and then the Psalms, some time mo, some time fewer according as
the time requires, but al in there own language. Now when the clock smyteth
(which is come^ly.vii. in So^mer. but.viii. in winter) the superattendau^t or
chief curate comes in to the pulpyt, and fryste of all, he wysheth unto his
audience and to him self* grace merye and peace from God the father through
his blessed sone Jesus Christ our savior: And to the intent that their
hertes may be opened to the true understanding of the gospel, which he is
about to preach unto them, he exhorts them to call for help to the holy
Ghost. So after that the two foresaid men (or at the least one of them) has
orderly begone, all the thurch folowethe, and sing with one voice unto the
holy Ghost this song, Ueni sancte spiritus etc. or such an other like it, in
thyr mother tongue.

The^ the preacher takes the gospel of that present sunday (or some other
place of the scripture, that he is appointed to declare) and expoundethe it
clearly by the other manifest places of the bible, noetynge in it such
lessones, such consolations, and such ensamples as are for the edyfienge of his
audience.

Comenlye at the latter end of the sermon, he makes a prery short rehearsal
of it by the way of exhortacyon to the people, or prayer toward God. And then
requires he them to confess and knowledge their sins unto God with him,
every man in his own conscience, and to say such or like words in his
heart, as I have plurallye expressed in the general confession, that I humblye
offered to the Kings most honorable counsayll for the edyfyenge. Anno. M. D.
xxxix. When the priest has prayed for all estates, and made this or such a
like confession in their name, he prays God to be merciful to them, to
bless them to show the light of his countenance over them, and to have
mercy on them.

Then gives he them this or soche a like absolucion, and says.
TO all them that repent and are sorry for their sins, detestinge and
abhorring their old wicked life. If they be hongry and thirste for Gods mercy
in Christ, beleuynge surely to have forgyuenesse only by him, purposinge to
for sake all abhomynacyon of living, and from hense forth to live in the
fear of God and unfeignedly to keep his commandments: To all such (by the
virtue of Gods word and commission of the same) I pronounce and warraunt fre
remyssion and clean forgeuenes of all their sins. To the other that will not
repent* but still harden their hertes against Gods truth, continually
abiding in the blyndnesse of false doctrine and fylthynes of wi^ked living,
having no purpose nor mind to come to r^pentau^ce: To all such (by the virtue
of the same word and commission thereof) do I pornounce damnacyon and the
terrible wrath of god, until they amend.

So after that he has wyshed the peace of God unto his audyence, he comes
down Then all the congregacyon and church in manner before said, do sing the
Creed or believe in their own mother tongue. And when that is done, the curate
or else his coadiutour, stands up before the table of the lord, and requires
all such as are appointed then to be partakers thereof, to be well ware what
they do, and to make a just account with them selves after what manner they
have proved and tried their own consciences, whether it be done unfeignedly and
in an earnest manner and whether they be at one with all men, and so forth. If it
be so in deed, he gives God thanks for it. If no, he prays the^ right
ge^tly, yt they will think no shame to abse^t the^ selves from this holy
supper till ye reco^ciliacion be made, lest they come to it unworthily. And the^
gives he the^ this exhortacion, or else another such like:

An Exhortation at the supper of the Lord.
Dear friends, we are all baptized into the death of our Lord Jesus Christ:
wherefore after holy Baptysme: we must all the days of our life, fight and
strive in continual battle and war against sin, death and the devil, and
so bear about with us in our bodies the passion and death of our Lord Jesus,
and we prove by experience, that the enemies whom we have to do withal, are
neither weak, nor feable, but mighty and valiant, to whose power me^ are
naturally subdued so yt upon earth there is none so mighty, as to resist this
power of darkness through his own strength, so feable and weak is all our
ability in comparison thereof. For the which cause God the father through
Christ his dear son has ordained another power and kingdom, in the which
is ryghtuousnes and life: and through his death and blood has he delivered us
and brought us from sin to ryghtuousnes, from death to life, from the devil
to God, and has included the kingdom of his grace in the preaching, beleuyng
and following of his word: which being begone in the holy christentie, shall
go forth until the last day: that we which receive, believe, and do after the
same word (by the merits of Christ our reconciler and Savior) should be
and continue for ever his dear children, and heirs of the kingdom of grace,
that is to say, of everlasting salvation, for as much as we through such faith
do eat continually his flesh and drink his blood, that is to say, abide in
him, and he in us.

To the intent now that this so great goodness declared by the word of God,
might daily among us be practiced, distributed and exhibited, therefore has
the gracious and merciful Lord Jesus Christ instituted and ordained a
remembrance of this his wonderful work, and commanded, that we at his
supper in the Sacrament, should eat his very body and drink his very blood.
Whereby the hertes of al such are faithful beleuers and fear God, might be
assured of this same grace of God, and everlasting salvation: And also that in
the holy congregation and church his glorious remembrance might (...) kept,
that is to say, to give him thanks and prai^e, to sing, ^peake preach, and
read thereof, to exhort and comfort one another among them selves. And
finally with all faythfulnesse one to show toward another such love and
favor, as we our selves have received of our dear lord Jesus Christ. And
for as much as we now are hapened in these later days, in the which this so
precious treasure is unhallowed and wyckedlye abused. This holy Sacrament shall
(for the necessary causes now rehearsed) be to us also a testimonye of this
present time before god and the world, that we do utterly both in word and
deed, refuse and forsake all the dis^eatfulnesse of the papistrie, and that we
faith fully with all our hertes submit our selves under the gospel of Jesus
Christ.

Wherefore ye dearly beloved in the Lord, for as much as this matter is so
wayghtye, even Gods own institution and ordinance, yea, and his commandment
also that we should do it. And likewise seeing the necessite which should
cause us to accomplish the same, is so great, specially on our behalf
toward God (to whom we owe a long Deo gratias and thanks) we ought in no
wise to refrain our selves from it, neither suffer our selves to be kept
back there from: but oftymes with repe^tant hertes to seek this our souls
medicine and comfort of our conscience: beleuinge what Christ says to us
herin, and doing as ^e commands us

And as for those that seek no such repentant hertes faith and comfort herein,
but live in open blasphemy, continuynge in sin and wicked life. They shall
know, that they are unworthy of this holy supper, and shall be excomunicate,
till they amend.

But to the intent that the vnrepe^tant may through the grace of god be
lightened, and that we our selves may frutefully enjoy this supper to the
ame^dme^t of our lives, and also that all Chrystendome generally may be the
beter and be edified. Therefore let us hertelye make our prayer to god the
father of al mercy: beleuyng assuredly, that he will graciously here us through
our Lord Jesus Christ, who commanded us to pray, and promised us, saying:
Ask and ye shall have: seek, and ye shall find: knock* and it shall be opened
to you.

Wherefore in consideracion of the same conmaundement and promise, lift up your
hertes and say thus with me in your prayer.

O Lord god our father in heaven we thy miserable children upon earth beseech
the that thou will mercifully look on us and lend us thy grace That thy holy
name may be sanctified among us and in all the world through the pure and
sincere teaching of thy word, and through ernest charity in our daily
living, and our conversation. Se^lude thou graciously al falls doctrine and
evil lyuinge, whereby thy worthi name might be blasphemed and slaundred.

O let thy kingdom come and be great. All sinful, blind people and such as
are holden captyue of the deuell in his kingdom* those bring thou to the
knowledge of the true faith in Jesus Christ thy son.

Strength us Lord with thy spirit to do and to suffer thy will both in life
and death in well and woo, that our will may all way be broken, offered up and
mortified.

And give us our daily bread: Preserve us from covetous desire and carefulnes
of the bealy, that of the we may be assured to have abundaunce of al good
things.

Forgive us our trespace, as we forgive them which offend us: that our heart
may have a sure and glad conscience, and that we never fear nor be afraid
for any sin.

Lead us not into tentacyon but help us through thy spirit to subdue the
flesh, to despise the world with his vanities, and to overcome the deuel with
all his crafty assaults. And finally deliver thou us from all evil, both
bodily and gostly, temporal and eternal. Amen.

They that ernestly, desire al this, let them say: Ame^ beleuyng without any
doubt, y^ it is granted and heard in heaven according as Christ promised us,
saying, when ye pray, believe assuredly y^ ye shall have it and it shall come to
pass. Ame^.

Then reherseth he the words of the holy supper out of three Eua^gelistes,
Mathewe, Mark and Luke, and also out of S. Paul Cor. xi. saying.
THe lord Jesus the same night wherein he was betrayed took bread, and gyuynge
thanks brake it and said: Take ye and eat, this is my body, which shall be
given for you. This do in the remembrance of me. In like manner when supper was
done, he took the cup also saying. This cup is the new testament in my blood.
As of^e as ye drink this do it in remembrau^c^ of me. This done, the whole
church in manner above said, do sing a psalm or two of thanks gyuing for this
blessed Sacrament. And in the mean saeson, they y^ are appointed the^ to suppe
with the Lord, and come soberly and with great reverence one after another)
the men first and then the women) to the table of the Lord: where they
knelynge (one I say after another) receive at the hand of one of the
priest^s, the Sacrament in form of bread. And then goes he with like
reverence to the other end of the table, and at the hand of an other of the
priests (which stands there ready for the same purpose) he kn^leth down and
receives it also in the form of wine, and all the other follow reverently,
and do the same. If one of the priests or both be disposed likewise as the^ to
suppe with the lord, he kneleth down, and his companion ^erueth him. And even
so does he also to his fellow in like manner and reverence.

If the co^municantes and they that receive then the Sacrament be many, they
sing the more Psalms of thanks gyuyng: else sing they the fewer.

When this holy supper is done, and the partakers thereof y^ were appointed
thereto served, one of the ministers stands up, and exhorts the people to
give earnest thanks to God, with this or such a like prayer.

O almighty God, most merciful father, thou that openest thy gracious hand,
whereby al things living have their food in due season, we give honor,
praise and thanks unto the for all thy benefits both gostly and bodily, which
thou have rychely poured upon us without any of our deseruynge: but specially
we thank the for this worthy memorial of our redemption wherein thou haste
nouryshed and fed our souls with the body and blood of thy dear son our
Savior Jesus Christ blessed for ever. Amen.

An other.
O Lord Jesus Christ our redeme^, honor and praise be all way given unto
the for feady^g our souls with this spiritual and heavenly food. And we beseech
the for thy tender mertye, that as thou have given it us for a sacrament of
continual thankfulness, of daily remembrance and of charitable unity.
Eue^so most merciful savior, lend us al way thy grace, to be thankful unto the
for it, and not only by it to be continually (myndeful of our redemption
purchaced through thy death and bludsheding) but also in co^sideracio^ thereof to
increace in love toward the, and al mankind for thy sake.

An other.
O Lord God allmyghtye, we thank the with all our hertes that thou have fed
our souls with the body and blood of thy most dear son. And we beseech
the vnfay nedly, so to illuminate our minds with thy holy spirit, that we
may dailye increace in strenght of faith to the, in assuredness of hope in
thy promyses, and feruentnesse of love toward the and our neighbors, to the
glory and praise of thy holy name. Amen.

Thus the priest concludes and ends the office of this present mystery, and
blesses the peopell rehearsyng these words of scripture. Numer^.vi.

The Lord bless you and preserve you: the Lord show his face to you and have
mercy on you: the Lord turn his contenaunce unto you* and give you peace.
Amen.

And so they depart

The order taken for the due ministracion of the blessed Sacrament of Baptism.
ON the sunday at one of the clock after none, they have a sermon of an hour
long, with like ryngyng and singynge of Psalms before in their mother tongue,
as they had in the morning, to the which preaching the people come as
thycke, as they did then. And as they sign a Psalm for grace to the holy
ghost in the morning, so do they here also and at every sermon, where or when
so ever it be made. And like as in the morning when the sermon is done, the
preacher exhorts them to confess their sins with him in their hertes, and
there upon does absolve the^ by the power of Goddes^ word: so does he here
also in like manner, and in every sermon. Then sing they a like song of
thankesgyuynge as they did in the morning, and as they ^e accustomed to do
after every preaching.

In the mean season while this psalm of thanks gyuyng is song (or ^ls
before) the font is prepared, the mydwyfe is the^^ present with the child: or
no mydwifes, if there be no children to be christened (as there be commonly)
with a fair company of honest sobre women. And when the psalm is song out,
the ministre being their ready at the font, reads a lecture of the Bible:
And when he has declared it co^pendiously to the edifiynge of the
congregation, he exhorts them, that for as much as all men are conceived and
borne in sin, and that seeing it is impossible for a man to come into the
kingdom of God, except he be borne a new and regenerate: they will show and
declare their Godly ^oue, and call upon God the father through Jesus Christ and
in his name, that he will mercifullye baptyse that child, (or those children)
with the holy ghost, and receive him (or them) to grace.

Upon the same exhortacion, they make their hertye prayer besechynge God to
have mercy on the child, and then adds he this or such a like peticion in
their name, saying.

O almighty God which in co^maundynge us to pray, have assured us, that we
beleuyng steadfastly in thy pro^^es, shall have all that we desire, specially
concerning the soul, wherein we seek thy glory and wealth of out neighbors
Our humble peticion to the (O most dear father) is, that for as much as this
child is not without original sin, thou wylt consider thine own mercy, and
(according to thy promise) send this child thy good spirit, that in thy sight
it be not co^pted among the children of wrath but of light, and grace, and
become a membre of the undefiled church spoused to Christ thy dear son in
faith and love, unfeigned, by the means of y^ same Jesus Chirst our Lord. Amen.

An other.
O Almighty eternal God, and most merciful father. For as much as the just
lives by faith, and impossible it is any man without belief to please the, we
beseech the y^ thou wyl^ grant to this child the gift of faith, wherein thou
wylt seal and assure his heart in the holy ghost, according to the promise of thy
son, that the inward regeneracion of the spirit may be truly represented by
the outward baptysme: and that the child may be buried with him in death, and
be raised up by him from death again. To the praise of thy glory and
edifyinge of his neighbor. Amen.

Sometime also the priest reads this parcel of the.x. Chapter of S. Marks
gospel, saying:
ANd they brought little children to him that he should touch the^, And his
disciples rebuked those that brought them. But when Jesus saw it, he was
displeased, and said unto them: Suffer little children to come to me and
forbid them not, for of such is the kingdom of god. Uerely I say unto you:
who so ever receaueth not the kingdom of God as a child, shall not enter
therein. And he took the^ up in his arms, and put his hands upon them, and
blessed them.

Then the godfather if it be a manchilde (or the godmother if it be a
woma^childe) holding the child in his arms, comes and stands by the
priest, who asks him on the childs behalf, if he forsake the deuel and al
his works he says yea, and upon the priests interrogacio^ he confesses his
faith in the face of the church. So the priest takes the child in his left
hand and with his righthande he pours water on his head, calling him by his
name (as he did before) and baptisynge him in the name of the father, and of the
son, and of the holy gooste

Finally, the ministre commits the children to the prayers of the
congregation, and exhorts the godfathers and godmothers most ernestly, to se
that the children be brought up and instruct in Christen knowledge and virtue,
to the glory of God and edifieng of the comen wealth.

Then sing they a psalm either that concerns some thanks geuynge to God
for his word or else some necessary peticion.

And so they depart.

Now in like manner as thou seist this blessed sacrament ministered on the
sunday, eue^ so with like reverence do they use it at the same hour on those
wyke days, that the congregation (with the authority of their head rulers has
appointed to that use: And if the children in ye mean time be in any danger,
the^ ye mydwifes baptize the^. And as the congregation and multitude of people
is great at the ministracion of holy baptysme on the so^day, so is it also on
the other appointed days, though they be work days. Whereby it is to be
noted, that ye institucio^ and ordinance of God is in great reputacio^ among
them: for as it is ministered reverently, so is it heard with great devotion
and feruentnes: And though there be always some unthankful lyuers ye^ the
flock of Christ be ever bringinge forth good fruits, and follow the word of
life in their co^uersacion:

The order taken for the due ministracyon of holy wedloke.
AS toutching Gods holy institucion of marriage, thou shalt understand, that
preuye co^tractes are avoided as much as may be: And young folks are so well
brought up in the fear of God and instruct in the knowledge of his word,
that they well not lightly be entyced to ru^ne on head, and mary without y^
honest consent of their parents and tutours. Again, the fathers and mothers
which have young folks apt to marriage, are circumspecte not suffringe their
sons and daughters to, go long beyond their time unmarried: but both for the
avoiding of uncleanly co^uersacyon in their children, and also for their own
discharge, they provide them honest marriages mete for them. Which thing to
do, they are not only in the daily sermons that they hear, but also by the
old Godly practices of such holy men as was Abraham Isaac etc. N^ther do the
two young persons come together after a light or vndy^cret manner, but even at
their handfastynge (when the knot of holy wedolke is first ^^yt) there are
present the father and mother of the parties or else (if they be dead or absen^)
their nyest kynsfolkes and tutours, and so is also some honest discrete
preacher or curate of theirs: who to the edifienge of them, makes a Godly
collacion out of Gods word for thyr en^a^ple, lerninge and comfort in holy
wedlock. So when the time approaches that they shall be married openly in the
face of the church, the curate in the presence of the whole congregation gives
warninge certain days before, and requires that if any man know some lauful
impediment to hindre the said marriage he will notify it at his monicion. If no
hinderaunce be made, then at the day appointed, the brydgrome having a company
of honest men with him, and like wy^e the bride having an hones^ company of
women with her, come to the sermon in the morning (which as I said before, is
every deye at.vii. of the clock in So^mer, and at.viii. in winter) and after
that the preaching is done and the sacrament ministered in manner before said,
they come both before the preacher: and in the mean time, the whole church in
their mother tongue, do sing the, Cvi. psalm. Beati omnes qui timent dominu^.
etc.

Then the preacher speaks to them both by name, and asks them saying: N
and N, are ye minded to live together in holy wedlock, and to testify and
confirm the same purpose here in the presence of the co^gregagicion? They
answer, yea, then (says he) I take you all here that stand by, to wyines,
requirynge you to record the same, and to remember it, and says moreover: If
there be any man here that knows lawful impediment by Gods word that these
two persons may not proceed together in marriage, let him speak now. So if
there be none to make impedimente, then the preacher says: For as much as here
appears no hynderaunce to the contrary, but that ye may go forth together
in holy wedlock, I pray God establyshe the thing that he has wrought in
you. Seeing also that both your consentes are knyt in holy wedloke, and ye
confess the same here openly before God and the world. I declare and
pronounce you to be married together. In y^ name of the father and of the son,
and of the holy ghost. And in so saying he joins their hands together, and
adds moreover: let no man therefore separate the^ a sundrr, who^ god has
coupled together. This done, he erhorteth the^ to remember, how y^ god has
ioythe^ in holy marriage, and according to ye commandment of god, to love one
an other, and so to keep their household, and to bring up their children when
God sends the^, in the fear of god that their whole living may redounde to
the glory of his holy name, and edifiyng of the com^n wealth.

Then rehearses he this (or such another) prayer in the name of the whole
church and congreg^cion.
O Almighty God, father of heaven: for as much as it has pleased the to call
these new married folks unto holy wedlock, like as at the beginning thou
saw it not good for a man to be alone, for the which cause thou m^deste him
an helper like to him self, and so ordeynedest that they two should be as one
person: we beseech the, y^ unto these new married folks thou wylt grant thy
holy spirit, whereby they living in holy wedlock, may still trust in thy
goodness, overcome all temptation, and lead an honest godly life to the
edifying of every man. Bless them also tha^ in the fruit of their body they
may praise the and so bring up the same, y^ it may be to thy glory and
profyt of the common wealth. Amen.

Then the church syngeth a Psalm of thanks gyuyng, and so departs.

The conclusion of this little book.
THou see now what order is kept in the ministracion and use of the foresaid
three holy ordinances of God: concerning the which, I writ here nothing of
had I wist nor of uncertainty, but even as I know, and as I have not only
seen with mine eyes and heard with mine ears, but been present also long and
many a day at the execution, practice and experience thereof, which thing as I
write to give al good hertes occasion of fervent prayer to God, that he will
grant his word to grow lykwyse among us: even so in the virtue of Gods holy
name, and for that precious blood sake of his most dear son, I admonish and
exhort al subjects to be pacient to auoyed all kind of sedicion, to commit
the refourmation of all errors, supersticions, ceremonies, vain tradicions,
wicked laws and unjust statutes of men. Even unto God the author of peace,
and to the workynge of his spirit in those princes and rules, whom he has
called to office for the same purpose: let no man be slack in his duty,
but give god that, which is his, and to the king the thing y^ belongs unto
him acordynge as Christ commands Math.xxii. as saint Paul exhorts.
Roma.xii.

This I say, to stop the mouths, and the blasphemous tongues of such as
will not cease to rail on me and to slander me (yea even to the kings
majesty) as though I were a peruerter of common order, or took upon me to
change the laws: and to make new statutes. Nay ye ungodly hypocrites, not
so, but as I am sure that there is heavy dampnacion laid up for all such
subjects as rebel or make sedicion against their Prince, or disobeye the least
commandment of god in their soueraygne, eue^ so I am assured, that there is
no less dampnacion prepared for those rulers or heads, that make unjust
laws and cruel statutes to maynteyne their own lusts and opresse the poor.
I report me to the.x. chapter of Esaye the.ii. and.iii. of Micheas, and to
the later end of the.v. chapter of the prophet Hieremy. Let all rulers
threfore beware, that they make no acts of parliament nor statutes against
gods word, and let al subjects learn of S. Pete^ (i. Pe.ii. to be obedient.
etc. And not only that but if they be commanded any thing, then let them
learn of the same S. Peter (Act.iiii.) to obey god more then me^. In the
mean time till gods blessed word only be ruler among us, and till all wicked
inventions of men be abolished, let those y^ fear god unfeignedly be fervent in
their prayers, and increace in all tha^kfulnesse and veriuous living toward
God and men. Let no man, woman, nor child of god be flacke in his deutie: but
let faith increace in strength let hope be evermore and more assured of gods
promises, let charity always love God and her neighbor, and leave no good
work undone, that may be to gods glory and man's profyt. And the^ shall we be
known, not only readers and hearers of the truth, but true disciples of the
same. And though we can not atteyne to the perfec^nesse of that common wealth
which I spoke of before (where Gods ordinances are so reuere^tly ministered,
the poor so richely pro uided for and youth so vertuous^y brought up)
nevertheless we doing our best, and begginge strength of god to do more then we
ca^ do of our selves, shall not only be allowed and accepted in his sight, but
also have the continual assistence of his holy spirit: whereby we sufficinetly
harnessed and armed against all temptacions of sin, hell, the devil, and our
own flesh, shall, as well have the upper hand of them, as we have (through the
only power of God) overcome many sturdy wyndes and tempests of adversity in
time paste, and as we hope to escape these present troubles by the help of
Jesus Christ, whose name be blessed for ever. Amen.

A little complaynte with a short exhortacion made unto all them, that are no
dissemblers with gods word, but unfeignedly live there after.
Like as God (accordyng^ to his most blessed nature) ever loving, gracious,
merciful and true, both always send ^is word before he pl^ge the world, and
gyue^h us warnyng before the destruction come, willing us to co^uerte unto him
to forsake our own evil ways, and to lay hand on eternal life. Even so
contrary wise the devil, the father of falsheade and lies, en^ying man's
salvation, casts ever one bone or other in the way, to hindre the glory of
God, to stop his word, to keep back his truth, least through the steadfast
beleauinge and following thereof, his own kingdom should be minished, gods
amplified and increased* Sometime to hinder the gospel of the glory of the
great god, he steareth up tira^ny and cruelnes, and mo^eth some rulers or great
me^ of the world to take part against it, to persecute it, to trouble and vere
the^ who^ god has called unto it. Ensample whereof ye se in Pharao, in king
Achab, in Antiochus, in Herod, and in those great prelates that showed their
hot charity upon our Savior Christ, and his Apostles. The devil also to set
up his kingdom the better, gets him chaplens for his own ^oeth, such as
were Baals prophets.iii. Regu^.xxii. that they may ever either in confessions
or otherwise, move kings and princes to take part against their own
salvation, and to trouble such as tell the^ no dreams, nor fa^tasies, but even
the very word of god. As the prophet Mych^as did. Sometime, I say, least the
truth should be believed, the devil as he is the father of all lies: so
gets he false witnesses to testify even against Christ, and against poor
Steue^ and Paul his servants, yea and to preach, that their doctrine is
naught, sedicious, new learning, and heresy, Mat.xxvii. Mat.i. Aetu.vii.xxi*
ii. y^ they will destroy good works. To.iii. y^ they will keep no holy day.
Mat.xii. John.v. that they will not fast. Mat.ix. Mar.ii. Luc.v. Thus (I say)
is the devil ever about to overthrow Christ's kingdom, and to set up his own.
And because his lyinge chaplens should the better fight against Christ, he
teaches them to go crattely to work, to lie and spare not, to call the
disciples of Christ new felwes, to say, that they care neither for fasting
nor praying, for alms deed nor for good work, yea make the world believe
(says the devil) y^ they care neither, for one cerimonye nor other, for one
sacrament nor other. Such lying lessons does the devil teach his scholars, and
not only this, but also to wrest and wrynge the scripture from the manifest
understanding of it, of the which iuglyng cast he has given the^ an ensample
in the.iiii. of Mat and.iiii. of Luke. Who now considering this great decay
of godlynes, that the devil has brought into the world (partly through the
tyranny that he has steared up in great me^, partly through the false wytnes
bearyng of hypocrites and lyinge teachers) has no cause to mourn in this
behalf? Who will not be sorry to se Gods holy word thus persecuted, thus
exiled, thus cruelly reported, thus belyed?

Nevertheless al this evil does not the devil think sufficient, he can not
here withal be content, but he enters in also among them that profess the
name of Christ, y^ are called brethren and disciples, that pretend to love
and favor his truth: And among them, look who is mete for his purpose, most
inconstant, and leas^ regards Christ's word in his heart, of him he makes
either an whoremonger, and disceyuer of his neighbor, or a follower of other
vices of his own carnal lusts, robbyng him utterly of that most holy, most
steadfast and living faith that Christ taught, and also of those worthy
fruits of y^ spirit of god repentance and works of light, which y^
scripture speaks of. By the means whereof, and because he bareth the name of
a Christen brother, there fore even as he behaueth him self now, and as he
lives, so must we be reputed of the ungodly and such lyuers must we be called.
If he be a breaker of peace, a maker of sedicio^, a dro^karde, a false byer and
seller, a follower of fylthy lusts, a brynger up of s^ctes (as God ever
suffrethe them to be disceaued that will not abide the order of his word) Then
must we also be called breakers of come^ order, raylers. makers of
insurrectio^, drou^kardes, false dealers with our neighbors, Heretics,
folowers of a fleshlye and carnal lyberte: Yea though all our teaching,
writing, talking and living be to the contrary. Yet bear we the blame, so
blind is this wyckede world in judgment, and so unthankful in their living
are a great nombre of them that are called Christen men (as I understand) on
the other side.

Wherefore to you dearlye beloved in God, elect and chosen to an hye vocacion
in Jesus Christ (eue^ to be flesh of his flesh and bone of his bones, to be
citezens with the saints and of the household of God) to you I make this my
mo^e before rehearced, trusting, that though nether the world, nor those false
brethren (which because they were not of us, are gone from among us.i.
Ihoa^.ii. and are fallen in love with this world after the e^sa^ple of
Demas.ii. Ti.ii though nether of them both (I say) will harke^ to y^ voice of
God, while it is called. To day but still harden their hertes against Godds
truth My trust is (as I said before) that ye will hold your hand still on the
plough, that ye will walk honestly now while the mercy of God lends you day
light. Ye know that our Lord said The night shall come, in the which no man
shall be able to work. Ye se how our aduersarye the deuel goes about like a
roaryng Lion, sekyng whom he may devour Ye se what a no^bre of great men on
the one side, have gyrded their sw^rdes about them and stand even in complete
harness, to fight against the manifest word of God: Yea what swering, what
blasphemyng of gods name, what pride, what excess, what fylthynes of body and
ydylnesse, is used, practiced and daily maynteined in their houses: Ye se,
how they can not abide the hearing of gods word, but blast and blow against
it, persecute it, as much as in them lies. On the other side, ye se what a
no^bre of hypocrites, Antichrists, false prophets and flatterrynge chaplens
are not only about great. men, but every where, in manner, roar and cry and
stamp against our Lords doctrine keep the peoble still in blynesse and fed
them with draffe and dregs in stead of Gods word. Thyrdly, ye se what a
number here be in the world, which pretendynge to love Gods word, by their
outward hearing readyng, and talking of it, live clean contrary against it,
bring not forth the worthy fruits of repentance, are as great swea^ers as
fylthy, as idle, as covetous, as disceatfull in bargaining, as unapt to al good
works, as they were before they knew the truth: And by this means is it come
to pass y^ through such vnchriste^ living, the good word of god is more
suppressed the^ other through y^ crueltye of tyrau^tes, or flattering lies of
hipocrites. All which thresortes of enem^es, because they are not of us, but
without, therefore will I have the less to do with the. But of you (dearly
beloved) I will be bold to exhort you, for the tender mercy of god, y^ (in
co^sidera^ion of the premesses) ye will walk godly and worthily in this wicked
world continuing (as I trust ye do) in stead fastnes of the christian faith,
in ferue^tnes of love toward god, and toward your very enemies for his sake,
in lokyng assuredly for his promises, being pacient and joyful in trouble,
earnest in prayer at al times, ready into true obedience, to keep al good
order, to be e^ercised in all good works, every man according to the state y^
god has called him unto. As many of you as are called to office and common
au^horitie, to bear rule, or to give judgment in causes of the common wealth,
be diligent in your office. Romit. xii punish the evil and maynteyne the
good.i. Pet.ii. Roma.xiii. Actepte no person in iudg^ment, allow no false
accusa^n, shed no innocent blood, Exodusxxiii. and hear the small as well as
the great. D^utr^.i.

As many of you as are called to the office of preaching, follow the apostles
counsel: take heed unto your selves, and to all the f^ocke, in the which the
holy ghost has appointed you to be ouersears, to feade the congregation of god
etc. Act.xx. Fead Christ's flock which is among you, and take the ouersyghte
of them, not as though ye were compelled, but willyngly not for the desire of
fylthy lucre but of a god mind: not as Lords over the paryshes, but to be an
ensample unto the flock.i. P^tri.V. To cast always ungodly and old wyuysh
fables, to be unto them y^ believe, an ensample, in their word, in
co^uersacio^, in love, in spirit, in faith, in pureness: To give atte^dau^ce
unto reading to exhortacion, to doctrine.i. Timo.iiii. Study to show your
selves to god, laudable workmen, which neade not to be ashamed.ii. Timo.ii.
All other estates among you I hertely exhort and require, every one to do
their duty. As subjects to be obedient and true to their princes and higher
powers. To.xiii. i Pet.ii. Tit.iii. Men to love their wives hertely, as they
are taught.i. Pet. iii. i. Thessal.iiii. Ephe.v. wives so to behave the^
selves, as it becomes women that profess godlynes through good works.i.
Tim.ii. that their chaist co^uersacio^ may win the wicked i. Pet.iii. Men to
deal gently with their servants. Ephe.vi. Colo.iii. to bring up their
children in the nurtoure and doctrine of the Lord. Ephe.vi. Deuteronomy.iiii.
Servants to be faithful, true and obedie^^ to their masters. Ephe.vi.
Col.iii. i. Pet.ii. that they may do worship to the word of God in all
things.i. Tim.vi. Tit.ii.

And if we thus behave our selves, every one in his calling, the^ shall it
come to pass, that eue^ they which now blaspheme us as evil doers, shall at
last be ashamed of their part, and convert from their own evil ways, to the
true faith and living, which is taught in the word of god. To who^ for his
infinite grace and gifts thereof, be honor and praise now and ever. Amen.

FINIS.
Set forth by Miles Couerdale.

Non possums que audiuimus, et vidimu^ non loqui.

Act^.iii*
