COMMENTARIES of that divine John Calvin, upon the Prophet Daniell, translated
into English, especially for the use of the family of the right honorable
Earl of Huntingdon, to set forth as in a glass, how one may profitably read
the Scriptures, by considering the text, meditatyng the sense thereof, and by
prayer.

Daniell. 2. The stone cut forth of the mountain without hands, shall break
in pieces the brass, the iron, the clay, the silver, and the gold. etc.

AT LONDON. Imprinted by John Day, over Aldersgate. 1570.

Cum gratia and Priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.



To the Reader.
GOod Reader, blame not this thing I beseech thee, which I have done in this
plain and rude sort, for the commodity of the simple and unlearned: whom I
did think unable to comprehend in their minds, and to apply unto their
consciences these learned Commentaries of this divine Calvin, unless they were
somethyng abbridged and ye expositions of the Hebrew words, which would have
been somethyng dark in our language, omitted. Wherefore, as I do profess my
self to be one of his scholars, and do praise God for the same more then for
any earthly matter: so do I not of arrogancy alter or change any thing in his
writings. But because I do know right well that if he were alive him self, he
would suffer all his doings to be applied to the commodity of the Church:
therefore now when I do offer his trauayles to the unlearned of our English
nation, who are desirous of the same, I do so present them as may be most
comfortable to their conscience, and least tedious to such simple persons as
are not able to comprehend all his large and learned discourses. And this
abbrydgement do I make but in the two first Chapters and in few places besides:
puttyng into print at this present, the one half of the book of Daniell,
conteynyng the first vj. Chapiters, which do treat of the particular hystories
wrought by God in his time, and therefore seems unto me far diverse from the
latter vj. Chapters: wherein he prophecieth of all things that should come unto
the elect people until the coming of Messiah, and touches also some things
that be general unto all, even to the end of the world. The which latter part
also I do mean (by Gods grace) to publish for the instruction of our nation in
these obscure Prophecies, if I can perceive this former travail to be well
accepted of the godly, which is my desire, and whom I do exhort in the Lord,
to read the Scriptures attentyuely, to meditate the same diligently, to pray
continually.

A. G.

John Calvin to all the true worshippers of God, which desire the kingdom of
Christ to be rightly restored in France, Salvation.
ALthough these six and twenty years wholly I have not unwillingly wa^ted
that our native country, whose beauty does entice so many strangers from
far to come unto it, because I had no delight nor desire to dwell in that land
whence Gods truth, pure Religion, and the doctrine of eternal salvation was
banished, forth of the which Christ's kingdom was violently driven, neither yet
at this day do I greatly desire the same: yet to forget the people and nation
of whom I was borne, it were neither any point of humanity, neither lawful so
to do. And I do suppose that I have with plain proofs declared how carefully
and earnestly I have desired to profit our countrymen: unto whom it may be
that mine absence has been profitable whiles that by my study and travail
they have received more fruit. The consideration of the which commodity has
not only wyped away all grief, but has made mine exile sweet and comfortable.
Wherefore seeing all this long time I have labored publicly to profit my
cou^treyme^ of France, and have not ceased privately also to stir up the
slouthful, to prick forward the sluggish, to encourage the fearful, to
exhort the doubtful weakelynges unto perseueraunce: I thought it now my duty
in this dangerous time, not to slake my diligence toward the^, especially
God giving me so good occasion to do it. For when my Lectures wherein I did
interpretate Daniels Prophecies should come abroad, nothing could have come to
hand more aptly, then hereby to show unto you dear brethren in this glass,
how yt God willing to prove ye faith of his at this time with diverse
exercises, has provided by his marvelous wisdom, to confirm and establish
their minds with old examples, lest they should at any time faint, being
shaken with most grievous storms and tempests, or at least if they should at
sometime come into any doubtful distress, that they should not fall away in
the end. For though there be appointed to the servants of God a course or
race beset with many dangers and impedimentes: yet who soever shall diligently
read and consider this book, he shall find therein contained, what so ever is
apt and meet to direct and guide him that is not slothful but forward, from
the beginning to the end of his race: and the good and stout champions shall
know by experience that they are sufficiently armed to the combat.

First of all an history, though lamentable, yet very profitable does offer it
self, that Daniel and his companio^s were carried into captivity whiles the
Kingdom and Priesthode continued: as though God had given up to extreme
calamity and misery the chief flower of the chosen people. And what at the
first view can be thought more unmeet, then that children endued as it were with
Angelical virtues, should be taken as a spoil, and made slaves to a proud
Conqueror, when as the most wicked men and proud contemners of God did remain
at home safe and sound? Is this the reward of Godlynes and of an innocent life,
whiles that the wicked flatter them selves because they escape unpunished, that
the Saints and Godly should suffer the punishment which they had deserved?
Howbeit here do we see as in a lively image, that God when he spares and
pardons the most wicked for a space, does try his servants like gold and
silver, lest it should grieve us to be cast into the furnace of trial or fynyng
fire, whiles that profane persons do live in rest at pleasure.

Secondly there follows an example of more then man's wisdom, and of a
singular continency, with an heroical stoutnes of mind, whiles that those
godly young me^ being tempted in that tender age with courtly delicates, do not
only pass over without regard, the daynties that were offered them, through
their temperancy: but because they perceived them selves to be craftily
assaulted that they might fall by little and little from the pure worship of God:
to the intent that they might rid them selves from these snares of Satan, they
do boldly and constantly despise, not without great danger of death, the honor
embrued with poison.

There does follow a cruel and more fearful co^bate, with a notable example
of an incredible and marvelous constancy, whiles that the companions of Daniell
are not moved with cruel threatenings to pollute them selves with the worship
of the image, and at the length are ready to defend the pure worship of GOD,
not only by their own blood, but also by the sufferyng of most horrible
torments. As for the goodness of God that shyneth forth in the end of this
tragedy, it is very profitable to arm us with an invincible faith and
constancy.

After this there does follow the like battle and victory of Daniel him self,
whiles that he had rather to be cast to the ragyng Lions, then to abstain but
three days from an open profession of his faith, lest by deceitful
dissimulation he might prostitute the holy name of God, to the derision of the
wicked: and he being delivered forth of the den, as it were drawn forth of
the grave most miraculously, triu^pheth over Satan and his co^federates. Hear
come not forth any Philosophers, which can dispute subtily and cunnyngly of
virtues in their studyes when they are quiet: but here have we the infatigable
consta^cy of holy men in the exercise of true holiness, to stir us up with
open cry to follow them. Wherefore unless we be altogether incapable of doctrine,
we must learn of those Scholemasters, diligently to take heed, whether that
Satan lay his baytes of flattery, that we be not snared therewith: or if that
he assail us with violence, that we may repulse and break his assaults with
a bold contempt of death and all dangers. If any man will make excuse, that
the examples of both these deliuerau^ces that we have named, are rare: I do
grant that God does not always stretch forth his hand from the heavens, to
save his in like sort, but (which is sufficient for us) he has hereby
testified that he will be the faithful guerdon and keeper of our life so often as
it shall be in any danger, and that we are not exposed to the lusts of the
wicked, but that God can assuage their fury and outrageous enterprises when he
sees it good. But we may not only look upon the end and success, but we
must behold how boldly and courageously these holy men have offered them selves
to death for the defense of Gods glory, neither does their prompt and ready
minds in offering them selves as sacrifices, deserve less praise because they
were delivered.

Now, amongst how many styrres and storms was the Prophet tossed those 70.
years that he lived in Captivity, it will be good to consider. He was so well
treated of no king as he was of Nebuchadnezar, whom he yet found a ragyng
beast. The other were more cruel, whiles by ye sudden death of Balsazar and
the wynnyng of the City, he was brought under new Lords, the Persians and the
Medes. Who fiercely breakyng in like cruel enemies, as they made all afraid,
so is there no doubt but that they wounded his heart. And though he were well
used of Darius, so that that servitude was tolerable: yet through the envy and
cursed conspiracy of the noble me^, he was then in most danger. Howbeit as he
was more careful for the commune safety of the Church then for his own
quietness, in what sorrow was it like that he remained, and with how great grief
was he troubled, when that present state did show none end of the cruel
oppression of that miserable people? He did depend assuredly upon the Prophecy
of Jeremy. But this was an incomparable patience and constancy, that his hope
did not languish nor decay being so long differed, yea that it was not utterly
drowned being drawn through so many ragyng floudes and tempests after such
sundry sorts.

Now come I to the Prophecies, whereof the former were sent unto ye Babilonians,
partly because God would adourne his servant with certain special marks
which should compel that most proud nation, though now in conquest, to
reverence and honor him, partly because it was convenient that his name should
be had in reverence amongst those profane persons, that being in authority
he might exercise the office of a Prophet more freely toward his own nation.
And after that his name was famous amongst the Chaldees, God committed unto him
Prophecies of great importance, which should peculiarly belong to the elect
people: but God did so apply them to the use and commodity of the ancient
people, that they should both mitigate the sorrows with comfortable remedies,
and comfirme the waueryng minds until the coming of Christ, and also he had
no less regard of our times. For that which he did speak before of the
transitory and vanishyng show of the Monarchies and of the everlasting
stability of Christ's kingdom, is no less profitable to be known of us this
day then of old. For God declares that earthly power which is not founded in
Christ, is transitory, and he threatens a sodeine ruin to all kingdoms which
set them selves up in pride, to obscure or hinder the glory of Christ.

The Kings that now reign in so great kingdoms (unless they willyngly come
under Christ's dominion) shall feel in the end by doleful experience, that
this horrible judgment does also apperteine unto them. For what is more
intolerable then to rob him of his right and authority, by whose protection
their dignity is preserved? yet do we see how few of that number do receive ye
Son of God offering him self unto them, yea how they busy them selves, how
they seek all shifts and try all extremities, rather then they will suffer
him to enter into their borders: and many of their Counselors diligently
apply their whole industry, endeavor, and study to shut up all passages. And
yet in the mean season, that they pretend the name of Christianity, and do
boast them selves the chief defenders of the Catholic faith, it may easily
be confuted as a vain bablyng, if it be once known what the kingdom of
Christ is by a true and right definition. For the scepter of his kingdom or
his throne is nothing else but the doctrine of the Gospel, neither does his
Majesty shine any where else, neither does he otherwise atteine his empire,
then where all, both high and low, with quyte minds to learn like sheep, do
hear his voice and follow whether so ever he calls. But they do not only
euerywhere reject this doctrine, wherein true Religion and the lawful worship
of God is contained, wherein the everlasting salvation of man and the true
felicity consists, but they banishe it and drive it far from them with
manaces and terrors, with fire and with sword, and leave no force unattempted
to drive it forth of their borders. And what a blindness is this and how
monstrous, that they whom the only begotten Son of God does call most
louyngly unto him self, ca^ not abide to receive him and to embrace him? But
many (such is their pride) think their authority nothing if they submit their
scepters to the hye King. Others will not suffer their lusts to be brideled:
and as hypocrisy does blind the wits of them all, they desire darkness and
are afraid to be drawn forth into the light. Yet is there no more wicked
pestilence the^ the fear which Herod had: as though he would take away
earthly dominions from the Monarchs, which offers the heavenly kingdom to
every one of the least and poorest of the people. The next is, that whiles one
does look at the doings of an other, their mutual league does retain them
all fast bound under the yoke of impiety with a deadly knot. For if they would
earnestly apply their mind to enquire what is truth and right, yea though they
would but only open their eyes, the knowledge thereof were evident. But because
this is perceived usually for the most part, when Christ springs forth with
his Gospel, that also great styrres do arise: under an honest pretense they
cast away the heavenly doctrine, to provide for public tranquillity.

I must grant in deed, that such alterations and chaunges as do engender
public disturbance may be judged odious: but God has great injury offered
unless we attribute thus much to his power, that he can establish the kingdom
of his son, and assuage all tumultes that boil forth against him. Although
heaven and earth should roll together, the worship of God is far more
precious, then that the least diminishing thereof can be recompensed with any
ransom. How be it they do burden the Gospel with a false sclander, which do
imagine that it is the matter and cause of tumultes and vproares. It is true in
deed that God does therein thunder with the vehemence of his word, whereby he
shakes the heaven and the earth: but whiles the Prophet brings in this
sentence to commend the word and to bring credit thereunto, that shaking is
blessed and much to be wished. And assuredly unless Gods glory be set aloft in
his due place, whiles all flesh be humbled and brought down, the pride of men
which does lift up it self against it, will never give place but forced and
thrown down by the strong and mighty hand of God. And if so be that the earth
trembled at the publishyng of the law, Exo. 19.18
it is no marvel if the power and office of the Gospel appear more
glisteryng and glorious. Wherefore we ought more louyngly to embrace the
Gospel, which whiles it rayseth the dead from the helles, and opens the
heavens to them that were unworthy to live upon the earth, it shows a
strange power and virtue, as though all the elements did agree to our
salvation.

But lo, the tumultes and tempests do spryng forth of an other fountain:
because that some times the nobility and such as are in high honor in the
world, do not willyngly suffer the yoke of Christ: sometimes the foolish
multitude spitteth forth what soever is for salvation, before they have any
taste what it is: and part like porkes delight them selves in their filthynes.
And others, as though they were enraged with infernal furies, are outrageous in
slaughters. And ye devil does prick forth those that he has, wholly to be his
slaves with most excessive fury and outrage, to bring all to hurly burly.
Hereof comes the soundyng of the trumpets, hereof come battles and wars,
whiles that Heliogabalus that Prelate of Rome, with his red and bloody route
and horned beasts, rages so fiercely against Christ and seeks for help on
every side of his filthy Clergy, the which altogether although it be not fed
in like daynty sort, yet does it eat browys and collaps out of the same pot,
and many hungry companio^s fly unto the^ to offer their service. A great
number of the judges which were wo^t to stuff their bellyes with Idolatrous
feasts, do fight for their kitchyns and bellycheare: but chiefly the devil
sends raylers out of the cloisters of Monks and Friars and forth of the
dens of dimsicall Doctors, who are like bellows to kindle the fire.

I do pass over the privy crafts and wicked conspiracies, whereof they can be
the best witnesses unto me, that are the greatest enemies to Religion. I name
no man: it is enough to have pointed them with the finger, who are but over
well known. It is no marvel though they which depend of the chaungeable
state and the diverse ishue of things, continue doubtful in this confused
invasion of so many beasts. But they reject the blame of their infidelity
iniustly and wickedly upon the holy Gospel of Christ. Let us grant that all
hell with the infernal furies do enter into battle: will God sit idle in the
heavens to forsake and betray his own cause? And when he shall stand up
against them, can the crafts of men be they never so subtle, or yet their
forces be they never so great, let God to have the victory? The Pope, they say,
will bring with him a long train of confederates. It is a just reward of
incredulity, to tremble at the sound of the fall of the leaf. And what say
you, unwise and improvident counsaylers? let Christ go that no new straungenes
do trouble us. Therefore shall you perceive shortly after this, how much better
it had been to have God merciful, and despisyng all vain terrors, to rest
upon his protection, then to provoke him to open war, lest they should offend
and displease the evil and wicked spirits. Surely when all things are
examined to the uttermost by the Popes defenders, the superstition which
hitherto has reigned, is none other but an evil thing well and cunnyngly laid
up and placed, which they think ought not to be styrred, because it seems
that it can not be touched without some loss and detriment. But unto them
which desire Gods glory, and which are settled in true Religion, there must be a
far contrary purpose, that is, that they do so offer their labors unto God,
that they commit all the ishues thereof to his providence, who if he had
promised nothing unto us, peradventure there might be some just cause to fear
and continually to doubt: but seeing that he has so often testified that his
assistance shall never fail in the setting forth of the kingdom of his
Christ, it is the only way to do well to settle our selves in this confidence.

Now it is your parts good brethren, as far as every man's power and office
shall lead him, to be careful with all his heart, that true Religion may
recover his pure and perfect state. I need not to rehearse how diligently
hitherto I have endeavored my self to cut of all occasions of tumultes: so that
I have the angels and you all my witnesses before the hye judge, that the
fault was not in me that the kingdom of Christ has not had a peaceable
procedyng without any hinderance: and I suppose that my diligence has
somethyng profited, that private men should not pass their bounds. Now,
although God by his merueilous power has spread the restoryng of the Church
farther then I durst hope for it, Luc. 21.19
yet is it mete to remember what Christ commands his scholars, even to
possess their souls in patience. Unto the which purpose also the vision of
Daniel appertains: that the stone whereby all the kingdoms which fought
against God were broken, was not formed nor fashioned by man's hand: and though
it were rude and unpolished, yet did it grow into a great mountain. Of the
which thing I thought good to admonish you, that amongst the thondryng
threatnyngs, you should quietly wait that these empty clouds may be driven
away by the heavenly power, and so vanish. Yet am I not ignorant (to pass
over the fires of thirty years) what unworthy troubles ye have suffer these
last six months: how often in sundry places the tumultuous people have broken
into your assemblyes: how often you have been assaulted with stones and with
swords: how your enemies have layne in wait for you, that they might oppress
your peaceable congregations with suddayn force at unawares: how some have been
slain in their own houses, some in the hye ways: how the bodies of the dead
have been trailed in derision, the women ravished, many men wounded, one woman
great with child and her child also thrust through, the houses broken and
pulled down.

But although more cruel things were yet at hand, that you may declare your
selves the Disciples of Christ rightly instructed in his schole, you must
endeavor your selves that no rage of the wicked which deal so outragiously, do
drive you from that moderation whereby hitherto only they have been overcome
and disapoynted. And if so be that the length of time do make you weary,
remember oftentimes that famous Prophecy, in the which the condition of the
Church was lively expressed. God declared then unto his Prophet what battayles,
what troubles, what griefs and perils the Jews should suffer from the end of
their captivity and joyful returning into their country, until the coming
of Christ. Now ye likeness of times causes the same things to be agreeable unto
us, and therefore may be applied to our use. Daniel rejoiced for the miserable
Church which had been long drowned with a deep floude of miseries, when he
collected by the count of the years, that the day of deliverance spoken of by
Jeremy the Prophet was at hand. Iere. 25. c. 12. and. 29.10.
Howbeit he had an answer that the state of the people should be more grievous
after that liberty were restored, so that they should scantly have any
breathyng time from their continual miseries. Daniel continued his hope
seventy years not without great and bitter sorrow and many griefs: but now God
increasing the time seuenfold, does strike him to the heart, as it were with a
deadly wound. Neither does he yet only pronounce that the people should be
subject to new troubles, when after long time they being restored had gathered
strength, had built their City and Temple: but in the first beginning of their
mirth, when they had scarce tasted the swetenes of the comfort, he does
appointe them unto misery. Now, concerning the calamities which followed soon
after (whereof there is a long rehearsal) seeing we tremble at the hearing only
of them, how doleful and bitter do we think they were to the rude people, how
horrible and fearful a spectacle was it to see the temple profaned by the
bold malice of a cursed tyrant, the sacrifices mixed with filthy pollutio^s in
despite, and all the books of the law to be burned to destroy all Religion,
and all those to be drawn to the same fire, who soever did confess plainly
and consta^tly that they would persevere and continue in the worship of God?
How could the tender and weak behold this without great fear of heart? And
this was the purpose of the tyrant, that cruelty should drive the weakelynges
to fall from their Religion. Under the Machabees there seemed some release to be
offered, the which yet was straight after deformed with most cruel slaughters,
and never wanted sorrow and grief. For where as their enemy did far excel
them both in multitude and warlike munition, they all thought nothing better
which had taken weapons for the defense of the Church, then to hide them selves
in the dens of wild beasts, or to wa^der in wilderness with great poverty and
scarcity of all things.

There was also an other kind of temptation, that wicked hipocrites, under a
false pretense of zeal (as Daniel says) did join them selves to Judas and
his brethren. By the which subtilty Satan spotted the garrisons that Judas had
collected, with great infamy, as though they had been a band of thieves and
robbers. But nothing was more lamentable unto good men, then to see the
Priests them selves, as every man was carried with his ambition, to betray the
Church and the Religion of God with wicked packyngs and practices. Neither was
that holy office only sold and made a merchandise, but it was bought with
mutual slaughter and parricides. Hereof came it that all states of men, all
though Circumcision and sacrifices were in use, were polluted in the end
through the manifold corruptions which spread every where without punishment:
that it was a strange wonder to wait for the kingdom of God when Christ came
into the world, and very few are therefore named with this commendation. If now
in that miserable deformity of the Church, in the manifold desolations, amongst
those great terrors, the spoylyng of their countries, the robbyng of houses,
and amongst the dangers of death the Prophecy of Daniel has sustained godly
minds, when as Religion was yet wrapped in dark shadows, and the doctrine
almost extinguished, and the Priests themselves being degenerate did tread all
holy things under foot: how shameful shall our tender weakness be, unless
this clear light of the Gospel, in the which God has showed his fatherly
face toward us, lift us up above all impediments, and stablish us with a
constancy that can not be wearied? For as there is no doubt but that the
servants of God then did apply unto their age, to mitigate the sorrows of
their present miseryes, all such things as were spoken by the Prophets of the
Babilonicall captivity: so is it our part to have our eyes bent upon the
miseries of our fathers, that we refuse not to be gathered unto that Church,
unto whom it is spoken: Isa. 54.11. Psa. 129.1 2.3.4.
O thou poor one, affiicted and tossed with tempests, that have no comfort,
behold I will receive thee: and the which in an other place, after she has
complained that the plowers have plowed their back, and the wicked have made
long forrowes as it were in a field, yet does she glory straightwayes that
their cords were cut by the just God, that they could not prevail. And the
Prophet has not only encouraged us by the examples of those times to hope and
to patience, but he has joined an exhortation taught by the holy spirit,
which is extended to the whole kingdom of Christ, and is peculiar unto us.

Wherefore let it not be grievous unto us to be comprehended amongst the number
of them, who as Daniel says: Must be tried by fire that they may be made
white: seeing that the inestimable felicity and glory which springs thereof,
does more then sufficiently recompense all the griefs of the cross. And
though many can feel no taste in this doctrine, but think it unsavory, yet
may not their dulnes or sluggishnes make us the more slothful: and therefore
must we print deeply in our hearts that which the Prophet straight way
pronounces: that the wicked shall do wickedly, because they will understand
nothing: but the children of God shall be endued with the knowledge of God,
that they may keep the right course of their godly vocation. And it is
necessary to consider the fountain of that brutish blindness, that the heavenly
doctrine may be sauery unto us. For there is none other cause why the most part
does despise Christ and his Gospel, but for that they carelessly flatter them
selves in sin, and are neither wakened with any fear, neither with the sense
of their miseries, neither with the terror of Gods wrath, to desire earnestly
and fervently the redemption which only does deliver us from the bottomless
depth of eternal destruction: and in the mean time being snared with
pleasures and other allurementes, or rather betwitched thereby, they are all
together careless of the blessed eternity of the other life. And though there be
many and sundry sects of them that contempteously despise the doctrine of the
Gospel, and in some of them pride is more evident, in some others tender
weakness, in others a certain dronkennes of the mind, in others a sleapy
dulnes: yet shall we find that this contempt comes of a profane careless
security: because that no man does enter into him self, to examine his own
miseries to find a remedy for them.

This is a monstrous madness, when Gods wrath and curse lies upon us, and his
just vengeance does press us, that we should cast of all care, and stand in
our own conceit, as though nothing were to be feared. How be it this vice is
to much commune: that those that are gilty a thousand times and are worthy a
thousand times of eternal death, when they have sleighty done a few foolish
ceremonies unto God, they bring them selves into a sleep, or rather a deadly
and senseles trance. But seeing that Paul does pronounce that the savor of ye
Gospel is deadly unto all those whose minds the devil bewitcheth: it is
necessary for us that will taste the savor thereof unto life, to set our selves
before Gods judgment seat, and often thither to sommon our consciences, the
which being wounded with an unfeigned fear, the reconciliation which Christ
has purchased for us with his blood so precious, may be esteemed of us
according to the price and worthynes. Wherefore the angel preaches of the
eternal justice which Christ has sealed with the sacrifice of his death, to
cause men to reverence Christ's doctrine, and to win authority unto it: and
he expresses also the manner and mean to obtain justice: because (says he)
iniquity is done away and purged. Therefore whiles the world does run mad after
their lusts and wantonness let the consideration of the condemnation which we
have deserved make us afraid and humble us before God. And whiles carnal men
do glutte them selves with earthly pleasures and delites, let us embrace with
fervent desire, this incomparable treasure, in the which an assured felicity
and blessedness is laid up for us. Let our enemies prate as they please, that
they also care how to have God merciful unto the^: seeing they are of this
opinion, that men must doubtfully call upon God in prayer, it is plain that
they overthrow the chief foundation of our salvation. Let them taunt and scoff
at our faith as long as they list, so that we feel assuredly that no man can
attain to this prerogative but by the benefit of faith, with a free and quiet
conscience, trustyng to the mediation of Christ, to call God father.

But the study of Religion and care of godliness will never take force in us as
it ought to do, until we do learn to lift up our minds (which are always
over prone to the earth) and exercise them in a continual meditation of the
heavenly life. In the which point the marvelous vanity of mankind bewrays it
self, that whereas al men can speak plausibly, as they were Philosophers, of
the shortness of this life, yet no man aspireth to that eternal and everlasting
life. Wherefore it was not without cause that Paul when he co^me^deth the faith
and charity of ye Collossians, Col. 1.2.5.
says that they are encouraged by yt hope which was laid up in the heavens.
And speaking in an other place of ye end of the grace which is reveled unto us
in Christ, Tit. 2.12.13
he says that we are taught thereby to deny all ungodliness and worldly desires,
and to live soberly and justly and godly in this world, waityng for that
blessed hope and glorious coming of the great God even our Savior Jesus
Christ. Let this hope then and waityng for his coming ravish us unto it, and
lose us from all worldly impedimentes: and the more that the world is infected
and farced with the careless life of the Epicures, it becomes us to labor so
much the more earnestly, that this infection creep not into us also, until we
come to the mark appointed. And although it is to be lamented that such a
multitude does willyngly perish, yet lest the wicked madness of them which thus
cast them selves down purposely to their own destruction should trouble us,
let an other lesson of Daniel comfort us, that there is a sure salvation laid
up for all them that are found written in the book. And although our election
be hyd in ye secret counsel of God, which is the first cause of our
salvation, yet seeing that the adoption of all that are grafted into the body of
Christ by faith in the Gospel is nothing doubtful: be you content with this
testimony, and go forward courageously in this that you have blessedly begone.
And though you must yet fight a longer battle (as I pronounce unto you that
there are yet behynd sorer skyrmishes then you do look for) with what rage so
ever the madness of the wicked shall boil forth, and though they bring all the
devils of hell to help them, remember you that your full course is appointed
by the heavenly moderator and ruler of the field, whose laws and orders you
must obey the more willyngly because that he does minister strength unto his
soldiers unto the end. Now because it is not lawful for me to forsake the
state, place, and office wherein God will have me to remain, this my labor
dedicate unto you, shall be a pledge of my careful desire to help you, whiles
that my pilgrimage being ended, the heavenly father of great mercy shall gather
me together with you into his everlasting heritage. The Lord govern you with
his holy spirit, my dear beloved brethren, and defend you with his protection
against all the enterprises of the enemies, and strengthen you with an
invincible power.

At Geneua 14. Calend of September. 1561.
The Lectures and readynges of John Calvin upon Daniel.
The first Prayer that he continually used before the same. The Lord God grant
us to be exercised in the mysteries of his heavenly wisdom with true increase
of Godliness, unto his glory and our edification. Amen.


HEre follows the book of Daniel the Prophet, the vtility and commodity
whereof, how great it is, may more easily be understand by the going forward in
the same, then aptly in few words be declared. But I will now give some taste
yet thereof, which may the better prepare us to the readyng, and make us more
attentive. And before I do come so far, I will briefly comprehend the sum
of the book and so divide it as may best further us. Wherefore we will divide it
into two parts. First Daniel rehearses how he atteined authority even
amongst the infidels. For it was necessary that he should be raised up to his
prophetical office after a strange and rare manner. All things (as is well
known) were so co^fused and so far out of order amongst the Jews, that
scarcely could any man believe that there remained yet any Prophet. Hieremias
was a live in the beginning, and Ezekiel afterward. Also the Jews had their
Prophets after their return: but Hieremias and Ezekiel had almost ended their
course when Daniel began to Prophecy. Others, as Haggaei, Zakari, and Malachi
were created Prophets to exhort the people: so that their office seemed to be
limited. As concerning Daniel, he could scarcely be counted for a Prophet unless
God had set him up after a marvelous manner, as I have said. This shall we see
to the end of the vj. chapter, that he was adourned of God with special notes
and tokens, that the Jews might fully be assured yt God had given him unto
them for a Prophet, unless they would condemn them selves of filthy ingratitude
against God. His name was famous amongst the Babilonians, and much honored. If
the Jews had despised him that was had in admiration eue^ of the profane
Gentiles, was not this as it were of set purpose to quench and to tread under
foot the grace of God? Daniel therefore had certain notes and tokens whereby he
might be known the Prophet of God, and whereby his vocation might be ratified.

The second part is joined afterward, whereby God forwarneth by him what soever
should shortly come to the elect people. The visions therefore from the vij.
chapter to the end of the book do peculiarly belong to the Church of God. For
there God declares what is to come: which was a thing very necessary. It was a
sore tentation when the Jews must suffer captivity 70. years, and yet after
that they should return into their country, for those 70. years God did
differ the full deliverance unto 70. times seven years. Their minds might
have failed and they all have dispayred a thousand times. For the Prophets had
spoken so gloriously of the redemption, that the Jews did hope for an happy
and most blessed state so soon as they should be delivered from the
Babilonicall bondage. But when they are oppressed again with so many
afflictions, and that not for a short time, but above four hundredth years,
where as they were in captivity but 70. years, the deliverance might seem but
a mockery. And there is no doubt but that Satan did tempt the minds of many
to fall away from God, as though God had deluded them when he brought them
forth of Chaldea into their country. For these causes God declared by a vision
unto his servant, how many and how great afflictions did remain for the
people of God. Howbeit Daniel does so Prophetie, that he does almost like an
Historiographer describe all those things which then were secret. And this was
very necessary, because that in so troublesome alterations the people had
never tasted that these things were reveled unto Daniel by God if the success
had not approved the heavenly testimony. Therefore was it mete that this holy
man should thus speak and Prophecy of things to come, as though he had
declared things already performed. But this shall we speak of in place.

I return to the beginning, to declare how profitable this book of Daniel is
to the Church of Christ. And first the matter it self declares that Daniel
did not speak of his own head, but that what soever he did speak it was
taught him by the holy ghost. For how could he have coniectured these things
that we shall see afterward, if he had followed nothing but ma^s wisdom: that
is to say, that other Monarchies should grow up which should destroy the Empire
of Babylon, which had the^ the greatest power in all the world? Again, how
could he conjecture of the coming of great Alexander and of his successors?
Long before Alexander was borne Daniel did Prophecy what he should do. Also he
declares that his kingdom should not be long because it should straight ways
be divided into four horns. Other things that he speaks also do manifestly
prove that he spoke by the holy Ghost. Howbeit this may be more evidently
proved by his other Prophecies, when he admonishes with what great miseries
the Church shall be vexed betwixt those two most cruel enemies ye king of
Syria and the king of Egypt. There does he rehearse their leagues, and then
recites their cruel wars one against an other, and afterward all the
alterations, and he does so point out every thing with the finger and prosecute
the whole matter, that it may appear that God speaks by his mouth. This is
then a great thing and very profitable, to know assuredly that Daniel was the
instrument of the holy Ghost, and that he did speak nothing of his own
brain. Now that he was in such authority to the end that he might be in more
credit with the Jews concerning his doctrine, that is extended unto us. For
how foul and shameful ingratitude is this, if we do not embrace the Prophet
of God, whom the Chaldees were compelled to honor: whom we know both to have
been superstitious and full of pomp and pride? Those two nations of the
Egyptians and Chaldees stood most in their own conceit of all others. For the
Chaldees thought that they only had the University of all wisdom. Wherefore
they would never have been very ready to receive Daniel, unless the truth had
compelled them, and that this confession had been violently wrasted forth of
them, that Daniel was the very Prophet of God.

Now when the authority of Daniel is thus confirmed, somethyng must be spoken
of the matters that he treats. And concerning interpretations of dreams, the
first dream of Nebuchadnezar does contain (as we shall see) a thing of most
great importance, that is to say, that all the glory and the power of the world
must vanish away, and that ye kingdom of Christ only shall remain stable,
and that there is none other perpetuity. As concerning the second dream of
Nebuchadnezar, therein doubtless the marvelous constancy of Daniel is evident. It
was a thing very dangerous so to cast down the Emperor of the whole world as
Daniel did. Thou (says he) wilt not be counted amongst men, but art now
worshipped as it were a God, thou shall hereafter be a beast. There is no man
at this day that dare thus speak to Emperors and Kings, either yet that dare
admonish them gently when they trespass. Seeing then that Daniel did forwarne the
king boldly what great shame he should come unto, doubtless herein he did
declare a rare and notable example of his constancy. And thus was his vocation
sealed up and more plainly confirmed: for this boldness came of the spirit of
God. But we must rather stand of the second part, where we see Gods care
toward his Church. The providence of God undoubtedly is spread throughout the
world. Mat. 10. Luke 12.
For if a sparow do not fall upon the earth without his permission, we may be
sure that he provides for mankind. Therefore nothing comes unto us by
chance. But God in this book does set us up a light to see that the Church is
so governed of him, that he has a singular care over it. If ever things were
so troubled and out of order in the world that men might conjecture that God
did sleep in the heavens and forgate mankind, no doubt such was the rollyng
whele of those times, yea there were so manifold and strange alterations, that
he which was of the most hye courage might well faint, seeing there was none end
of wars, and sometimes the Egyptians gate the victory, and sometimes there
were other styrres and wars in Syria. Seeing then that all things were turned
vpside down, what could be judged, but that God contemned the world, and that
the miserable Jews were deceived of their hope when they thought that GOD
which was their deliverer would likewise be their keeper and Savior at all
times. For although all nations generally were then subject to many calamities,
if yet the Syrians overcame the Egyptians then did they abuse their power
against the Jews, and Jerusalem was said open to the spoil, as though it had
been the wages of the victory. If other had overcome in battle, they aduenged
their injuries upon the poor Jews, and there they sought their recompense.

Thus were those miserable men spoiled, that their condition was much worse
after their captivity when they were returned into their country, then if
they had always been exiles and strangers in other countries. And when they
were admonished of things to come, this was their chief stay whereupon to rest.
But the use of the same doctrine must be applied unto us at this day. For we do
see as it were in a glass or lively image, that God was careful of his Church
even then when he seemed to have cast of all care thereof. Again, that it was
not without his divine counsel that the Jews were thus exposed to the
injuries of their enemies. But of the other part we do acknowledge that they
were meruailously perserued even with a greater and more marvelous power of
God, then if they had lived quietly and none had molested them. These things
are to be learned from the vij. Chapter to the ix. Now when Daniel does number
the years until the coming of Christ, how clear and evident a testimony is
this, which we may set against Satan and all the scoffs of the wicked: seeing
it is certain that the book of Daniel was in men's hands before this came to
pass. Where he the^ reckeneth 70. Weeks, and affirms that then Christ shall
come, let all profane persons come now and prate, and with open mouths
declare their obstinacy: yet shall they be overthrown in the end, and be
convinced that Christ is that true redemer whom God had promised from the
beginning of the world: because he would have him manifest with so sure a
demonstration as no Astrologians have the like.

This then is well worthy to be observed and marked, that after that Daniel
has treated of diverse calamities of the Church, he appoints the time wherein
God would reuele his Son unto the world: and that he treats of the office
of Christ. This is one of the chief Articles of our faith. And he does not
only speak of his coming, but Prophecieth that the shadows of the law shall
then be abolished, because that Christ will bring the accomplishment thereof
with him. And where he speaks of the death of Christ, he also teaches to
what end he shall suffer death, even that he may abolishe sin by his
sacrifice, and may give eternal justice. To conclude, this is to be noted,
that even as he had instructed his ancient people to patient sufferyng of
afflictions, so does he also admonish, that the state of the Church shall not
be quiet when Christ shall be given unto the world: but that the children of
God must have a continual battle unto the end, and that the fruition of the
victory is not to be hoped for, whiles that the dead shall arise and Christ
shall gather us into his heavenly kingdom. Thus do we comprehend briefly, or
rather do taste, how profitable and fruitful this book is. Now come I to the
words, how that Nebuchadnezar, either the father or the son (for they both
reigned together) came in the third year of Iehoiakim, and took away Daniel
and the first captives, of whom Jeremy speaks: Ierem. 24 Ierem. 25.
afterward Iehoiakim rebelled in the fourth year and was worse handled.

Meditations upon the book of Daniel the Prophet, with certain Prayers
collected forth of the Lessons of that divine Calvin, rather for the comfort
of the conscience then orderly translated, in the two first Chapters, but
afterward you have the whole Commentary.
Chap. 1.
The Text.
Iehoiakim king of Judah came Nebuchadnezer king of Babel unto Jerusalem and
besieged it.

2 And the Lord gave Iehoiakim the king into his hand with part of the vessels
of the house of GOD which he carried into the land of Shinar to the house of his
God, and brought the^ into his Gods treasury.

3 And the king spoke unto Ashpenaz the master of his Eunuchs, that he should
bring certain of the children of Israel of the kings seed and of the Princes

4 Children in whom there was no blemish. etc.

The Meditation.
GOds divine providence and his profound judgments do maruelously appear in
the captivity of Daniel, and in the whole order of Gods works, in deliueryng
that king of Judah and his own people into the hands of Nebuchadnezer the
king of Babylon an heathen tyrant.

Daniel (as appears) was one of the first captives that were led from Judah,
of whom Jeremy speaks, that they were very good figs, pleasant to the Lords
taste which were first carried captive. For God promises to give the^ hearts to
know him, and that they shall be his people, and that he will be their God.
Ier. 24. Iere. 24.
throughout the Chapter. Again the king was ruled by the counsel of the
Prophet Jeremy and so found favor. 2. Kings. 25.27. 2. K. 25.27
Thus in the mids of Gods rods and scourges our gracious God is myndfull of
his mercyes and always sends comfort to all his, though by means far
contrary to man's reason, and much passing our capacities. And hereby we may
perceive how incomprehensible Gods judgments are unto man. For Daniel was as
an Angel amongst men, so that if there were any good amongst that people,
Daniel was as the principal. For Ezechiel Ezekiel. 14.
reckeneth Daniel amongst the three just, by whom it was most like amongst
all mortal men, that God would be pleased and pacified, yet is Daniel carried
into captivity to be a slave under this cruel king of Babylon: and other men
most wicked, prouokyng continually Gods wrath against them did remain quiet at
home in their nestes. God does not deprive them of their natural country,
neither cast them forth of that heritage: which was a sign and pledge of his
fatherly adoption. Now if any man would take upon him to determine the cause
why Daniel was carried away among the first, shall not such one show his own
madness? Let us therefore learn reverently to have in admiration the profound
judgments of God which do so far pass our capacities, Luc. 23.31.
and in the mean season remember this sentence of Christ: If they have done
this in a green tree, what shall be done to the dry? Seeing this was done to
Daniel, what great mercy and long sufferance of God toward us is this, to
spare us so long wallowyng in sin? For who dare compare him self to Daniel?
Nay we are unworthy to loose his shoe latchets, as is the old Proverb. For all
his great te^tations could not turn him from the true service of his God, as
follows. But where he says that God delivered Iehoiakim into the hands of
Nebuchadnezer, it is to our comfort, that we may see that Nebuchadnezer did not
overcome the king nor take away the captives by his own power or counsel or
policy: but because God would thus humble his people the sede of Abraham, to
teach them to know him: like as also he sets forth his terrible judgment in
that he neither spares the people whom he had chosen, Psa. 132.23
nor the temple which he had appointed for his chief restyng place upon the
earth. For the terrible punishment of such wicked hypocrites and Apostatas as
bare only the name of his people, boasted of their temple, Tit. 1.16.
and had nothing but a vain brag of a formalitie and solemn show of
Religion, which God rebukes, Isay. 9.13. Isay. 9.13.
2. Tim. 3.5. 2. Tim. 3.5


A Prayer concerning the same.
Grant almighty God and most merciful father, seeing thou do set forth unto
us so clear and bright a glass wherein we may both behold thy providence and
thy marvelous judgments that thou have heretofore executed upon thine old
people, that we also may fully persuade our selves that we are also under thy
hand and protection: whereby we may so rest and settle our selves always, that
what soever comes unto us, we may still trust that thou will be our keeper and
defender, always careful for our salvation: so that we may safely and with
quiet minds call upon thee, and so cherefully wait for all dangers in all
manner of chaunges of this world, that we may stand stable in thy word which
never fails, and cleauyng unto thy faithful promises, may nothing doubt but
that Christ to whom thou have given us, whom also thou will have to be the
pastor of thy whole flock, is so careful over us that he will lead and bring al
through this bru^t of our battle how grievous and troublesome so ever, whiles
we attain to that heavenly rest which by his blood he has purchased for us.

5 And he appointed them provision every day of the kings meat and of his
wine which he drank, so nourishyng them three years, that at the end thereof,
they might stand before the king.

6 Now among these were certain of the children of Judah, Daniel, Hananiah,
Mishael, and Azariah.

7 Unto whom the chief of the Eunuchs gave other names. For he called Daniel
Belteshar, and Hananiah Shadrach, and Mishael Meshach, and Azariah Abednego.

The Meditation.
Here Daniel declares that Nebuchadnezer commanded those children of the
kings seed of Judah to be fed from his own table of his own meat and wine,
that he might make them dronken with his delicates and thereby cause them to
forget their own nation. We know that if there be any craft in ye world it is
chiefly practiced in kings Courts. Nebuchadnezer therefore seeing that he had to
do with a stubburne people (as the Jews were) would by this practice win him
servant which should freely and willyngly serve him: and therefore does he
labor to overcome the^ by his dainty fare from his own table: As this is the
greatest honor that can be done to any in the Court at this day, to be served
of the same service with the Prince. But the king does not this save only for
his own purpose, to make them like well the Chaldees manners and to renounce
their own nation. Howbeit God preserved Daniel and his fellows with his
spirit from this deuilish craft, that they absteyne from the kings meat and
drink, lest they should be polluted. For this cause also the king changes
the names of these young men, to put away the memory of their kindred and
original, and that they should thus become altogether Chaldees. The which thing
they could not withstand nor let, though this were a great grief unto the^:
therefore they suffer it and keep them selves from all the pollutions that they
can, still desiryng to live in the fear of God and in the remembrance of
their country and captivity: Therefore do they refuse those dayntyes of
Babylon and choose a spare and poor diet that was more meet for mourners and
prisoners.

Thus God keeps Daniel from all pollution, and therefore gives him sobriety
and wisdom to abstain from the kings daynty dishes, lest he should thereby
be overcome to forget his God and his people, and so degenerate into heathenish
manners: for this thing he perceived to be sought of the king. Therefore did he
choose rather pulse and most base diet, not that he thought it unlawful for him
and his fellows to eat of the kings meat and to drink wine: but he did see
what a hard thing it is to keep a measure in full tables and dayntie fare, and
how soon we are deceived when we are enterteyned and fed delicately. This is a
rare virtue, to observe sobriety where dayntie meats and drinks are offered
in abundance. Therefore that he might remember his own state, he does abstain
from courtly delicates, Satan's subtle snares. And this does he not only
himself, but he also persuadeth his fellows so to do, and therefore is this
named upon Daniel alone because he is the principal. And hereby we do learn
that as every one of us is endued with a more excellent gift then others, so
should we use ye grace of God, and his holy spirit to instruct others. For it
is not enough for a man him self only to abstain from evil unless he help
others and join them also with him into the society of goodness and true
holiness. The which example may teach us our duties now and at all times.

8 But Daniel purposed in his heart not to be polluted with the portion of the
kings meat and drink, and he desired of the master of the Eunuchs that he
might not be polluted.

Hear again Daniel declares that he had always his heart bent to avoid all
things that might any way pollute him and make him forget him self and his
state. But here some do doubt whether any such matter were in the meat and the
drink, that Daniel ought to absteyne from them. For this seems some note of
superstition. And we know that all things are pure unto the pure: which rule
is true in all worlds. Again we do read no such thing of Joseph. And it is
very like yt Daniel afterward did use such meats when he was in his great
authority with the king. Wherefore this was not always observed of Daniel, and
therefore it may seem now either an unadvised zeal or to much singularity. To
this may be answered: that God allowed it in Daniel and in his fellows, as it
were by miracle, preseruyng them fair lykyng in their mournyng and strayte
diet, and therefore it is not to be doubted but by Gods spirit they were thus at
the first moved to abstain for a time from the kings delicates, and so to
record that they were exiles and captives, brought from the holy City and the
holy kindred of Abraham, into an Idolatrous country and people whose manners
were abominable unto them. And so they count their fine meats and dayntie
fare, pollution and abomination for the consequence that would have ensued if
they had gredyly given them selves unto them. For Daniel knew the danger, that
they should have been corrupted with heathnish manners, if they had thus at the
first given them selves up to have been abused with sumptuous fare and princely
dishes. Wherefore absteynyng from them, he keeps his mind in reverence to
God, he reteyneth the remembrance of his own state and country, he
disapoynteth the king of his crafty purpose, and grows into more credit
through Gods providence.

The Prayer.
Grant O most merciful God, that so long as we wander in this wretched world,
we may so take our meat and drink for the infirmity of our flesh, that we
never be corrupted by fine fare (wherein the flesh deliteth) neither yet by any
foolish superstition, nor that we be drawn away at any time from temperance
and sobriety: but let us always remember so to use our abundance, that when
we abound in all things most plentifully, we may give our selves to moderate
abstinence continually: as also that we may patiently bear all poverty and
hunger when it comes, and that we may so use liberty in our meats and
drinks, that always the glory of thy name O Lord, may be before our eyes, and
that such frugalitie may appear in all our life, that we may continually seek
that sacietie and fulness whereby we shall be saciate for ever most abundantly
when the glory of thy countenance shall appear unto us in the heavens, through
Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

9 Now God had brought Daniel into favor and tender love with the chief of the
Eunuchs. 10 And the chief of the Eunuchs said unto Daniel: I fear my Lord
the king who has appointed your meat and your drink: therefore if he see your
faces worse lykyng then the other children which are of your sort, the^ shall
you make me lose mine head unto the king.

11 Then said Daniel to Melzar whom the chief of the Eunuchs had set over
Daniel, Hananiah, Mishael, and Azariah:

12 Prove thy seruau^ts I beseech thee, ten days, and let them give us pulse to
eat, and water to drink.

13 Then let our countenaunces be looked upon before thee and the countenaunces
of the children that eat of the portion of the kings meat, and as thou
see, deal with thy servants.

14 So he consented to them.

15 And at the end of ten days their countenaunces appeared fayrer and better
lykyng then all the children which did eat of the kings meat.

The Meditation.
Where it is written that God gave Daniel favor with the chief Eunuch, we must
consider the goodness of GOD toward his servants, how he turns the cruel
hearts unto mercy and pity: that we may be the more bold to go forward with
Gods business through all dangers. For this may many times come to pass, that
we can not do the office whereunto God has called us, without present danger
of life (as that he should account the kings meat a pollution, which was but a
captive and a prisoner, could not be without great danger, as appears by the
Eunuchs answer) and because we would fly such dangers, we wax cowardes
and sluggish many times. Daniel therefore to encourage us in Gods matters,
declares that God gave him favor with this Eunuch, to teach us to cast our
care upon God when any worldly terror or manaces of men would terrify us
from the following of Gods spirit. And here we perceive that it is in Gods hand
to turn their hearts which rage against us, so that he ca^ deliver us from all
peril when he pleases.

Thus God caused the king which might have used him as a slave, to command
him to be used as a Princes child, and his governor also to be very favorable
unto him. Whereby we gather this general doctrine, that men's hearts are
governed by God, so that he can mollify all fearcenes and cruelty, and make
wolves like lambs so often as it lyketh his good pleasure. As for example, when
his people came forth of Egypt, God gave them such favor that the Egyptians
delivered unto them all their chief jewels and ornaments. Now it is plain
that the Egyptians hated them nevertheless. What causes them then to bring
forth to the Israelites all their precious jewels? Only the Lord God of the
Israelites, who even then put into their hearts new affections. And so of the
contrary must we knew, that it is in Gods hand to make our dearest friends our
greatest enemies. Wherefore we must seek God in all things. Truth it is that
GOD frames and forms some from their birth to be either mild or cruel, but
he does not this only for once, but daily and continually when it so pleases
him. Like as also he lighteneth the minds or blyndeth them every hour and
moment at his pleasure, so that the most wise shall sometime see nothing, where
the most simple shall find great comfort. Wherefore we may learn that men's
hearts and minds are so governed by Gods secret inspiration, that he changes
them at his good pleasure: and therefore that we need not much to fear our
enemies, who though they rage never so much, may yet be turned toward us. And
so by the example of Daniel let us learn constantly to go forward in our
course appointed, and not to turn back though all the world be against us:
for God is able easily to remove all impedimentes.

And this may we see by Gods mercy, that God causes our enemies to think well
of us in those things which yet they do not allow in them selves. For he
thought well of Daniel, that he did well to worship his God after the Jewish
manner, but he thought his Babilonicall Religion to be the best. As many
profane men now a days are content to grant that we do well which cast away
Popish superstitions, yet do they sleep still in this error, that they may
live still after their old customs because they were so brought up and so
taught by their forefathers. So does this Eunuch make his excuse by the king,
and finds no fault with Daniel. Yet does Daniel with a singular constancy go
forward with his purpose and proves the Eunuchs servant. And hereby we may
learn to go forward with good things and know that the commandment of a king
in external matters, can not bind our co^scie^ces. And this is a true trial
of our faith, when we are not wearied in seeking to do well, neither step
back for a little trouble, or think that the door which is shut can not be
opened. Wherefore if we do not turn back from our good purpose, but prove all
other means convenient, then is it evident that godlynes has taken some root
in our hearts. Wherefore he bids the servant prove if God do not preserve
him and his fellows as well lykyng as others. And hereby we may perceive that
Daniel was moved by Gods spirit to require this so earnestly, seeing that God
did as it were miraculously preserve them.

Deuteronomy. 8.
It is most sure that man lives not by bread only, but by the word and decree
of God: that is to say, because God has decreed and appointed bread and such
other of his creatures to be man's sustenaunce. Now God had taught Daniel by his
spirit that he could not remain pure amongst the Babylonians unless he
refused their delicates. Whereby we may learn to beware that we give not our
selves to serve our glotonous lusts, for then shall we easily be drawn from
the fear of God and our duty toward others, and consider this general
doctrine, that what soever meat we live withal, it is not by the power of the
meat which is dead in it self, but by the singular blessyng of our God. Heb.
11.
And we must despise the daynties of Egypt as Moses did, choosing to suffer
adversity with the people of God, rather the^ to enjoy the pleasures of sin
for a season with the wicked. Again, let us learn hereby that if we should
have nothing but roots and herbs in Gods service, yea though the earth do
altogether fail us and bring us no fruit at all, yet God can so bless us
that we shall be well lykyng, Exodus 16.
as were the children of Israel 40. years long in the wilderness.

The Prayer.
Grant O Lord God, that seeing we do live now amongst so many enemies, and
the Devil never cease to stir against us new troubles, so that all the
world is enraged against those that transform themselves from the vanities of
this world that they may the better serve thee: Grant we beseech thee, that we
may perceive both the devil himself and all his wicked powers, to be so
brideled and subject unto thee, that thou can turn them and direct their
hearts which way thou think best, that we learning by experience that we
shall always be safe and sure under thy protection, as thou have promised us,
may continually go forward in our vocation, despising the pleasures, and not
fearing any terrors, whiles at the length we may come to that blessed rest
which is laid up for us in the heavens through Jesus Christ our Lord.

17 As for these four children God gave them knowledge and understanding in
all wisdom: also he gave Daniell understanding of all visions and dreams.

18 Now when the time was expired that the king had appointed to bring them in,
the chief of the Eunuchs brought the^ before Nebuchadnezer. And the king
communed with them, and among them all was found none like Daniel. etc.

The Meditation.
Whereas the other three companions of Daniell were singular in all liberal
sciences and learning, Daniell only was authorized for the prophet of God, to
declare dark visions: the which thing is written to confirm his doctrine both
unto the Jews and the Gentiles. And the Lord gave this excellency of learning
and knowledge unto these that were strangers, to stir up the king and his
people to reverence his majesty in the presence of his servants, that they
should be compelled to acknowledge Gods grace whom they worshipped, to be the
cause of their excellent wits and great knowledge, seeing no man by nature is
excellent in such things, but only as God gives, and his country men were
as diligently instructed as these strangers. God therefore did this for his
own glory when he made Daniell and his fellows so excellent by tenfolde above
all the learned of his whole kingdom. And thus God uses to ravish his enemies
into the admiration of his power, even when they would most fly from it. For
what sought Nebuchadnezer, but only to extinguish the memory of God, by
bringing up these of the noble families in the sciences of the Chaldees, that
they might oppugn the Religion of God wherein they were borne? The king
purposed this, but God caused the kings counsel to set forth his glory and
made Daniell to be known for an excellent prophet all the days of this kings
life and long after, even unto the first year of king Cyrus, as appears in
the fifth chapt. and the eleventh verse.

The Prayer.
Grant O most merciful father, seeing that every good gift proceeds from
thee, and though one do excel an other in qicknes of wit, wisdom and
understanding, yet no man has any thing of his own, but as thou do
vouchsafe to distribute to every man after the measure of thy free liberality:
that we may apply all our understanding and learning to the glory of thy name:
Again that with all humblenes and modesty we may acknowledge all to be thine
that thou have lent us: and that we labor to keep our selves in such
sobriety that we search nothing curiously, neither yet corrupt the true and
natural knowledge of the creatures which should move us to magnify the
creator, but that we remain in that simplicity whereunto he calls us:
Furthermore that we stay not in these earthly things, but that we may rather
learn to lift up our minds to the true wisdom, that is to say, to know thee
to be the very God, and so give our selves to obey thy justice, and that this
be our only wisdom to obey thee and to give our selves wholly to glorify thy
name all our life long, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Chap. 2.
The Text.


2 Then the king commanded to call the Enchanters, and the Astrologians, and
the Sorserers, and the Chaldeans for to show the king his dreams. So they came
and stood before the king.

3 And the king said unto them: I have dreamed a dream, and my spirit was
troubled to know the dream.

4 Then spoke the Chaldeans to the king in the Sirians language: O king live
for ever. Show thy servant thy dream, and we shall show the interpretation.

The meditation.
WHere Daniell says that Nebuchadnezer had this dream the second year of his
Empire, it seems something contrary to the first Chapter. For if Nebuchadnezer
did conquer Jerusalem the first year of his kingdom, how can it be that
Daniell was now counted among the wise men and Astrologians, for he was then
a Scholar? This seems not then to agree, that Daniell with his companions
were but Scholars the first year of Nebuchadnezer, and that the second year
he was in danger of his life because he was of the number of the Mages. Some
say that the second year is to be counted from the captivity and destruction
of the City: for they say that Nebuchadnezer was called king after that he had
a quiet Monarchy, and before he had destroyed the Temple and City he had not
so. But I do think otherwise, as it is more probable, that this Nebuchadnezer
raygned with his father when he conquered Jerusalem in the time Ioachim, and
that he was then sent thither by his father: and after he had ended his wars
in Aegipt, he returned into Chaldea, to prevent seditions and innouations.
Wherefore herein there is no absurdity, that Nebuchadnezer reigned before the
death of his father together with him, and afterward he reigned alone: and that
this thing which is here spoken, came to pass in the second year of his own
reign. He says that he dreamed dreams, and yet there is but one dream
declared. But because many things were wrapped up in this dream, he speaks
plurally as of many.

It is added that his spirit was troubled, that we may know that it was no
common dream. For this was not the first time that ever he dreamed, neither
was he so troubled every night to call together all the Mages. Wherefore
Daniell would note that this was an extraordinary dream, so that he being
astonished did fall again into a dream, and through the trouble of his mind,
forgot what he had dreamed. But he felt a burning in his conscience because God
would not suffer him to rest, but would have his mind to be unquiet whiles
that he should have the interpretation of the dream. Wherefore the profane
writers do not without cause place dreams among diuinations. They speak in
deed doubtfully of dreams, because there can be no certainty in their
writings: yet did they think that there was some kind of divination in their
dreams. How be it to extend this to all dreams were foolish and childish.
For many times dreams do come of the affection of the mind, or of the
disposition of the body: but of the contrary part, some dreams do come by Gods
appointment for other purposes.

But concerning the dream of Nebuchadnezer, two things are to be noted: First
that the memory thereof was lost and it was forgotten: secondly that the meaning
thereof was unknown. We may see in other places that the dream was not
forgotten, and yet that the interpretation was unknown. But here Nabuchadnezer
was not only troubled for want of interpretation of the dream, but he was
troubled again and was full of care and grief because the vision was vanished
forth of his mind. As for the darkness of the dreams, God uses them so
toward his own children. For Joseph when he dreamed that he was worshipped
of the Sun and the Moon, Genesis 37.
knew not what the matter meant: neither yet when he dreamed that his sheafe was
worshipped of the sheaues of his brethren, but he told it simply to his
brethren. Thus does God speak in dreams as it were by a dark ridle, until
the interpretation be annexed: and so was the dream of Nebuchadnezer.

Thus sometimes we see yt God does open his will to the unbelievers, but not
openly, Isa. 29.
because they seeing should not see: and it is as if one should reach unto them
a book that were shut (as Isay says) that God does speak with the unbelievers
in a strange and a stamering tongue. Isa. 28.
So then was Gods will uttered to Nebuchadnezer, that he did still remain
doubtful and amazed: wherefore his dream could nothing have profited him,
unless God had given him Daniell to be the interpreter thereof. All his
cunning Astrologians and Chaldees could do nothing: as all their sciences are
vain and foolish. The Chaldeans who had taken to them the name of the Country
as men most excellent, could tell the king nothing at all. Daniell and his
fellows in the mean time are forgotten of the king, though he had good proof
of their wisdom before (no doubt) by ye singular providence of God: because
God would not have his servants to be joined or coupled with the Enchanters,
Sorcerers, and Mages, but would have his power to be made evident in Daniell,
after that all their vain sciences had failed, and that the king by them could
have no comfort, though they boasted much of their own knowledge. But it is to
be noted that the dreams that God sends can not be expounded by any art of
man, but by special revelation from the almighty God.

5 And the king answered and said: the thing is gone from me. If ye will not
make me understand the dream, with the interpretation thereof, ye shall be
drawn in pieces and your houses shall be made a Iakes.

6 But if ye declare the dream and the interpretation thereof, ye shall
receive of me gifts and rewards, and great honor: therefore show me the
dream and the interpretation of it.

7 They answered again and said: let the king show his servant the dream,
and we will declare the interpretation thereof.

8 Then the king answered and said: I know certainly that ye would gain the
time, because ye see the thing is gone from me.

9 But if ye will not declare me the dream, there is but one judgment for
you: for ye have prepared lying and corrupt words, to speak before me till
the time be changed: therefore tell me the dream, that I may know if ye can
declare me the interpretation thereof.

Here the king requires more of the Chaldees the^ they ever professed. For
although they boasted much of their art, yet they did never promise to tell
every man his dream. Wherefore it seems that ye king does against justice thus
to charge them. But we must note that ye king had such a terror and trouble
stricken into his heart, that he was like a raging beast, and that seeing these
wicked men made themselves the interpreters of the Gods, the king will herein
try their great boastinges. Wherefore this is a just reward of their arrogance,
that these vain men puffed up with a foolish pride of their wicked art,
should thus come into danger, Leuit. 20.
so that of their parts they had deserved death for the art it self: and the
Lord also would have them to be declared fools to their perpetual shame and
confusion, and so to suffer death for their wicked dealinges: Though the kings
fact were outrageous, commanding such a thing upon the pain of death, as
never was heard tell of, and commanding all to be killed without exception.
But here we do see how far the wicked do exceed in their kinds that want
the government of Gods spirit, and how the Lord does punish one wicked by an
other many times, to both their confusions.

The Prayer.
Grant O Lord God, seeing that we do so wander in this world that we always
stand in need of knowledge and the government of thy holy spirit, that we may
depend wholly of thy word and heavenly revelation, lest we challenge to much to
our selves by any vain knowledge: but that we fully perceauing our own
blindness and ignorance may always fly unto thee, and not suffer our selves
to be carried to and fro by the craft of Satan and his wicked instruments, but
that we may remain so firmly in thy truth, that we never swerve therefrom,
whilst thou please to direct us in the whole course of our vocation, and so
we come into that heavenly glory of thy kingdom, which is purchased unto us by
the blood of thine only begotten son Jesus. So be it.

10 Then the Chaldeans answered before the king, and said: there is no man
upon earth that can declare the kings matter: yea there is neither King, nor
Prince, nor Lord that asked such things at an Inchaunter, or Astrologian, or
Chaldean.

11 For it is a rare thing that the king requires, and there is none other
that can declare it before the king, except the Gods whose dwelling is not with
flesh.

They excuse themselves that this belongs not to their art, neither that any
king ever commanded any such matter. But the king receives none excuse, for
God had stirred him to punish these Mages, Chaldees, and Coniurers, as the most
wicked deceauers of the people: and by this means also he would have the
excellent spirit that was in Daniel more known and regarded. Where they say
that it was a rare thing. They do mean that this is strange, that the king
should have such a vision sent from heaven, and that he should not remember it:
wherefore they think it some secret mystery and knowledge that passes their
capacity, only perteining to the Angels, which always do see Gods will and
pleasure: or to their Gods whom they did worship many in number. For all the
heathen Idolaters had always this opinion that there was one high God above all,
and that there was a number of lesser Gods which ruled under him: and so every
man after his own fantasy feigned him a God above in the air. Wherefore they
being men in the flesh can not enter into the heavens (say they) to see all
secrets. This excuse will not serve, for the king rages more and more.

12 Wherefore the king with great wrath and indignation commanded that all the
wise men of Babylon should be slain.

We do not read of the like example in any history. But the cause is to be
noted: that God had his secret judgment against the Inchaunters, and would
set up his servant Daniel. And it may be that the king did then first perceive
that which he never understood before, that is to say, that the boasting of
their knowledge was nothing but lies, and that in all their foolish arts there
was nothing but craft and deceit. We see also them that are counted devout in
false religion, when they perceive that their fained holiness will not help
them, then they brast forth into madness and rage against those Gods whom they
have worshipped. And so may it be that Nebuchadnezer in this so earnest business
did epsy the deceit of the Mages, whom he never suspected before: but now he
sees that he is deceived, and that he is destitute of their aid and counsel
in this doubtful matter, of whom he thought that he should never have been
forsaken: and because he looked for all help at their hands, therefore does
he rage an hundredth fold more then if he had not put in them any confidence.
This is the manner of all the superstitious and idolatrous.

13 And the decree was given, and the wise men were slain, and they sought
Daniel and his fellows to put him to death.

The Meditation.
We see here the singular providence of God for Daniel. When the wise Chaldees
are killed, God will not have his saints mixed with them, but so separate
from them, that his glory may be the more set forth by them, and they more
gloriously preserved. Yet see we how the king despised Gods gift, and would
have extinguished the light offered in that he would have Daniell killed, in
whom he had known such excellent wisdom as was before named. But now through
his rage all is forgotten, and he will take no pains in this doubtful matter,
to consult with Daniell whom God had given him of great mercy, if he would have
used him. But thus many times they that be in authority run to hastily after
their own lusts, and will take no pains to enquire for counsel, neither at
God, nor at faithful and godly men, neither yet will they search for the
innocent persons, nor take leisure to try the just causes. Notwithstanding God
does meruelously deliver his from death, as we see in Daniell. And we see the
way that Daniel takes after that he had opteyned a days respet of the king.
He and his fellows fall to earnest prayer to find mercy at Gods hand, as we
must do in all our necessities: for it is only of Gods free mercy and favor
when he defends us, or gives us any thing that good is. Forthermore, we may
learn how ready God is to grant such prayers as are made of faith, and how
near GOD is unto all them that call upon him in truth. And therefore because
that Daniell brought faith and a pure conscience, he is heard straight ways.
And this secret was opened unto him in a vision by night and he prayseth God.

The Prayer.
Grant almighty God, that seeing we are in danger every day and hour, and we
are not in ieopardy only by the rage of one cruel tyrant, but the devil
stirs all the world against us, and armeth the princes of the world to
destroy us: grant we beseech thee, that we may feel in our hearts, and that
thou will declare in deed that our life is in thy hand, and that thou art such
a faithful keeper thereof, that thou will not suffer one hear to fall from
our heads, but that thou will so defend us, that the wicked also may know that
we boast not in vain of thy holy name, neither that our prayers unto thee are
fruteles, and when we have felt thy fatherly goodness and care all the course of
our life, in the end receive us to that blessed immortality which thou have
promised unto us and laid up for us in the heaven, through Jesus Christ our
Lord. Amen.

20 The name of God be praised for ever and ever, for wisdom and strength are
his.

21 And he changes the times and seasons, he takes away kings and he
sets up kings, he gives wisdom unto the wise and understanding to those
that understand.

22 He discovers the deep and secret things: he knows what is in
darkness. etc.

Now Daniel prayseth God, as we ought daily to wish his name to be sanctified,
but especially as Daniell does here, when he works any strange work and
shows any token of his favor amongst us. Whereupon says David: Thou have put
a new song into my mouth. Psalm. 40. Isay. 42.
And Isay says, that God has given the matter of a new song, because he has
dealt meruelously with his Church. So does Daniell here praise God with most
vehement affection, giving unto him only the praise of power and of wisdom,
and so separating him from all false Gods and all creatures, in that as he
knows all things by his wisdom, so does he rule and govern all things by
his power, so that nothing is done but by his appointment: and also that he
has not only this fountain of all wisdom and power in him self, but that
he spreads forth the same to be seen both in heaven and in earth. So that
what wisdom or power so ever appears in any creature in the world, it is but
a sign, testimony and declaration of Gods wisdom and power, that God may be
magnified. So that the change and alteration of times, of states, of kingdoms,
and of all arts and sciences, are but as it were glasses to cause man to
behold Gods power and wisdom, by the which all things are governed.

Wherefore Daniell teaches us that we need not to clime up to the heavens to
search out this wisdom and power, for it is daily practiced amongst us upon
the earth, whiles we see kings and kingdoms altered and changed so far
above all compass of man's wit and our capacities, that we may always have our
recourse unto God and reverence his majesty in all things. If all the years
and days should run after one course, we would attribute it unto nature. But
now when we see how far summer does differ from the winter, and that we have
not yet always the like summer and the like winter: no sometimes the spring
time is hoote as the summer, sometime it is as cold, as stormy, and snowye as
ye winter, and the summers are sometimes so strange and the years so diverse
one from an other: all these alterations and changes are wrought by the wisdom
of God to waken us, and to stir our dull hearts to look up to the maker of
all, and not to stick to ye fond imagination of nature, as do the
philosophers, and so rob God of his honor. And if in all these small
mutations the power of God be so manifest, how much more should God be
magnified in these great transformations of the whole world, which are now in
our days most evident: so that we may boldly say to the proud conte^ners with
the prophet David: Lift not up your horns so high, nor speak with stiff
necks, for to come to preferment is neither from the east nor from the west,
Psalm. 75.
nor from the sowth: but God is the judge, he makes low and he makes high.

Thus resting upon Gods, we may deride all vain discourses of man's brain,
wherewith they folishly trouble their heads, that God comes seldom or never
into their remembrance: the which fault Daniell notes in this 21. verse, like
as he goes farther in the 22. verse. Whereby we learn to give God his due
praise in all things, which the world with open sacrilege does use to rob
from him: that if we have any understanding or judgment at all, we must
knowledge it to be Gods gift. If we have but one drop of common sense or wit,
we must praise God for it. For without his secret inspiration giving us this
understanding, we should have been like stones and stocks. Now, he that has
more knowledge is more bounden unto God because he has received more. For who
is it that makes this diversity but only God? But above all, the knowledge of
spiritual things is the rare and singular gift of the holy ghost, and
therefore the manifest token of Gods power. Let us therefore beware of that
deuelish pride wherewith the word is bewitched, boasting in their gifts as
though they came of them selves: and let us praise God for that he has not
only given us the common gift of wit and understanding to put a difference
betwixt good and evil, which seems only natural: but that he has so
lightened our minds, that we do perceive those spiritual things which else
should far pass our capacities, and let us pray continually that he would
vouchsafe more and more to open to us that light wherein he dwells, that so
we may feel the power of his spirit working in our darkness, and
strengthening us in his service.

The Prayer.
Grant O Lord God, that where so many testimonies of thy wisdom, power, and
glory are daily before our eyes, and yet we can not see them, but bury this
clear light with our ingratitude: grant we beseech thee, that at the length
we may learn to open our eyes, or rather that thou would open them by thy
spirit, that we regarding with how many, how great, and how excellent
benefits thou presentest thy self unto us, and geuest testimony of thy
wisdom, thy power, and divine majesty, we mey so profit in this thy schole
of holiness, that we may attribute all praise of all power, wisdom, and
knowledge unto thee, that we challenge nothing at all unto our selves, but only
extol and magnify thee: and the more liberal that thou please to show thy
self unto us, the more earnestly we may labor to serve thee and to give our
selves wholly unto thee, taking no piece of praise to our selves, but caring
only for this one thing, that to thee alone may all glory remain and shine
throughout the world, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

27 Daniel answered in the presence of the king, and said: the secret which the
king has demanded, can neither the wise, the astrologians, the inchanters,
nor the southesayers declare unto the king.

28 But there is a God in heaven that reueileth secrets, and shows the king
Nebuchadnezer what shall be in the latter days. Thy dream and the things which
thou have seen in thine head upon thy bed, is this.

29 O king, when thou wast in thy bed, thoughts came into thy mind what should
come to pass hereafter, and he that reueileth secrets, tells thee what
shall come.

The Meditation.
Daniel still labors to cause the king and all others to give all glory unto
God. Therefore he affirms that none of those whom they counted wise men,
neither any man by art and science is able to understand Gods secrets, but
God who is in the heavens does only reueile them as he pleases. And with this
point he begins with the king, to smite a reverence and fear of Gods
majesty into the kings heart, that he might more diligently hear and fear the
words that should after follow, and so be the more apt to receive the
mysteries that should be reueiled. For this is it that wants amongst the
worldlinges, that they can not think that it comes of God which Gods
messengers do bring unto them. Many now a days are willing to hear what can
be said of the Gospel, and what may be brought against popish supersticion
and error, but they are not inwardly touched nor moved, therefore what so ever
they conceive does but vanish without profit and goes forth of their
remembrance. Wherefore this reverence of God and his word is most necessary, as
the beginning of wisdom and the preparation of the mind to right
understanding. So does Daniel then prepare the kings mind, and abbaseth him
self and his own knowledge, that God only may have the glory.

The Prayer.
Grant almighty God, seeing thou will have us to differ from the brute beasts,
and therefore have grafted in our hearts the light of understanding: that we
may learn to know this to be thy singular grace and gift, and that we may
reverence and magnify thee for the same, and that we may always exercise our
selves in the knowledge of those things which may bring us reverently to
regard thy word and thy majesty: and also that we may put such difference
betwixt the common sense that thou have given us, and the light of thy spirit,
that thou may be glorified: and that we may always especially praise thee
for thy gift of faith, whereby we are made thy children engrafted into the body
of thy son, and that we may continually crave increase of the same faith of
thee, whiles in the end thou do bring us to that full revelation of light, when
we being made like thee, shall behold thy glory face to face, and shall have
the fruition thereof, through the same our Lord Jesus Christ. Amen.

30 As for me, this secret is not showed me for any wisdom that is in me,
more then in other: but only to show the king the interpretation, and that thou
might know the thoughts of thy heart.

31 O king, thou saw, and behold there was a great Image. This image of
excellent glory stood before thee, and the form thereof was terrible.

32 This images head was of fine gold, his breast and arms of silver, his
belly and thighs of brass,

33 His legs of iron, and his feet were part of iron and part of clay.

34 Thou beheldest it till a stone was cut without hands, which smote the
image upon his feet that were of iron and clay, and brake them to pieces.

The Meditation upon the.31. etc.
By this dream of Nebuchadnezer Daniel (as before) declares all the mutations
of kings and kingdoms to be done by Gods providence. And though they be never
so rich and pompous, though they be never so proud, fierce, or terrible, yet
GOD by his secret counsel does pluck them down at his time appointed,
because they magnify them selves against the kingdom of his son Christ,
whom he has determined without man's help, in the mids of his enemies to
raise up to his great and eternal kingdom. Now these four Monarchies the
Babilonians or Chaldees, the Medes or Persians, the Macedonians or Grecia^s
were destroyed one of an other, and ye last by ye Romans, before ye kingdom
of Christ was reueiled unto the world. Now the Romans fell by ambition,
avarice, cruelty, and civil sedition. And Christ who is the just judge of the
world from all eternity, as he by his divine providence did justly make the
mutations of the other Monarchies, so does he in this last of all, when he most
evidently sets up his spiritual kingdom upon the earth.

Prou. 8.
Christ is the eternal wisdom of his father, by whom kings do reign and have
their authority approved, if they seek that he may reign amongst them: but
if they be open enemies to his kingdom and show them selves cruel tyrauntes
to his people, Psalm. 2.
he then has power with his iron scepter to break them down and destroy
them. And this dream of Nebuchadnezer, of the destruction of these Monarchies,
was sent especially for the comfort of Gods people, that they should not
despair when they did see the glytteryng pompous kingdom of the Chaldees,
after that of the Persians, then of the Macedonians, last of all of the Romans
ouerwhelmyng ye whole earth: but that they should still look for ye kingdom
of Judah and of Christ which God had once promised to be performed, how
miserable ruins so ever in the mean space should appear.

Therefore then was this dream sent to the king with the interpretation by
Daniel, that all the East parts of the world might know it: and that ye Jews
there dispersed might still norish their faith and hope in Gods promises, seeing
all things done by his appointement: and that the same God which had told
Nebuchadnezer before what should come afterward, had also determined what he
would do in time to come: whose purpose could not be changed though it were
long differred. Whereas then the Jews did know that the Chaldees did then
reign over them and all the world by the appointment of God, and that after
them there should come an other worse then they, and thyrdly that under the
Macedonians they should be still in troubles, and that the Romans also should
be Lords over all and keep the world in cruel subjection, and last of all
that their Messiah whom they looked for, should be the eternal king for ever,
and that none of the Monarchies had any assured stabilitie: this was unto them
a singular comfort and confirmation.

Thus do we see for what cause God would have this thing to be published every
where, which was as then unknown, that the Jews might deliver that from hand
to hand unto their children and posterity, which they heard of the mouth of
Daniel, and that his prophecy might be exta^t and remain for them a
continual monument in all ages. Wherefore when the Jews that then were
captives did see this terrible Image of their enemy in great admiration unto
all the world, what could they then think but that they were, as it were
swallowed up without recovery? And so likewise under the other mighty
Monarchies. Therefore God of his great mercy does offer them this consolation,
that their redemer should come, which should break in pieces all these
Empires, and that without all help of ma^s hand or humane power: for this
stone of him self and his own power, should grow into such a kingdom as
should fill the whole earth.

The Prayer.
Grant almighty God, seeing we wander so in this world, that our minds are
easily encombred and troubled and our judgment darkened when we do see the
glystering power and prosperity of the wicked to be terrible both to us and to
all others: Grant we beseech thee, that we liftyng up our eyes unto the
heavens, may remember always how great power thou have bestowed upon that
thine only begotten son, even to this end, that he should guide us and
govern us by the power of his spirit, and should also defend us through his
fidelity and protection: so that he should alter, change and tra^spose the
whole world for our salvation, that so we may quietly rest under his defense,
and fight forth our battle boldly and constantly, with such patience as he
commands and commends, whiles that in the end we may attain that fruit
of victory which thou have promised unto us, and the which also thou will show
unto us in thy heavenly kingdom. So be it.

36 This is the dream and we will declare before the king the interpretation
thereof.

37 O king thou art a king of kings: for God of heaven has given thee a
kingdom, power and strength and glory.

38 And in all places where the children of men do dwell, the beasts of the
fields and fowls of the heaven has he given into thine hand, and has made
thee ruler over them all. Thou art this head of God.

39 And after thee shall arise an other kingdom inferior unto thee, of
silver. And the third kingdom shall be of brass, which shall bear rule over
all the earth.

40 And the fourth kingdom shall be strong as iron: for as yro^ breaks in
pieces and subdueth all things, and as iron bruseth all, so shall it do. 41
Whereas thou saw the feet and toes part of potters clay and part of iron,
the kingdom shall be divided, but there shall be in it of ye strength of the iron.

The Meditation upon the 36. etc.
Daniel describes the golden head to be the king of Babylon, because that in
respect of the other three it was the best, yet was it of it self wicked and
cruel, but the world ever waxes worse and worse. The which thing as it was an
admonition to the Jews to be content with their state: so is it unto us to
take heed that we be not carried away with ye long custom of sin in these
our wretched times.

Again, he names the Persian kingdom to be of silver, and so inferior to
the first Monarchy: not that it was inferior in power and dominion, but
because it was worse in ambition, in cruelty, in vice and corruption, as Isay
the 13. Isay. 13.18.
does before prophecy. And as ye Monarchies did grow greater and greater, so
did their vices increase, that men might see their madness which desire to have
Princes of so great power and dominions: As though any one man were able to
rule any one kingdom, and that this were not rather plain and evident, that
such excessive dominions are like great ragyng rivers that run over the
banks, to the great damage of their neighbors, Isa. 8.6.7.
as Isay well notes chapter. 8.

So is the third named of brass the Macedonian, not so much for the strength
as because it was worse: to cause the Jews still to wait for the eternal
kingdom of Christ which is of mercy and justice. And the fourth of iron the
Roman, because it brake down all before it, and was most cruel both to the
Jews and to other nations. Yet the feet shall be part of potters metal,
part of iron, says Daniel, which can not well be matched together but the one
will break the other: which does signify the cruel murder that began betwixt
the two first brethren and continued manifestly amongst them in their civil
wars though they were joined in kynred, to declare unto the godly that that
kingdom of the Romans was not it that they should stay upon: but that they
should always buyld their faith and hope upon this stone cut forth of the
mountain without hands, and upon that kingdom which the God of heaven should
raise up after these kings, which kingdom should never be destroyed, but
shall destroy all these kingdoms, and it shall stand for ever.

Now, this kingdom of Christ does not destroy the kingdoms of the world for
any other cause, but because that they are enemies to his kingdom. Therefore
Daniel speaking of this matter does treat of a thing the^ known, and
afterward evidently felt of ye Jews from time to time, that is to say, that
these Monarchies are enemies to the kingdom of God. For the Chaldees had
thrown down the temple of God, and as much as in them lay they endeavored
them selves to destroy all his true worship. As for the Medes and Persians,
although by Cyrus and Darius at the first liberty to return from the
captivity was granted, yet were the Jews so miserably handled by the kings
following and by their officers and deputies, that the most of them did rather
choose to live in exile then to return into their country. Thirdly, though
Alexander of Macedony one time spared them, yet the kings that succeeded him
most cruelly vexed them, spoiled and slew the most true worshippers of God, and
burned Gods holy Testament: so that it is no marvel though Daniel set the
kingdom of Christ against such Monarchies. As for the Romans we knew how
proudly they despised the God of Israel, and though they had Pantheon wherein
they worshipped all the Idols and Gods of all the nations that they Conquered,
yet would they not give any honor or place to him at all.

Again, how they hated Christ's Gospel, how cruelly they murdered the
Christians, and labored by all means to diffame and banish forth of the world
the doctrine of salvation, the matter is most manifest. Therefore Daniel to
admonish the faithful what should be their condition and state to the coming
of Christ, does pronounce all those Monarchies and kingdoms to be so many
enemies to God and to the kingdom of his son Christ, and that therefore they
must be destroyed. And hereby he does exhort to patience, that the faithful
do not faint in so great miseries and persecutions as the proud tyrauntes
should stir up against them so often and many times. And Daniel says that this
stone is hewn forth of the mountain without hands, to signify his divine
birth and sending from the heavens, so that his dominion and kingdom must be
separate from all earthly Empire, because it is immediately from God and
heavenly.

The Prayer.
Grant almighty God, that we may remember our selves so to be pilgrims and
strangers in this world, that no glistering show of any riches, or power, or
wisdom of this world do blind our eyes at any time: but that we may direct
our sight, eyes and senses always to behold the kingdom of thy Son, and
that we may so be there fixed, that nothing may hinder us to have forward in
the course of our vocation, whiles that at the length we may come to the mark
which thou have set before us and unto the which thou do call us at this day
by the trumpe and preaching of thy Gospel: and that at the length thou will
gather us into that blessed eternity which is purchased for us by the blood of
this thy Son, and that we may never be broken by this stone with the wicked
world, but that being strengthened with his power, we may by him be raised up
above all the heavens. Amen.

44 And in the days of these kings, shall the God of heaven set up a kingdom
which shall never be destroyed: and this kingdom shall not be given to an
other people, but it shall break and destroy all the other kingdoms, and it
shall stand for ever.

The God of heaven shall the^ raise up a kingdom which shall never be
destroyed, neither shall this kingdom be given to an other people: it shall
destroy all, and it self shall for ever. The which comfortable promise of this
eternal kingdom, does not only pertain to the person of Christ, who is the
only king that lives and reigns for ever, but also to his Church, which is
the whole body of his kingdom, to all his people and subjects, and to every
particular member and person of the same. Thus does this eternal king
communicate his eternity to all his, because he will have always a kingdom
in this world, though the world can not always see it, and he does regenerate
al his true subjects of this kingdom with his eternal spirit into everlasting
life, to raygne with him in his kingdom for ever. Therefore the perpetuity of
this kingdom of Christ is true after two sorts, besides the eternity that is
in the person of Christ: first in the whole body, which is the Church: who
though it be often times so scattered that it do not appear in man's eyes, yet
does it never utterly perish, but God does preserve it by his secret and
incomprehensible wisdom and power, so that it shall remain for ever. Secondly
in every one of the faithful there is an other perpetuity, because they are
borne again by the incorruptible seed, and being borne by the spirit of God,
are not only the mortal children of Adam, but they carry the heavenly life in
themselves, because the spirit which is in them is life, as Paul says to the
Romans. Romans 8.10.


And we see how this kingdom has been eternal ever since the doctrine of the
Gospel has been preached. For though the Church have seemed sometimes as it
had been buried, yet God gave life in the very grave of Idolatry and ignorance
unto his elect. And now how is it come to pass that the children of the Church
and the soldiers of Christ's kingdom are come forth as it were of the grave
in such abundance, but that the Lord has mercy upon Zion because his time
appointed is come, Psalm. 102.13
and therefore his servants delight to build up Zion, yea he himself will
build it, and his glory shall appear, and the heathen shall fear and all the
kings of the earth at his glory, and the people which shall be as it were new
created, shall praise the Lord.

Furthermore, Daniel says that this kingdom can not be translated from one to
an other, as the first was from Baltazar to Darius, the second from Darius to
Alexander, the third from that cursed kindred of Alexander and his Princes to
the Romans. The fourth of the Romans was turned not only to strangers of
foreign nations, but to swineherds (as Iustine writes), to beasts, as was
Heliogabalus, to monsters in nature, as was Nero and Caligula, and such like:
like as also, as the Gospel did grow it continually decayed because it was so
manifest an enemy to Christ's kingdom. But as for Christ's kingdom, neither
can Christ be spoiled of his power and dominion, neither yet we his members can
lose this kingdom, whereof he has made us pertakers. Therefore Christ
reigns for ever, as well in him self as in his members, without any peril
of alteration: for we shall be preserved for ever by his grace, and he has
received us into his protection that we can not perish. John. 10. John. 10.1.
Pet. 1.5.
We that are kept through his power by faith (as Peter says) may be sure and
quiet: for what so ever the world and the devil devise against us, we shall
for ever remain safe and sure in Christ.

And thus would Daniel have all men to see that there is no stabilitie any
where, how great so ever the power or glory appear, but only in Christ. Where
Daniel says, that this stone was hewn forth of the mountain without hands,
he declares that nothing in Christ's kingdom is wrought by man's power, but
all things in the salvation of man are wrought by God, as Isa. 63: Isay. 63.5.
Because the Lord did see no helper in the world, he armed himself with his
own strength. Again, herein we note his low and base beginning, like unto a
stone that had no form nor fashion. Which both are comprehended in Micha,
Isay. 53. Micha. 5.2
where he says: Thou Bethleem Ephratha art the least amongst the thousands
of Judah, yet forth of thee shall he come unto me, that shall be the ruler in
Israel, whose goynges forth have been from all eternity. Thus Daniel would
answer man's gross imaginatio^s, which might think that because Christ's
glory did not appear so great at ye first as in the kingdoms of the world,
and because yet his kingdom is under the cross, that therefore it were not to
be regarded: and would have us to lift up our eyes to the heavens and behold
Gods power herein, who works his glory contrary to man's judgment.

45 Where thou saw that the stone was cut out of the mountain without
hands, and that it brake in pieces, the iron, the brass, the clay, the silver
and the gold: so the great God has showed the king what shall come to pass
hereafter, and the dream is true, and the interpretation thereof is sure.

This must we always consider that our Savior Christ said unto Pilate, that
his kingdom is not of this world, no man can see how it springs or
spreads: John. 18.
and how soever the children of this kingdom be dispersed or scattered, and be
neither named nor known in the world, yet is it certain that this kingdom of
God and his Christ remains safe and sound, 1 Kings. 19.
though neither Eliah nor any other man can see it, and that this kingdom
shall overcome all powers that stand up against it.

The Prayer.
Grant almighty God, seeing thou have made it open and known unto us by so
many, so clear, and most sure testimonies, that we may look for none other
redemer then this thy Son whom already thou have given unto us, and have
established his authority and his divine and eternal power by so many
miracles, and have sealed the same as well by the publishing of thy Gospel, as
by the seal of thy holy spirit in our hearts, and do confirm the same by
daily experience: that we may remain firm and stable in him, and that we
never turn from him, neither that our faith fail at ane time, whatsoever
Satan attempt against us, but that we may persevere in the course of thy holy
vocation, whiles that at length we may be gathered into that eternal beatitude
and blessed state of rest, which is purchased unto us by the blood of thine
only begotten Son. So be it.

46 Then the king Nebuchadnezer fell upon his face, and bowed himself unto
Daniel. etc. 47 Also the king said to Daniel: of a truth your God is a God of
Gods, a king of kings. etc.

That Nebuchadnezer worshipped God and Daniel, though in some part it may be
commended, yet in some respect it is blame worthy: for though he acknowledged
the God of Israel to be the true God, yet does he give part of Gods honor unto
a mortal man, as many times men without knowledge do mix heaven and earth
together, because that they always fall to their superstitions, though they
have sometimes some good motions. And it is plain that this confession of the
king was but particular, for he did not wholly return unto God from his
Idolatry and errors, but was astonished for the present, and returned
afterward to greater madness, as follows in the next chap. And thus many times
God compels the wicked to give testimonies to his glory, when yet they
reteyne their vices and fall forthwith to their accustomed wickedness, as it is
plain afterward.

Whereby we may learn that it is not enough though a man with open mouth praise
the power and wisdom of God, unless he cast all superstitions forth of his
heart, and so hold of one God that he defy all others. For there can not be
required a playner confession then this, and yet we see that Nebuchadnezer was
still retained in the snares of Satan, because he holds still his false
Gods, and thinks it enough to make God of Israel the chief. The which folly
appears evidently amongst the Papists, which grant the name of God and
Christ, but they rob away all the power and give it unto other creatures after
their fond imaginations: and they are not so good as this profane king, for
they will not give him the whole government, but feign man to have free will,
and all things to run by chance, or that the heaven and earth according to
ma^s merits or demerites do their endeavors and office. Thus make they man's
free will the cause of all, and so rob God of his honor. This is their madness.

The Prayer.
Grant almighty God, seeing man's heart is so full of hypocrisy that there is
nothing more hard then to purge it from all lies, errors, feynyng and
dissimulation: that we may learn to examine our selves fully and
substancially: and also that thou will so shine unto us with the light of thy
spirit, that we may verily know our hyd vices, and that thou will drive them
far away from us, that thou only may be our God, and that true holiness
may prevail amongst us, and that we may give thee pure and unspotted worship
and honor, and that we may live with upright consciences in this world, and so
be content every one with our own state that we study always for the
commodity of our brethren, whiles that at the length we be partakers of that
true glory which thou have prepared for us in the heavens by Jesus Christ our
Lord. Amen.

Chap. 3. The Text.


NEbuchadnezer, after that he had professed the God of Israel to be the true
God, does fall again to this foul Idolatry: wherein after the custom of the
Idolaters he utters his own pride and ambition. Wherein God would have his
wicked heart to be made manifest. Who might have been thought by his former
confession to have been wholly changed: but by this it appears that in his
fairest show of words he remained wicked. And as this is the manner of all
superstitious persons, when they pretend their Religion and think that they
serve their God, yet will they be seen and praised of the world: so many times
they will mix policy with their Religion, to bring men into an uniformity.
And these two things are hear manifest. His Idol is so costly and great that
his fame must needs spread, and he straightly charge all nations both Jews and
Gentiles upon pain of death to join in this Idolatry.

Thus for policy he will stablish one Religion in all the nations that were
under him, lest by the mixture of the Jews that were stiff in their religion,
or by any other people any tumult might arise, and by such tumult any shaking
or diminishyng of his dominion. Thus do many Princes when they publish laws
for Religion, rather regard their own quietness and commodity, then what God
requires by his word. And this bold temeritie has been amongst them from the
beginning, that sometimes they would make new Gods, sometime they would appoint
GOD a law how he should be worshypped: but they would rarely or never subject
them selves only and wholly to the word of God. Whereby their madness is
manifest, that whiles they pretend to worship God they set them selves above
God, and worship their own fantasy and folly. They think it is not for their
Princely dignity to be in obedience under God, or to set forth his word
simply, but they will have their procedynges to be of more authority: and
puttyng in the name of the King or the Queen, they think the matter is
preiudicate and sufficient, that GOD may be worshipped none other ways then it
pleases them and as they have decreed by their authority. And in such
commandments we may see that al those which depend only of their fathers
and antiquity, are easily overcome to change their Religion, and they only
are able to stand fast against such thunderyng threatenings of Princes, which
have their consciences grounded upon Gods holy word.

And this is to be noted, that the king does not command any to profess with
their mouths that this is a GOD or that it has any divinity, but he only
requires the outward gesture. Whereby we may see that they are worthily
condemned of Idolatry that do the outward gesture, be it for fear or favor,
either that they do dissemble such a matter, as many do amongst the Papists
and in other places. We must worship God in spirit and truth, and also with
outward profession, Ioh. 4.23.
not only to exercise our selves in the worship of God, but also to offer our
selves wholly unto him and that we may be holy both in body and soul, 1. Cor.
7.24. 1. These. 5.23.
as Paul admonishes us. And by the pronenes of this people to Idolatry we have
cause to consider our corrupt inclination, how easily at the commandment of
authority we may be overthrown. Which ought to admonish us that we labor to
know Gods word and to retain our selves with in the bounds thereof, never to
shrink therefrom, what so ever commandment come to the contrary, and though
an hundredth deaths should follow it.

The Prayer.
Grant almighty God, because we wander always so miserably in our own
cogitations, that if we do attempt to worship thee at any time by our own
fantasies, we do nothing else but profane and pollute the true and pure
worship of thy majesty: again we are so easily drawn away to wicked
superstitions as may be: Grant therefore that we may remain in the pure
obedience of thy word, and that we never turn this way nor that way therefrom:
And furnish thou us we beseech thee, with the invincible strength of thy spirit,
that we never give place to any terrors or manaces of men, but that we may
remain in the reverence of thy name to the end: and how soever the world do
rage after their deuilish errors, that yet we never fail from the right way,
but continue in the right course unto the which thou call us, whiles our
race being ended we may come to that blessed rest which is laid up for us in
the heavens, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

2 Then Nebuchadnezer the king sent forth to gather together the nobles, the
princes, and the dukes, the judges, the receivers, the counselors, the
officers, and all the gouerners of the provinces, that they should come to the
dedication of the image which Nebuchadnezer ye king had set up.

3 So the nobles, Princes, and Dukes, the Judges, the Receivers, the
Counselors, the Officers, and all the Gouerners of the Provinces were
assembled unto the dedicatyng of the Image that Nebuchadnezer the king had set
up: and they stood before the Image, which Nebuchadnezer had set up.

4 Then an herald cried aloud: Be it known to you, o people, nations, and
langages,

5 That when ye hear the sound of the cornet, trumpet, harp, sackebut,
psalteries, dulcimer, and all instruments of music, ye fall down and
worship the golden image which Nebuchadnezer the king has set up.

6 And who so ever falls not down and worshippeth, shall the same hour be
cast into the midest of an hot fiery furnace.

7 Therefore as soon as all the people heard the sound of the cornet, trumpet,
harp, sackebut, psalterie, and all instruments of music, all the people
nations, and languages fell down and worshypped the golden Image, that
Nebuchadnezer the king had set up.

8 By reason whereof at that same time came men of the Chaldeans and grievously
accused the Jews.

Although their purpose is not hear expressed that accused Sadrach Mesach and
Abednego, yet of the end by probable conjecture we do gather that this was done
of a set purpose when the king set up the golden Image. For we do see how they
were observed and marked amongst so great a multitude. And (as was said
before) it seems that Nebuchadnezer did follow the commune policy of kings.
For though they presumptuously despise God, yet do they arm them selves with
Religion to establish their power, and for this purpose only do they dissemble
some kind of Religion, to contain the people in obedience. Whereas then the
Jews were mixed with the Chaldees and Assirians, the kings policy was to
prevent all controversies, and therefore does he set up this Image in a famous
place, that it might be a proof and a trial whether the Jews would join
them selves to the rites of the Babilonians. And this place may minister some
probable conjecture that the king was moved hereunto by his counselors,
because they were not well content that strange men of an other nation should
be head officers of Babylon, who yet were but as slaves: for by the law of
arms they were taken prisoners.

Wherefore seeing the Chaldees grudged at this, their malice and envy moved them
to give the king this counsel. For else how comes it to pass that they so
suddenly perceive that the Jews, namely Sadrach, Mesach, and Abednego do no
worship nor reverence to the Image: Surely it appears that they did as it
were lie in wayt to espy what the Jews would do, and thereby may we gather
that they imagined this crafty accusation at the first when as they counseled
the king to make this Image. And that with clamor and tumult they do accuse the
Jews, hereby do we perceive that their minds were full of envy and hatred. It
might be said, that they were styrred with zele, as superstitious men would
have all other bound to their madness, as also cruelty follows such foolish
zele always: but here it is evident that envy only carried away the Chaldees
with such clamors to accuse the Jews. And it is uncertain whether they speak
of the whole nation, that is to say, of all the exiles generally, or of these
three only. This is probable and lykely, that they did restrain their
accusation to these three. For if these three had been brought down, they would
easily have conquered the rest. For few would have been found so constant
amongst all the people. It is very like therefore that these outrageous cryers
do assail those who^ they compted most bold and constant: and so labor to
bring them down from that high dignity, in the which they could not abide to
behold them.

Here may it be demanded why they spared Daniel, when it is not like that he
would dissemble any thing at all when the king commanded the Image to be
worshypped which he had set up. It may be that they absteined from Daniel for a
time, whom they knew to be in the kings favor: and that they did accuse these
three which might more easily and with less labor be oppressed. I suppose
that this craft moved them that they did not name Daniel together with these
three, lest peradventure the favor that he was in should mitigate the kings
wrath. Now follows the form of their accusation.

O King, Live thou for ever. That was their common salutation. It is added
afterward: Thou O king, for vehemence, as though they should say: thou of thy
kyngly majesty have made a decree, that who so ever should hear the voice of
the Trumpet, Harp, Pipe, and other instruments of music, he should fall
down before the golden Image, and who so ever refused this, should be cast
into the furnace of flaming fire. But here are Jews whom thou have set over
the charge of the province of Babylon. This they put to in despite, to charge
them with ingratitude, that they being brought to so great honor by the king
should despise the kings commandment, and entice others by their ensample to
like disobedience. We see therefore that this was spoken to amplify the crime,
that the king had set them over the province of Babylon, and they did not
worship the golden Image neither honor his Gods.

We see that the Chaldees in all this accusation have only this respect, to
condemn Shadrah, Meshach, and Abednego of this crime only, that they did not
obey the kings commaundemement. For they do not dispute of their religion,
because that was not profitable for them, to call into question whether the
Gods that they worshipped were worthy such worship or no. Therefore they pass
with silence that thing which they think not to be expedient, and they lay
fast hold of this darte: that the kings majesty is contemned, because these
three do not worship the Image which the king by his decree had commanded.

Here again do we see that supersticious persons do not apply their mind
nor care to search out the true or right worship of God: but casting of this
care, they follow only their foolish boldenes and their own lust. Wherefore
seeing such foolish temeritie is set forth unto us by the holy ghost, as it
were in a glass, let us learn that our religion and worshipping of God can
not be allowed by God, unless it be grounded of the word of God: and that in
this point therefore the authority of men is nothing to be regarded. For
except we be assured that the religion which we follow does please God, what so
ever by man's authority can be brought to the confirmation thereof, it is weak
and nothing woorthe.

Forthermore, seeing we see these holy men charged with the crime of
unthankfulness and also of rebellion, there is no cause why we should think
much to suffer the same at this day. Those that falsely accuse us, do lay
rebellion to our charge, because (forsooth) that we despise the decrees of
princes which would bind us to their errors and blindness. But as we shall see
afterward, we have an easy and ready defense: yet must we suffer this reproach
for a while before the world, as though we were stubburne and rebellious: And
though the wicked do charge us with ingratitude and a thousand reproaches more,
yet must we bear their sclaunders patiently for a season, whiles the Lord come
with his brightness and glory to maintain our innocence.

13 Then Nebuchadnyzer in his anger and wrath commanded that they should bring
Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego. So these men were brought before the King.

14 And Nebuchadnezer spoke and said unto them, what disorder? Will not you,
Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednegoserue my god, nor worship the golden image that
I have set up?

15 Now therefore are ye ready, when ye hear the sound of the Cornet, Trumpet,
Harp, Sackbut, Psalterie, and Dulcimer, and all instruments of music, to
fall down and worship the image which I have made? for if ye worship it not,
ye shall be cast immediately into the midest of an hot fiery furnace: for who is
that God that can deliver you out of my hands?

This hystory does evidently declare unto us, that Princes in dissembling some
Religion have only regard to their own authority, that they may the better
thrust in them selves into the place of the Gods. For this is a monstrous
matter, that king Nebuchadnezer does here brag against all the Gods, as
though there were no power in heaven, but that which he allows. What God
(says he) can deliver you out of my hand? And why then did be worship any
other God? For this cause verily, to hold the people in with some bridle, and
so to establish his tyranny: not that he had any care of holiness in his heart.
Daniel does declare that the king was angry at the beginning. For nothing is
more grievous to kings then to see their authority despised. They will be obeyed
in all things, though their commandments be most wicked.

Yet the king seems afterward to temper him self when he asks Sadrach,
Mesach, and Abednego, if they be not ready to worship his God and that Image of
gold. When therefore he speaks unto them doubtfully and does yet propound unto
them free choice, there is some moderation in these words. For it seems that
he will not charge them with any crime, so that they will suffer them selves to
be turned afterward. But in the mean season the rage breaks out under this
deceaueable show of moderation, for he adds straight ways: Unless ye obey,
behold ye shall be cast into the furnace of burning fire: And at ye length he
breaks forth into that cursed sacrilege and horrible blasphemy, that there
is no God which can deliver those holy men out of his hands.

We see therefore in the person of Nebuchadnezer, with what pride Princes do
swell and are puffed up, even where they pretend some zele of Religion, because
they are not touched with any true reverence of the true God, but will have
what soever they command, to be received of all men: and so (as I have said)
they do rather thrust them selves into Gods place, then study to worship God a
right or to maintain his glory. To the same end tend the words which he
uses saying, that he has set up the Image that he made. As though he should
say: it is not now lawful for you to consult whether the Image ought to be
worshypped or no, for my commandment ought to be sufficient unto you. I have
set up this Image, not without consultatio^ and reason, therefore it were your
duty simply to obey unto me

We see therefore how he chalengeth most high authority even in the making of a
God. For he does not here treat of politic matters, but he will have this
Image worshypped as God, because he has decreed so, because he has published
his law. And we must always remember (as I have touched) that this example of
pride is set forth before us that we may know how we ought to attempt nothing
rashly in Religion, but that we must hear God speak, so that we depend of his
word and authority: for if we stick unto men there will be no end of errors.

Although therefore that Princes be proud and ragyng, yet must we keep this
rule, that nothing pleases God but that which he has commanded in his word,
and that the beginning of true Religion is the obedience which we give to God
alone. As concerning the blasphemy, it does declare that which I have spoken
more plainly, that is to say, how soever they pretend Religion, yet they
despise all the power of God, and they have none other thing in their hearts but
to set forth their authority, and therefore they borow the name of God that
they may be the more honored. Howbeit in the mean time if it were profitable
to change their Gods a hundredth times every day, they would not care to do it.

Therefore is Religion for the most part but a pretense to earthly Princes, and
no true reverence of God is in their hearts, as in this profane king is
evident. For who is that God, says he? He excepteth no God. If a man answer
that he speaks by comparison because he would defend the glory of his God
that he worshypped: yet when he belcheth forth this blasphemy against all
Gods, surely his arrogance is intolerable, yea it was a deuilish fury which
drove him so far. Now let us come to the chief point, where Daniel declares
with how great constancy Sadrach Mesach and Abednego were endued.

16 Sadrach, Mesach, and Abednego answered and said to the king: O
Nebuchadnezer, we are not careful to answer thee in this matter.

17 Behold, our God whom we serve, is able to deliver us from the hoate fiery
furnace, and he will deliver us out of thy hand, O king.

18 But if not, be it known to thee O king, that we will not serve thy Gods,
nor worship the golden Image which thou have set up.

This is the chief thing to be considered in this hystory, that these three
holy men did remain constant in the fear of God, though they did know most
present danger of death to hang over their heads. Wherefore when death was
set before their eyes, they turned not back from their right course, but they
set more by the glory of God, then by their own life, yea then by an hundredth
lives, if it had been needful to have bestowed so many, and that had been
granted unto them. Daniel does not rehearse all their words, but gathers a
brief sum only: in ye which yet that invincible power of the holy ghost
wherewith they were endued, does plainly appear.

Surely this was an horrible threatnyng when the king said: If ye be not ready
to fall down before the Image at the blast of the trumpet, ye shall the same
hour be cast into the fiery furnace. When the king thundered after this manner,
they might be shaken as me^. For we know how dear life is unto us, and how the
fear of death smites all our senses. But Daniel rehearses all these
circumstances, that we may know that there is more strength in the servants
of God when they are led with his spirit, the^ that they should give place to
any threatninges, or fall down for any terror.

They answer the king that there needs no long consultation. For in that
they say that they are not careful, they signify by this word that the matter
is determined: as that worthy saying of Cyprian is reported by Augustine. When
the Courtiours did counsel him that he should regard his life (for the
Emperor did against his will judge him to torment,) when flatterers did thus
urge him of every side to save his life by denial of Religion, he au^swered:
In a matter that is holy or of Religion, there needs no deliberation. So do
these holy men say: We care not, that is, we never enter into consultation or
deliberation what is expedient, what is profitable. No, this is already
concluded, that we by no means will be drawn from the pure worship of God.
If thou read it [we ought not to answer thee] it will be almost the same
sense. For they declare that the fear of death is in vain set before them:
for they are utterly determined and their hearts settled, not to swerve one
straw bread from the true and lawful worship of God.

And here they do use two reasons to reject that which the king propounded.
They say that God has power and strength enough to deliver the^: Again though
they should dye, yet that they do not so much esteem life that they will deny
God to prolong it. Therefore they declare them selves to be ready to dye if the
king will so rigorously urge them to worship the Image.

This place is worthy to be noted. For first this answer is to be learned,
that when men are about to bring us to deny God, we must shut our ears, and
take no farther aduisement. For even then begin we to do great injury unto God,
when we dispute whether we may decline from his pure worship or no, what so
ever cause may thereunto move us. And would to God this were well known to all
men, that the glory of God does excel and surmount all things, that all must
be brought law when the diminishyng or obscuryng thereof is intended.

But this craft beguileth many now a days, that they think it lawful to way,
as it were in balance, whether it be better for a time to turn from the true
worship of God, when any profit does offer it self of the other side: as we
do see at this day such dissemblers, of whom the world is full, to have their
colors to cloak their wickedness, when either they worship the Idols with the
wicked, or else they deny either privily or openly the true Religion. O what is
to be done, the man that is in any office will say? I see how much good I can
do if I dissemble a little and do not show my self what I am: for this playnes
would not only hurt me privately but all others. If the king have none that
may sometimes pacify his anger, the wicked thereby shall be unbridled and have
their will and liberty to drive him unto all cruelty. It is better therefore
that some keep a mean and so hearken and lie in wait what the wicked do, and
so though they can not do it openly, yet by some secret practices they may
turn away the danger from the heads of the godly.

When they object these Arguments, they think that God is au^swered: As
though Sadrach, Mesach, and Abednego could not have pretended the same, or as
though it had not come into their minds thus to say: behold we are now armed
with some authority to help our brethren, and what a barbarous cruelty will
be executed amongst them, if the open enemies of Religion come into our place:
for, as much as lies in them, they will dostroy and root out of the earth our
nation and all memory of true Religion? Is it not better then that we for a
time give place unto tyranny and to this cruel commandment of the king, then
to leave our place destitute, which straight ways shall be occupied with
outrageous enemies, who will utterly overcome our miserable nation, which is to
much oppressed already? I say, they might have gathered all these clokes and
colors to excuse their infidelity, if for the auoydyng of danger they had
kneeled before that golden Image: but they do not so. Therefore (as I have
already said) the^ has God his due and true honor, when his worship is
determined with out all doubtyng, and that we are fully persuaded in this, that
nothing ought to be so dear unto us, that we may think it lawful to swerve,
though never so little, from that profession which he commands and requires
in his word.

To be short, here is that security which ought to confirm the true
worshyppers of GOD, set against all the crafts and crooked counsels which
they inue^t that do lose the cause of life for the love of life, as the Poet
says. For wherefore do we live but to serve to the glory of God? This cause why
we live, do we lose for the love of life, when we being over careful to live
in the world, do not regard the end of our life. So then does Daniel set forth
the simplicity which the children of God must needs follow, against all the
subtle reasons which the dissemblers invent, to cover their wickedness with
some coulor. Therefore we are not careful. Wherefore? Because we know assuredly
that the glory of God is more worth then a thousand lives, or what soever the
sense of the flesh can minister unto us. Then where this magnanimity shall
take place, all doubtful wranglyng shall vanish away, and they which are
called into danger for the testimony of the truth, shall not weary them selves
with vain reasons. For (as I have said) their ears shall be shut up against all
these alurementes of Satan.

And when they do add: That God is able to save them, and if he will not, yet
that they are ready to dye, they declare what should erect and lift up our
minds above all temptations, even that our life is precious unto God, and that
he can deliver us if he will. Seeing then we have succor enough in God, let us
not think that there is any better way to save our life then to give our
selves wholly unto his protection and defense and so cast upon him all our
cares.

Again, in the second member this is to be noted, that if God will set forth
his glory by our death, this is a lawful sacrifice which we must offer unto
him, and that true holiness can have no force in us unless our lives be in our
hands, that is to say, except our lives be always prepared for sacrifice.

The Prayer.
Grant almighty God, that whereas we see the wicked to be carried with so great
rage after their fond and filthy imaginations, and that they are so puffed up
with so great pride and arrogance: that we may learn true humility and so
subject our selves unto thee, that we may depend wholly of thy mouth, and that
we enterprise nothing without thy warrant: And when we have learned what
worship pleases thee, that we may constantly continue in the same unto the
end, and neither by any perils, neither by any threatenings or cruelty to be
moved away from our stabilitie, neither that we be led out of the way at any
time: but perseueryng in the obedience of thy word, thou may allow our
endeavor and service and so knowledge us for thy children, that we once may be
gathered into that everlasting heritage which thou have prepared for all the
members of thy son Christ. So be it.

We have noted the constancy of Sadrach, Mesach, and Abednego grounded upon
these two reasons, that they were surely persuaded that GOD was the keeper of
their life, and that they should be delivered by his power from present death,
if it were so profitable: Secondly, because they had determined with them
selves that they would dye boldly and without fear, if God would have such a
sacrifice offered unto him. And that which Daniel speaks of these three men,
pertains unto us all. Therefore may we gather hereby a general doctrine when
danger comes unto us for the testimony of the truth, that we learn first to
lay up our life in the hand of God: secondly that we be ready to dye boldly and
without fear.

As concerning the first, experience teaches us that many fail from God and
from the profession of their faith, because they can not stand sure in this
point, that God is strong enough to deliver them. It is true that this is
spoken of all men, that God has a care over us: Again, that our life is in
his hand: but scarcely the hundredth man has this firmly and certainly
fastened in his heart: for every one searches a way and mean to save his life,
as though there were no power in God. Therefore he at the length has rightly
profited in the word of the Lord, which has learned that his life is cared for
of GOD, and also that he has help and defense sufficiently in him. For he
that is gone thus far, may safely enter into danger an hundredth times, for
he will not doubt to follow whether soever God calls. For this one thing does
deliver him from all fear and care, that God can take his servants out of a
thousand deaths, as it is said in this Psalm: Psalm. 68.23
In his hand are the ishues of death. For death seems to consume all things:
but God delivers out of that deuouryng gulf whom he pleases. So this
persuasion shall suffice us to a stable and invincible constancy.

But it is necessary that they which cast their whole care of their life and
safety upon God, have a clear conscience, that they doubt nothing but that
they mayntaine a good cause. And this is also expressed in these words, when
Sadrach, Mesach, and Abednego do say: Behold our God who^ we worship. When they
allege the worship of God, they testify that they have a sure ground, and
that they do nothing rashly: that they are the worshyppers of the true God, and
that they labor for the defense of Religion. For this is the difference
betwixt the Martyrs and mad men, which often times are justly punished for their
madness, because they are about to pervert all things. For we see very many to
be driven with their own rage, and if such be put to death, they are not to be
nombred amongst Gods Martyrs. For the cause makes the Martyr, as Augustine
says, not the punishment. Wherefore there is no small force in these words,
when these three men do affirm that they worship God: for by this they do
glory that they do not rashly enter into the danger that stands before them,
but for the true worship of God.

Now come we to the second. If God will not deliver us from death, know thou O
king, that we will not worship thy Gods. I said first of all, that our life
must be committed wholly unto God before we can be prepared constantly to
undertake any great danger, and that the desire of this earthly and and
transitory life ought not to hinder nor hold us from a free and plain
profession of the truth: for the glory of God ought to be more precious unto us
then a hundredth lives. Wherefore we can not be witnesses of God, unless we lay
down the desire of this life, or at the least prefer Gods glory before it.
In the mean season it is to be noted, that this can not be done except the
hope of a better life do ravish us unto it. For where ye promise of the
eternal inheritance is not fastened in our hearts, we ca^ never be drawn away
from the world. For naturally we covet to be, and that affection can not be
drawn from us except faith get the mastery, as Paul says: We would not be
unclothed, but would be clothed upon this mortality. Paul affirms that men
naturally can not be brought willyngly to go out of the world, except (as is
said before) that faith get the victory. But when we understand that our
inheritance is in ye heavens and that we are strangers in the earth, the^ do
we put of the desire of this earthly life, whereunto we are to much addicted.

These two are the things then which do prepare the children of God unto
Martyrdom, that they doubt nothing to offer the^ selves and their lives into
the hands of God for a sacrifice, that is to say: if they be persuaded that
their life is preserved of God, and that he will be an assured deliverer, if he
see it to be expedient: Again when they clime up above this world and aspire
unto the hope of that eternal and everlasting life, and so be ready to forsake
the world. And in their words a great magnanimity may be noted when they
say: Be it known to thee, O king, that we worship not thy Gods, neither the
Image that thou have erected: for here they accuse the king after a sort, that
he will be so arrogant to appoint Religion at his pleasure. Thou have set up an
Image, but thine authority is to us of no valor, for we know that it is a
feigned God whom thou will have to be worshipped under this Image. But the God
whom we worship has opened him self unto us, and declared that he will not be
worshypped under any Image. We know that he is the maker of heaven and earth,
and that he has redeemed our fathers forth of Egypt, and that he would chasten
us when he cast us forth into this banishment. Because therefore a sure
stabilitie of our faith is manifest unto us, we utterly despise thy God and thy
commandment in this point.

19 Then was Nebuchadnezer full of rage, and the form of his visage was
changed against Sadrach, Mesach, and Abednego: therefore he charged and
commanded that they should heat the furnace at once seven times more then it
was wont to be heat.

20 And he charged the most valiant men of war that were in his army, to
bind Sadrach, Mesach, and Abednego, and to cast the^ into the hot fiery
furnace.

At the first sight God seems here to forsake his servants because he does
not openly help them. The king commands them to be cast into a fiery
furnace: no help appears from the heavens. Wherefore this was a full and
perfect trial of their faith. They were now armed, as we did see before, to
suffer all things. For they do not answer so constantly only because they
trusted in the present help of God: but because they were determined to dye,
and a better life did so comfort their minds, that they were content to lose
this present life.

This was the cause that they were not afraid for the terrible commandment
of the king, but they followed their course, even to suffer death without all
fear for the honor of God. For there remained no third thing, but either to
choose to dye, or else to deny the worship of the true God. By the which example
we are taught to premeditate this immortal life in our quiet state, that if it
so please God, we do not doubt to lay down our lives for the testimony of the
truth: for this is one cause why we are so fearful. Again, when we do come
into present danger, then do we tremble and quake, because whiles we are
forth of danger we vaynely imagine to our selves a continual securitiy. So
long therefore as God gives us quietness, we must apply our minds to meditate
the life to come, that the world may wax vile unto us, and that we may be
ready so often as need shall be, to give our blood for the testimony of the
truth. For this history is not set forth unto us, that we should only commend
and magnify the virtue and constancy of these three holy men, but it is set
forth for us to imitate their constancy.

And concerning the king Nebuchadnezer, here Daniel again, as it were in a
glass, does show unto us the pride and arrogance of kings when their
commandments are not obeyed. Surely a heart of iron should have been
mollified with this answer, that Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego did commit
their lives unto God, and therefore could not for fear of death be drawn from
their faith. But he is filled with anger. Concerning this rage we ought to
consider what power Satan has over me^, when he has them in his claws. They
have no moderation nor rule of themselves, although at other times they make a
fair show of virtue: As this king had many tokens of virtue, as we have seen
before, but because the devil does now styr him, there appears nothing in
him but cruelty and rage.

Forthermore, let us remember that our constancy does please God, although it
do not show forth the fruit thereof before the world. For many under this
color spare themselves to live in their pleasures, because they think it a
rashness to offer themselves to death when there appears no profit. And many
excuse themselves under this pretense, that they strive no more for the glory
of God, because they should lose their labor, and their death should be
fruitles. But we do hear Christ pronounce this to be a pleasant sacrifice
unto God, Mat. 5.11.10.32. Mar. 8.38.
when we offer our lives for the testimony of the heavenly doctrine, although
the generation before whom we testify the name of God, be crooked and
adultrous, yea though it wax the more stubbern at our consta^cy. And such an
example is here set forth unto us in these three holy persons. For how so ever
Nebuchadnezer waxed more and more outrageous with their bold confession, yet
did that plain confession please God, and they did not repent it, although
they did see no such fruit of their constancy as they desired. And the prophet
does express the circumstance, to declare the kings rage: that he commaundid
the furnace to be made seuenfolde hoater then it was wont, and chused of his
strongest men to cast these into the furnace. But as it appears by the
success, all this was done by the secret providence of God. For the devil
might else have obscured the miracle, if all doubts had not been removed. But
when the king commands the furnace to be made seuenfolde hoater, and did
choose out his strongest men to do the execution, God by delivering his
servants took away all doubtfulnes, that the more light should shine forth
of that darkness which Satan thought to have blinded men withal, the kings
policy and his power.

Thus God uses to disapoynt the wicked, and the more witty that they be to
obscure Gods glory, the more does God cause both his glory and his doctrine to
shine forth: Like as here, as it were in an image, Daniel does paynt unto us,
that the king Nebuchadnezer left nothing undone, whiles that he would thus
smite a terror unto all the Jews with this cruel punishment: and yet atteyned
he nothing with all his subtle fetches, but that the power of God and his
favor should be more evidently opened toward his servant.

21 So these men were bound in their coats, their hosen, and their clokes,
with their other garments, and cast into the midest of the hot fiery furnace.

22 And the kings commandment was strait, that the furnace should be
exceeding hot, and so the flame of the fire slew those men that brought forth
Shadrach, Mesach and Abednego.

23 And these three men, Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, fell down bound in
the midest of the hot fiery furnace.

Here Daniel declares the miracle whereby God delivered his servants.
Whereof there be two parts: One, that those three men walked safe in the midst
of the fire: an other that the flame burnt up the kings Guard that cast them
into the fire. And the prophet does diligently rehearse the circumstances, to
set forth the power of God, as that the king gave a strait charge, and with so
great anger caused the furnace to be heated, and that his strong men were
consumed with ye utmost flame, where as they three walked in the coals in the
fire and the flame. And this is as much as if the prophet had said, that the
fire had no force at all upon the holy servants of God, and that the smoke
had killed the kings servants. Therefore says he that those three did fall
down in the fire. Then surely they could not help themselves nor find any
shift to escape. Further he says, that they fell down bound: wherefore
naturally they should at ye first brunt have been choked and smothered, and
afterward have been consumed: yet do they remain safe and walk up and down
lose in the furnace. We see then that the power of God is so evident, that the
devil could darken it with no lies. And that the utmost flame does deuourethe
kings Guard, of the other part God does approve this to be his work. And this
is the end of the history, that these three men were preserved miraculously and
above their hope.

Now, by this example we may learn that there is nothing better nor more safe
for us, then to make God the keeper and defender of our life. Yet may we not
precisely look always to be defended and delivered from all peril: For we
do see both these things to be in the hearts of these three holy men: first to
hope for deliverance if God see it good: secondly that they doubted not to dye
with out fear, if it so pleased God. Howbeit this must we gather of this
present history, that there is help enough for us in God, if he will prolong
our life. And we know that our life is dear unto him. Therefore let us leave
it unto his pleasure, either to deliver us from ye present peril, or to take
us to a better life, as he thinks best. For in Peter we have both these
examples. Peter was delivered forth of prison when as a little after he must
dye. Then God declared that he had a care over the life of his servant.
Afterward Peter dyed: then was there no miracle. Why so? because Peter had
accomplished the end of his vocation. Thus the Lord as often as is expedient,
will show his power to preserve us: but if he will have us go unto death, let
us surely think that there is no better thing for us then to dye, and that it
is hurtful unto us to go about to prolong our life any longer.

24 Then Nebuchadnezer the king was astonished and rose up in have, and spoke,
and said unto his counselors: did not we cast three men bound into the midest
of the fire? Who answered and said unto the king: It is true, o king.

Daniel does declare that the power of God was manifest to the heathen men,
both to the king himself and to his courtyers, who had conspired unto the
death of these holy persons. He says therefore that the king trembled at this
msracle: like as God many times compels the wicked to acknowledge his power.
How so ever they do amase themselves and harden all their senses, yet will they
nill they, they are compelled to feel Gods power. Daniel declares that this
came to pass to king Nebuchadnezer. He trembled therefore and did arise
hastily and spoke unto his counselors, saying: Have we not cast three men
bound into the furnace? And they answered, it is so. Where it is no doubt, but
that both Nebuchadnezer was compelled by Gods secret inspiration thus to
demand, and they also thus to confess. For Nebuchadnezer might have come
straight way to the furnace, but God would wring this confession out of his
enemies mouths, that they together with their king should grant, that
Sadrach, Mesach, and Abednego were delivered by no earthly means, but by a
rare and marvelous power of God. Let us note therefore that the wicked were
witnesses of Gods power, not willingly, but because God did put into the kings
mouth this question, and also because he did not suffer them to speak any
thing but the truth.

25 And he answered, and said: Lo, I see four men loose, walking in the mids
of the fire, and they have no hurt, and the form of the fourth is like the
son of God.

There is no doubt but that God sent one of his Angels who by his presence
might comfort the minds of these holy men that they should not faint: for this
was a fearful spectacle when they did see the furnace so flaming and them
selves cast therein. God therefore would thus comfort their carefulnes and
mitigate their sorrow, when he sends an Angel to be their companion. We know
sometimes that many Angels have been sent for the comfort of one man, 2. king.
6.15 Psalm. 91.11 34.8.
as we read of Elizeus. And this is a general rule: He has given his Angels
charge over thee, that they may keep thee in all thy ways. Again: The Angels
pitch their tents round about those that fear God. The which sentences do
chiefly belong unto Christ, but they are extended to the whole body of the
Church and to every member thereof.

Wherefore God has his armies in redines by whom he can preserve his. And we
read sometimes that one Angel is sent to a whole nation. For God needs not
his Angels when he uses their ministry, but he thus relieueth our infirmity.
And when we do not attribute unto his power so much as we should, he sends
his Angels to correct our doubtfulnes: as we have said, that there was one
Angel given to these three men, whom Nebuchadnezer calls the son of God:
not that he thought that he was Christ: but we know that that was commonly
received among all people, that the Angels were called the sons of God,
because there appeared in them a certain divinity. Therefore they did commonly
call all the Angels the sons of God. And according to this usual custom
Nebuchadnezer says, that the fourth man was like the son of God. For he
could not know the only begotten son of God, which was blinded with so many
wicked errors, as we have seen before.

Let this simplicity therefore suffice us, that king Nebuchadnezer does speak
after the common manner, meaning that some one Angel was sent unto these three
men, Psalm. 89.7
because it was usual (as I have said) to call the Angels the sons of God.
The scripture speaks so, and God would never leave the world so brutish but
yt he would have some seed of true doctrine to remain for a testimony against
the wicked.

The Prayer.
Grant almighty God, seeing our life is but a minute, yea it is nothing but
vanity and smoke: that we may learn to cast all our cares upon thee, and so
to depend of of thee, that we doubt nothing but thou will deliver us from all
perils that may come unto us, when it shall be so profitable for us. Also grant
we beseech thee, that we learn to despise and set nothing by our life for the
testimony of thy glory, that so we may be ready to depart forth of this life
when thou will call us: and that the hope of the heavenly life may be so
fastened in our hearts, that we may willyngly leave the world, and that we may
desire withal our heart that blessed eternity which thou have witnessed by thy
Gospel to be laid up for us in the heavens, which thine only begotten son
has purchased for us with his blood. Amen.

26 The^ the king Nebuchadnezer came nere to the mouth of the hot fiery
furnace and spoke, and said: Sadrach, Mesach, and Abednego the servants of
the high God, go forth and come hither. Sadrach, Mesach, and Abednego came
forth of the mids of the fire.

Here is described a sodeine change in a king no less cruel the^ proud. We
have seen before how proudly he required that wicked worship of the servants
of God, and when he did see that they did not obey his commandment, how
fierce he was against the^. And now Daniel declares how soon his pride was
brought down and his cruelty qualed. But it is to be noted, that the king was
not so changed that he did cast of wholly his old nature and manners. For when
he was touched with this present miracle, he did in deed give glory unto God,
but it was for a moment: he did not earnestly repent. And such examples are
diligently to be noted: for many men by one fact will judge of every man.
Howbeit the most wicked contemners of God may for a time submit them selves
unto him, and shall not dissemble it in the sight of men, but shall do it
earnestly: because that GOD verily does compel them thereunto with his power:
yet in ye mean season they keep within their hearts both pride and cruelty.
Such was the turnyng of king Nebuchadnezer. For he being amassed with ye
miracle, could resist God no longer: yet he was not constant in his conversion,
as we shall see afterward.

Let us know therefore that the wicked which are not regenerate with the spirit
of God, are driven many times to worship God: but this is only a particulare
motion in the^, and the rest of their life does not answer unto it. But when
God reformeth his servant, he also takes in hand to govern them unto the
end, and does encorage them to perseverance, and confirms them with his
spirit. Yet is it to be marked that the glory of God is set forth by this
temporal and chaungeable conversion of the wicked, because, will they nill
they, they are compelled to give place unto God for a time: whereby the greatness
of his power is known. God does therefore cause that to serve to his glory
which does nothing profit the reprobate, but rather turns unto them to a
greater judgment. For Nebuchadnezer was less to be excused after that he
knowledged the God of Israel to be the most high and only God, and afterward
straight ways returned to his superstitions.

Daniel says that he came near to the mouth of the furnace, and that he
said: Sadrach, Mesach, and Abednego the servants of the hie God, go forth and
come hither. A little before he would have had his Image worshypped, and that
to be counted the only God in heaven and in earth, only because it was his
pleasure. For we see that he did challenge so much to him self that he would
have all Religion and worship of God subject to his lust and pleasure: but now
as though he were a new man, he calls Sadrach, Mesach, and Abednego the
servants of the high God. What place then does he put him self in and all
the Chaldees? Verily that they do worship feigned Gods and Idols, which they
have forged for them selves. But God did wring out this word from the cruel
and proud king: like as wicked men are compelled by torments to speak that
they would not.

Thus therefore does Nebuchadnezer confess the God of Israel to be the hye God,
as though he had been upon the rack, but not willyngly neither of a well
disposed mind. He does not dissemble this before men (as I have said) but his
mind was neither pure nor upright, but only boiled out with a particular
motion: so that we may say that this was rather a violent then a voluntary
motion.

After Daniel says that his companions came forth of the mids of the fire.
By the which words he confirms again this miracle. For God might have
quenched the fire of the furnace: but he would have it burn in the sight of
all men, that thereby the power of this deliverance might be more evident. And
by the way this is to be noted, that these three men walked in the furnace
whiles the king commanded them to come forth: because God had given them none
other commandment, They did see that they remained safe and sound in the
mids of the furnace. They were content with that present benefit of God, and
they thought not them selves at liberty, whiles that by the kings voice they
were called forth. Genesis 8.16.
Like as when Noah was in ye Arc he did see his health and life to lie as it
were in the grave: therefore did he attempt nothing whiles he was commanded to
go forth. Even so says Daniel, that his companions went not forth of the
furnace whiles the king commanded it. For then they understood that they
pleased God, when they had heard it at ye kings mouth: not that he was a
Prophet or a preacher, but because they were cast into the furnace by his
commandment: and so now when he calls them out they know that the end is
appointed of their torment, and so they come forth as it were from death unto
life.

27 Then the nobles, Princes, and Dukes, and the Kings counselors came
together to see these men, because the fire had no power over their bodies, for
not an hear of their head was burnt, neither were their coats changed, nor
any smell of fire came upon them.

Daniel says that the nobles, Princes, and Dukes, and the Kings counselors
came together, meaning that they came to consult of this great miracle, and
when they had consulted of this matter, he says that they came to behold that
manifest sign of the incredible power of God. And he nombreth certain parts,
which do more clearly prove that these three were saved by none other means
but by the singular benefit of God. For he says that the fire had no power in
their bodies: again, that there was not one hear of their head burnt: thirdly
that their garment was not changed: last of all that there was not any smell
of fire upon them. For he expresses more by this word of smell, then if he had
simply said that the fire had not pierced the^. For it may be that the fire
does not consume the body, and yet may burn it and scorch it, but when no
smell of the fire did once come upon them, the miracle is most evident. This is
the mind of the Prophet.

Finally he shows that this miraculous deliverance was manifest, because
these three come forth of the furnace, and the Princes, Dukes, and nobles were
witnesses of Gods power. And their testimony might be of more authority, then
if all the Jews had beholden this grace of God: for men would not have believed
the Jews. But when it is manifest that these are sworn enemies to true
Religion, surely they would gladly have buried this miracle with silence if it
had been in their power. But God draws them against their wills, and
compels them to see it with their eyes, and afterward to confess it, to put
away all doubt for ever.

28 Nebuchadnezer spoke and said: Blessed is the God of Sadrach, Mesach, and
Abednego, who has sent his Angel and delivered his servants that put their
trust in him, and have changed the kings commandment, and yielded their
bodies, rather then they would worship or serve any God save their own God.

This is a rare confession of a king: but it will appear by process that he
was carried with a sudden vehemence, and that there was no lively root of the
fear of God in his heart. And I do repete this again that we may know, that
true repentance does not consist in one work or twain, but in perseverance
and continuance, as Paul says: If you do live in the spirit, walk ye in the
spirit. Where he requires constancy of the faithful, Gal. 5.25.
that they may show them selves to be truly regenerate by the spirit of God.

Nebuchadnezer therefore, as one ravished in spirit, magnifieth the God of
Israel: but in ye mean time he mingleth his Idols with the true God. So was
there nothing pure in his fact. Eue^ so ye wicked when they have felt Gods
power, they dare not go forward stubbornly against him: but they will please
and pacify him with some feigned repentance: yet do they never put of their old
corruption, as is plain in Nebuchadnezer, that he was always one, though God at
the sudden caused him thus to confess that the God of Sadrach was blessed.

But why calls he him not his God? This might be excused if he had verily
given him self to the God of Israel and cast away all superstitions. Howbeit
he does not so, therefore was his confession but feined: not that he went about
to dissemble with men to get their favor, but he deceived him self as
hypocrites use to do. He pronounces the God of Sadrach, Mesach, and Abednego
to be blessed. If he had done this purely, he should have cursed all his Idols:
For ye glory of the true and only God can not be extolled and magnified, unless
all the Idols be brought to naught. For wherein stands the praise of God, but
that he alone have the preeminence? If any other God be set by him, then is his
Majesty darkened, as it were with clouds. Hereby then may we gather that
Nebuchadnezer was not touched with true repentance when he blessed the God of
Israel.

He adds: Which sent his angel and delivered his seruau^ts. Here Daniel more
plainly declares that Nebuchadnezer was not converted to receive ye God of
Israel, and to worship him truly with a pure affection of his heart. Why so?
For true holiness is always grounded in the knowledge of the true God, which
requires doctrine. Nebuchadnezer did know that the God of Israel was the hye
God. Whereby? Verily by his power: for he had a spectacle set before his eyes
which he could not contemn though he would. Thus then does he grant the God
of Israel to be the hye God, taught by this miracle. But this is not sufficient
unto true holiness (as I have admonished) except also doctrine be joined unto
it, yea and have the chief parts. I do grant very well that men are prepared
unto faith by miracles: but if nothing save bare miracles appear, and no
knowledge be joined out of the very word of God, it will be but a shadow of
faith: as we have here a most manifest example.

Let us know then that this was a particular faith in king Nebuchadnezer. For
he had all his mind bent upon the miracle, and being content with that
spectacle, he did not inquire who was that God of Israel, or what his law did
comprehend, neither yet was be careful for the Mediator. Finally he neglected
and despised the whole substance of true holiness, and took hold unadvisedly
but of one part only. This do we see daily in many profane men. For God many
times does humble them and causes them to fly unto him for succor: but in
the mean season they remain wrapped in their own wits, and do not renounce
their superstitions, neither regard which is the true worship of God. For to
approve our service unto God, this principle must be remembered, To. 14.23.
that nothing does please him which is not of faith: and that faith can not be
conceived by any miracle or by any sense of divine power, but that it must have
doctrine also. For miracles are of force only to prepare the mind or to
confirm Religion: but of them selves they can not bring men to the true
worship of God.

And this is merueilous that this profane king says that an Angel was sent
from God, save that it is evident in the profane writers, that there was always
some thing known of the angels. This was a certain before conceived
persuasion of the angels: like as also amongst all people there is some taste
that there is a God. And where Daniel said before that the fourth which was in
the furnace was called the son of God by the king of Babel, eue^ the^, as I
have said, Nebuchadnezer professed himself that he understood something of the
Angels: but now he speaks more plainly, that God has sent his Angel. And
how the Angels do help the elect and the faithful, I there touched briefly,
and I do not use to stand long upon common places. For this place it is enough
to note, that the wicked which never heard any thing of God or of true holiness,
did yet hold this principle, that God uses the ministry of his Angels to
save his. And this moved Nebuchadnezer to say, that an Angel was sent from God
to deliver his servants.

Then he adds: Which trusted in him. Which is also to be noted, for it is
added as ye cause why these three were so meruelously delivered: because they
put their trust in God. And although Nebuchadnezer was but almost like a stock
or a block concerning the doctrine of faith: yet God would teach us by this
stone or block, and make us ashamed, and lay unto our charge the want of
faith, which causes that we can not commit our lives to Gods will, and boldly
undertake all dangers when need requires. For if we were fully persuaded
that God is the keeper of our life, surely no manaces, no threatninges, no
terrors, no nor finally any deaths could stop us from going forward in our
office. But infidelity and distrust in God is the cause of our slouthfulnes:
and so often as we turn forth of the way, so often as we defraude God of his
honor, so often as we fail traitorously, the want of our faith does utter it
self, and may, as it were, be palpably felt and seen.

Let us learn the^, if we will have our life defended with the hand of God, to
give our selves wholly unto him: for he will never deceive us, if that we rest
in him. We do see that Sadrach, Mesach, and Abednego, were uncertain of the
end: yet this could not diminish nor abate their hope and confidence in God:
for they used this Dilemna standing of two parts: either God will deliver us
from the fiery furnace, or if we die he will save us after a far better
sort, for he will gather us into his kingdom. Although then they durst not
promise themselves the thing that they knew not, yet they laid up their lives
in the hand and protection of God. Wherefore they are worthily commended by
Nebuchadnezer, that they trusted in their God.

Afterward he says: that they changed the kings decree, that is to say, that
they did not regard it, but rather did disanull it, as having greater
authority. For who so setleth himself upon God, he easily despises all
mortal me^, and all ye glory and hautines in all ye world. And this sentence
is worthy to be noted, that faith is first laid for the foundation: the^ ye
magnanimity, boldness, and constancy wherewith Sadrach, Mesach, and Abednego
were endued: because that whosoever rests upon God, he can never be turned
away from doing his office, and though never so many dangers be offered, yet
shall he be carried a loft through all, by the wings of his faith. So that he
which knows that God stands of his side, is above all the world, that he
neither is astonished at the scepters and crowns of kings, nor fears their
power, but overcomes all hautines in the earth that shall stand against him,
and will never turn back from his right course.

He says afterward: that they gave their bodies, lest they should worship any
but their own God. Many that boast themselves Christians now a days would
overthrow and disalow that thing which this wicked king is compelled to praise
in these three persons. For they do imagine that faith ca^ be buried in the
heart, and bring forth no fruit of confession. There is no doubt but that God
will have al these things rehearsed by his Prophet, that their craftines may
be detestable unto us which would defraud God of his lawful honor, and yet
would, as it were, stop his eyes that he should not espy the injury that is
done unto him. Such are unworthy to be reproved by the wrod of God: and
Nebuchadnezer is here set their master, their correcter and their judge.

This also must be noted, that Nebuchadnezer does praise these three men
because they refused to worship any God but their own God. And why then did he
mingle his multitudes of God? for he departed not from his errors to give
himself wholly to the God of Israel, and to embrace his true worship. Why does
he praise that in others, which he himself does not follow? But this is a thing
over common. For we see that virtue is praised, and yet goes coldly forward.
For many think it sufficient with their lyppes and toungs to do their office.
Howbeit though Nebuchadnezer did seem to himself to speak earnestly, yet did
he not consider himself: and so this took away the whole pretense of all
excuse: For he could not afterward pretend ignorance and error, when he with
his own mouth had affirmed, that none other God was to be worshipped.

Let them therefore now be ashamed which will be called Christians, unless they
be free from all wicked superstitions, and consecrate themselves wholly unto God
and retain his pure worship. This is also to be considered, that the king
Nebuchadnezer did not simply praise the constancy of these three men, because
they do not worship every God: but also do acknowledge the God of Israel to be
the true God. Whereupon it follows that all other were feigned and mere
vanity. But he spoke this without aduisement, for God had not lively touched
his heart as he uses to work in his elect, whom he does regenerate.

29 Therefore I make a decree, that every people, nation, and language, which
speak any blasphemy against the God of Sadrach, Mesach, and Abednego, shall be
drawn in pieces and their houses shall be made a iakes because there is no God
that can deliver after this sort.

Here Nebuchadnezer is pushed further forward: for I must use this word,
because he does not receive ye worship of the true God in his heart to forsake
his errors, as I have said. It is therefore as though God did thrust him forth
by force to publish this decree. The decree in deed of it self is commendable
and Godly, but Nebuchadnezer was carried with a blind and suddayne motion,
because Godliness had taken no root in his heart. Therefore is he always only
beholding the miracle. So is his faith partilar, and also the fear of God in
him was fruitles. Why then does Nebuchadnezer seem to be a patron of Gods
glory? Verily because he was afraid by ye miracle. Wherefore being not
otherwayse moved, he could not be retained in the reverence of one God. Finally
this zeal that he pretends is nothing else but a motion that easily
vanishes. And this is profitable to be noted. For we see many carried with a
vehement zeal to set forth Gods glory, but because they want knowledge and
judgment, this can not be counted praise worthy. And many also do much more
wickedly, as we see in Popery, where many proclamations of kings and Princes
fly abroad. If a man ask the^ what makes them so hot and fervent that they
spare not man's blood? forsooth they pretend a zeal of God: but it is a mere
raging madness where true knowledge does not guide it. We must consider
therefore that no law can be made nor any decree published of religion and of
the worship of God, except the true knowledge of God confirm it, and be seen
in it. Nebuchadnezer verily in this decree had a good ground: but (as I have
said) it was only a particular motion in him. But they that will now be
counted Christian Princes, do only rage under the pretense of a zeal, and so
like cruel beasts do sheed innocent blood. Wherefore? Because they do not
discern betwixt the true God and the Idols. But this shall be touched afterward.

Nebuchadnezer does extol the God of Israel. But how does he know that he is
the high God? Verily by one token of his power only. But he despised that
which was the principal: to understand by the law and the Prophets who that
God was and what was his will. So do we see the glory of God to be maintained
but in one part only: and in the mean season that which was the chife in his
worship and in true holiness, to be despised and left out. The punishment is
great, that he should be cut in pieces and his his house made a Iakes which
speaks blasphemy against the God of Israel. Where we note, that severity is
not to be condemned, where the true worship of God is maintained even with
sleit punishme^tes. But we must be assured of a true judgment in the cause.
But of this also I will speak afterward. As for that which follows: that
there is none other God which can deliver after this manner, it does confirm
that which I touched before: that this king did not regard in his decree,
either the law of God, or any other part of religion, but only that he was
moved by this miracle, so that he neither could nor would suffer any thing to
be spoken in reproach against the God of Israel. Wherefore this only thing is
worthy blame in this decree, that he does not enquire nor search who is that
God, that he may be drawn by a sure persuasion to publish the decree.

30 Then the king promoted Sadrach, Mesach, and Abednego in the province of
Babell.

This seems to be of small importance, yet is it not written in vain: but
for this purpose, that we may know that this miracle was ratified through the
whole province and country, when all the Chaldees did know that these three
men were cast into the fiery furnace, which afterward had again the kings
power and were restored to their former dignity. Seeing this was done, the
power of God could not be unknown. For it was like as if God had sent forth
three preachers throughout the country, which should proclaim in every place
how meruelously God had delivered the^ from death by his singular benefit.
Whereby also it might be understand that all ye Gods which were the^ worshipped
in Chaldea were of no value, seeing that great God whose Image the king had set
up, was despised: and yet that this co^stancy was allowed of the true God which
had delivered his servants from death.

The Prayer.
Grant almighty God, seeing thou art known unto us by the doctrine both of the
law and the Gospel, and do vouchsafe daily to open thy will familiarly unto
us: that we may remain stable and steadfast in the true obedience of that
doctrine wherein perfect justice is manifested unto us: and that we never be
moved from thy worship nor turned away from thy service: and whatsoever comes
unto us, that we may be ready rather to die a hundredth deaths, then to turn
from the true profession of thy religion, in the which we know that our
salvation consists: that so we may glorify thy name, that we may be
partakers of that glory which is purchased unto us by the blood of thine only
begotten Son. Amen.

Chapt. 4. by true division, for here begins the preface to the proclamation.
31 Nebuchadnezer king, unto all people, nations, and languages that dwell in
all the world, peace be multiplied unto you.

32 I thought it good to declare the signs and wonders that the hye God has
wrought toward me.

33 How great are his signs, and how mighty are his wonders: his kingdom is
an everlasting kingdom, and his dominion is from generation to generation.

Daniel does first speak here in the kings person: afterward he declares
what came to the king. But it may seem strange that Daniel sometimes brings
in the king of Babylon speaking, then speaks he in his own person, and
afterward brings in the king speaking him self. Howbeit seeing this variety
does neither obscure the sense nor make it doubtful, we ought not to be
troubled therewith. The sum of this chapter is: Because that Nebuchadnezer
was plainly taught, that the only God of Israel was to be worshipped, and he
was compelled to confess this for a space, yet because he departed not from
his supersticions, yea and what so ever he had conceived of the true God it
rested not in his heart, but vanished away by and by: therefore is he worthily
punished like a beast for so great ingratitude. God would have him to be more
and more blinded, as he uses to do with the reprobate, and sometimes with the
elect also. When they will run from sin to sin, God lowseth them the
reyne till they cast them selves down headlong. Afterward either he reaches
them his hand, or he draws them back with his secret power, or brings them
into order by his rods and corrections and so humbles them. Thus did he with
the king of Babylon.

We will consider the dream afterward: but here we briefly note that the king
was admonished that he might perceive in the end, that he had no excuse of his
stubbernes and contempt. God might worthily in deed have stricken him as soon
as he did see that he was not truly converted: but before God would punish
him so severely (as we shall see afterward) he would monish him, to prove if
there were any hope of repentance. And although he did seem to receive that
thing with great modesty that God declared by the dream, and Daniel did
interpretate unto him, yet did he profess with his tongue that which he had not
in his heart. And this thing is manifest, because that where he ought to have
trembled, to have been careful and to take heed unto him self, yet ceased he
not from his pride, but boasted him self to be a king of kings, and Babylon
to be the queen of all the world. Because therefore he did speak so proudly
after he was admonished by the prophet, we perceive that the dream did nothing
profit him. But God by this means would make him more inexcusable. Again,
although no fruit thereof did straight ways appear, yet by long process of
time, when God touched his heart he did know more plainly that this punishment
was sent unto him of God. Therefore was this dream an entrey and as it were a
preparatiue to repentance. And like as the seed seems to putrify in the earth
before it bring forth his fruit: so also sometimes God works leysurely, and
causes that his doctrine which seemed unprofitable a long time, becomes at
the length fruitful and of force. Now come I to the words.

The preface of the decree is: Nebuchadnezer the king to all people, nations
and langages which dwell in all the world: that is, under his dominion. For he
would not have this understand of Scithia or France, or other far countries,
but because his dominion stretched far and wide, he spoke proudly: as we see
the Romans call their Rome the imperial sea of all the world, yet were they
not lords over all. Nebuchadnezer therefore does here proudly set forth the
largenes of his Monarchy, when he sends forth his decree to all people and
nations upon the whole earth. Afterward he joins this: I thought it good to
declare the signs and wonders that the high God has wrought toward me. There
is no doubt, but that at length he perceived that he was punished for his
ingratitude, because that he had given glory unto the one and true God, only
by tongue and outward show, and afterward fell again to his old superstitions,
yea he would never cast them of at all. Therefore do we see that this king was
often chastised before he would take profit of Gods correction.

Let us not merueile then if God do often smite us with his hand, for daily
experience does try us to be slothful and very sluggardes at Gods
admonitions. When God therefore will bring us to repentance, he must of
necessity beat us oftentimes, because either we are nothing moved when we are
chastised by his hand, or if that we do seem for one time wakened, yet do we
return again by and by to our old sinful slumber. It is of necessity
therefore that the scourges be doubled. This do we see in this present history
as in a glass. How be it this was a singular benefit of God, that
Nebuchadnezer did give place at the length, after that God had chastised him
many times. Yet know we not whether this confession came forth of a true and
unfeigned repentance: I do leave that in doubt. Yet I do nothing doubt but that
Daniel does rehearse this decree, to declare that the king was in the end
compelled to confess the God of Israel to be ye only God, and to publish the
same to all people and nations under his dominion.

In the mean ceason this is to be noted, that this decree of the king is
praised by the spirit of God. For Daniell does rehearse it for none other
purpose, but to declare the fruit of the conversion in the king. Wherefore
this is with out al controversy, that king Nebuchadnezer has testified his
repentance when he magnified the God of Israel before all the world, and
appointed a penalty for all them which spoke blasphemously against that God.
Therefore is this place often cited by Augustine against the Donatistes: Epist.
166. ad Donatistas.
for they would have been suffered still unpunished when they maliciously
troubled the Church, when they corrupted the pure doctrine, yea when they took
upon them to rob like thieves and rage like murderers. For it was manifest
that diverse were then murdered by them and others maimed. When these men
lived so wickedly, yet would they have their wickedness to go unpunished: and
this they held for a principle, that no man ought to be punished for holding a
contrary religion.

For the which thing some at this day are to much bent to contention. It is
evident what they seek. For if a man mark them, they are wicked contemners of
God, at the least they would have nothing to be certain in religion. Therefore
do they labor to overthrow and, as much as in them lies, to destroy all the
principles of religion. Therefore that they may pour forth their poison, they
strive thus stoutly for impunity and deny that heretics and blasphemers ought
to be punished. That impudent Castalio is one of them, and his fellows, and
other such like. Such were then the Donatistes. And therefore (as I have said)
Augustine does often times cite this place, and declares that it is shameful
slackenes when Christian princes do not by punishing the heretics and
blasphemers, maintain Gods glory: considering that Nebuchadnezer which was
never truly converted, yet by a certain secret instigation published this
decree. How so ever it is, it is evident enohgh to such as are modest and void
of contention, that this decree of Nebuchadnezer is commended by the testimony
of the spirit. If it be so, it follows consequently that it is the duty of
kings to defend Gods true worship, and to punish severely profane contemners,
who labor either to make nothing of true religion, or adulterate and corrupt
the true doctrine with their errors, and so dissipate the unity of faith and
trouble the concord of the Church. This is plain by the text of the prophet.

Nebuchadnezer says first: It is good for me to declare the signs and the
wonders which God has wrought with me. At the first he began to declare what
God had done, but it vanished away. Therefore after that God had twice or
thrice chastised him, at the length he confesses that it is good and glorious
for him to declare the wonderful works of God. And he breaks forth into an
exclamation: how great are his signs, how wonderful are his mighty works?
his kingdom is an eternal kingdom and his dominion for ever It is no doubt
but Nebuchadnezer would stir up his subjects to read this decree more
diligently, and to know the greatness thereof, that they might give them selves
to serve that true and only God. He calls the high God the God of Israel
undoubtedly. Yet do we not know whether he had cast away his supersticions or
no. And I do rather think the contrary, that he had not cast of his errors,
but that he was compelled thus to give glory unto the true God. He did then so
knowledge the God of Israel to be the high God, that he did join unto him the
inferior Gods as companions and mates: as all the faythles have perceived that
there was one high God, but they imagined therewith an heap of other Gods.

So then did Nebuchadnezer confess the God of Israel to be the hye God, yet
did he not correct the Idolatry that was under his dominion: yea he mingled
altogether his false Gods with the God of Israel, and so left not his
corruption. He does greatly celebrate Gods glory, but that is not enough unless
all superstions be abolished, that that only religion which is prescribed in
the word of God may have place, and the pure and perfect worship of God may only
flourish.

To be short, this preface may be some token of a notable conversion. But we
shall see straight ways, that Nebuchadnezer was not wholly pourged from his
errors. Wherefore we ought to be the more moved, where we see the king wrapped
in many errors to be so ravished with the admiration of Gods power, that he
exclameth and cries out because he could not express that which he had in
his heart.

Chap. 4. The Text.
1 I Nebuchadnezer being at rest in mine house and flourishyng in my palace,

2 Saw a dream which made me afraid, and thoughts upon my bed and the
visions of mine head troubled me.

3 Therefore made I a decree that they should bring all the wise men of Babel
before me, that they might declare unto me the interpretation of the dream.

HEre does Nebuchadnezer declare how he did know the hye God at length. He
does not show what lessons he had received before, but because his pride was
tamed at length by this dream, therefore does he only make mention thereof.
Yet there is no doubt but he called into memory also his former dreams and
condemned him self of ingratitude, that he had buried so great power of God,
and that he had blotted out with wicked oblivion so great benefits as God had
given him. Here then only he speaks of the last dream, as we shall see
afterward. But before he come to the dream, he says: that he was quiet.
Whereby he notes the circumstance of the time, that we may know that he was
corrected of God because prosperity had made him dronken, and as it were
brought him in sleep. It is no marvel though it were so with him: for it is
an old proverb, that fulness engenders fiercenes, as we do see horses when
they are much pampered, to kick, to be fierce and not to abide the rider. The
same also is seen amongst men. For if God treat them favorably and
bountifully, they wax fiece, they are outrageous against all men, they shake
of the yoke of God him self, and in the end they forget that they are men. And
seeing David did so, what will profane men do, or such as are over much
addicted to the word? For David does confess that he was deceived with his
quietness and felicity, that he thought nothing was more to be feared: Psalm.
30.7
I said in my felicity or in my quiet state: J shall not be moved. And
afterward he says: O Lord thou have chastised me, and J was amassed. Seeing that
David then promised unto him self perpetual quietness in the world, because
God had spared him for a time, how ought our tranquillity to be suspected lest
we settle in our dregs? Nebuchadnezer therefore does not recite in vain that
he was quiet in his house and florishyng in his palace: for this was the cause
of his boldenes and pride that caused him to despise God so carelessly.

Afterward he adds: that he saw a dream and that he was troubled. He would
here without doubt distinguish his dream from common dreams which do often
rise either of ye troubling of ye brain, or of cogitations in ye day, or of
other causes, even as it has been seen in an other place. Neither is it
nedeful here to repeat those things which we have largely spoken of before.
Let this be sufficient, to perceive briefly how the dream may be descerned,
(whereby GOD did admonish him of the punishment to come) from other dreams
which are either of troubles, or vain, or without effect. Therefore he says,
that he saw a dream, and yet he was waken. For he adds: that he had
thoughts upon his bed, and then: he was troubled with the visions of his
head. This heap of words does te^de none other way but that that vision was an
heavenly oracle, of the which we will speak again more largely.

It follows: that he made a decree: that all the wise men of Babylon should be
called which might expound or make open the interpretation of the dream. The
king, no doubt, did dream often: neither yet did he call unto him every day the
Mages, Southsayers, and Astrologians and others which excelled in the science
of prophesying, or at the least did profess it. He did not ask the^ of al his
dreams, but because God grafted in his heart, a sure note whereby he marked this
dream, therefore the king could not rest until he heard ye interpretation
thereof. So we have seen before, that the authority of ye first dream of ye
four Monarchies and of the everlasting kingdom of Christ was established: so
that the king perceived that it came from heaven. And there is some difference
betwixt this dream and that which we expounded before. For God did blot out of
the remembrance of king Nebuchadnezer the dream of the four Monarchies: so
that it was necessary that Daniel should bring before the king the very dream,
and also should interpret it: for the^ Daniel was more unknown. For although
he had profited so much that he excelled among all the Chaldees, yet
Nebuchadnezer ye king would less have marueiled at him if he had been only an
interpreter of the dream. Therefore God would get the greater reverence to his
Prophet and his doctrine when he gave him two parts, that is, that he should
foresee what the dream was, and then expound the sense and the end of it. In
the other dream Daniel was only the interpreter. But now God did sufficiently
prove that he was endued with a heavenly spirit, so that Nebuchadnezer should
call him no more as one of the Mages, but should discern him from all the
residue.

4 So came the enchaunters, the Astrologians, the Chaldeans and the
Southsayers, to whom I told the dream, but they could not show me the
interpretation thereof.

Here Nebuchadnezer does confess that the Mages were called in vain. Whereby
it appears that all their knowledge was deceiuable: or at ye least that
Daniel could expound the dream that came not by man's study or industry, but
by an heavenly revelation. And I do embrace this sentence, that Nebuchadnezer
would express plainly that Daniel was taught by God to interpret dreams, and
that this was a singular gift of his spirit. For he doubted not but that if
there were any art of divination, his Mages, enchaunters, and Chaldees which
boasted upon the title of perfect knowledge, had it. This then was without
controversy with him, that they knew all things that man could know, and
seeing they could not know this thing, it appeared that Daniel was taught of
God, and so Nebuchadnezer did extol him above all the Mages, as though he
should say that he was a Prophet from heaven, as appears afterward.

5 Till at the last Daniel came before me, whose name was Beltsazar, according
to the name of my God, which has the spirit of the holy Gods in him, and
before him I told the dream, saying:

6 O Beltsazar chief of the enchaunters, because I know that the spirit of the
holy Gods is in thee, and no secret troubles thee, tell me the visions of my
dream that I have seen, and the interpretation thereof.

Here does the king of Babylon speak gently unto Daniel, because he
perceaueth him self destitute of his own Doctors. And hereby we perceive
that he never came to the true God, but when he was compelled by necessity.
Daniel was not unknown unto him, neither was he far away, for he was in his
palace. Seeing then that the king might have had Daniel when he would, why did
he leave Daniel out and called the other Mages so sole^nly? Wherefore it is
plain (as I have said) yt he never gave glory unto God, but when he was driven
thereunto by great necessity. Therefore he did never submit him self unto the
God of Israel of his own accord willyngly: and it is plain that they are but
soddayne motions when soever he shows any sign of holiness. When he
entreats Daniel so humbly, we see his servile nature. Like as all proud men
when they need not the help of others, they are so puffed up that no man can
bear their pride and insolency: but when they are brought to extremity, they
would rather lick the dust of a man's feet, the^ want the favor that might
help them. Such was the nature of this king: for he would gladly have
despised Daniel, as he had already counted him inferior to the Mages: but when
he sees him self remain in his troubles, and that he could have no remedy
but by Daniel, this he takes for his last refuge and now he seems to forget
his pride and authority when he does speak thus fair unto the holy Prophet
of God. But the rest shall be touched afterward.

The Prayer.
Grant almighty God, seeing thou do here set before our eyes a notable
example whereby we may learn that the greatness of thy power ca^ not be enough
commended with man's praise: and seeing that we hear that this profane, cruel,
and proud king was a publisher thereof, and that thou have vouchedsafe to
manifest thy self unto us in thy son Christ: Grant we beseech thee that with
true humiltie of spirit we may study to glorify thee and give our selves
wholly unto thy service, that we may declare not only with tongue and mouth
but also by our works, that thou art not only our true and very God, but also
our father: seeing thou have chosen us to be thy children in thine only
begotten son, whiles that we may have the full fruition of that eternal
inheritance which is laid up for us in the heavens by the same Jesus Christ
our Lord. Amen.

O Beltsazar chief of the Mages, because that I do know that the spirit of the
holy Gods is in thee, and that thou know all secrets, declare thou my
visions and the interpretation thereof.

We said before that the king did thus humbly entreat Daniel, because he was
brought to an extremity. For he did not seek unto him at the first, but
consulted with his enchanters. Whom he then despised, he is now compelled to
worship and reverence. He calls him Beltsazar: the which name doubtless did
sore wound the heart of the Prophet. For he had an other name given him of his
parents even from his infancy, whereby he might know that he was a Jew and
that he had his original of a holy and elect nation. Now that his name was
changed (as we have said in an other place) it was done undoubtedly by the
craft of the tyrant, that he might by little and little forget his kindred.
Therefore king Nebuchadnezer would by changing his name make the holy servant
of God degenerate. Therefore as often as he was called by this name, there is no
doubt but that he was much offended. Howbeit he could not remedy the matter
because he was a captive, and (as he did know) he had to do with proud and
cruel people that were now conquerours. Again, in the next verse Nebuchadnezer
says that this name was according to ye name of his God. Wherefore seeing Daniel
had his own proper name of the judgment of God which his parents had given
him, Nebuchadnezer would put away that holy name of his religion, and calls
him Beltsazar in honor: the which name is very like to be derived of the name
of his Idol. Wherefore this was double grief to ye holy Prophet, that he was
spotted with such a foul blot, that he bare ye mark of the Idol in his name.
But he must bear this cross also amongst the other scourges of God. Thus did
God exercise his servant many ways in the bearyng of his cross.

Now that he calls him the chief of the enchaunters, this doubtless priked ye
mind of this holy Prophet. For he desired nothing more the^ to be disceuered
from the Mages, who deceived the whole world with their crafts and delusions.
For although they were excellent in the knowledge of Astrology, and held some
principles that were commendable, yet we know that they corrupted all sciences.
Therefore Daniel was not willing to be counted one of them: but he could not
deliver him self from this infamy. Thus do we see that his patience was tried
diverse ways by Gods appointment.

Nebuchadnezer says farther: Because J know that the spirit of the holy Gods
is in thee. Many do translate, Angels, which I mislike not. For all nations did
know that there was one hye God, but they feined ye Angels to be inferior
Gods. How soever it is, here Nebuchadnezer does bewray his ignorance, that is
to say, that he had yet profited no further in the knowledge of the true God,
but that he was yet wrapped in his old errors, and holds still many Gods,
as he was entangled with that superstition at the first.

This place may be translated in the singular number as as some do, but so it
is wrasted, and the reason that moves them is very weak. For they think that
Nebuchadnezer was truly converted, which is proved to be false by the whole
text. And they that are of this opinion would excuse him of all fault. But
seeing it is plain ye many testimonies of old ignorance are contained in this
decree of Nebuchadnezer, there is no cause why we should change any thing of
the simplicity of the words. Therefore he grants to Daniel a divine
spirit, but in the mean season he imagines many Gods. Because (says he) the
spirit of the holy Gods is in thee, and no secret is hid from thee. As though
he should say, that Daniel was endued with a divine spirit, so that what so
ever he propounded should easily be answered. Nebuchadnezer knew this: why
did he not then straight ways call Daniel unto him when he was in doubt, seeing
Daniel was able to deliver him from all grief? Here his ingratitude is
perceived, that he consulted with his Mages and neglected Daniel. We may see
then how he always labored to run away from God, until that he was drawn
by force: whereby it appears that he was not truly converted. For repentance
is voluntary, and they are counted to repent, who return willingly unto God
from whom they fall: the which ca^ not be done without faith and the love of
God.

7 Thus were the visions of mine head in my bed. And behold I saw a tree in
the mids of the earth, and the height thereof was great:

8 A great tree and strong, and the height thereof reached unto heaven, and the
sight thereof to the ends of all the earth.

9 The boughs thereof were fair, and the fruit thereof much, and it was meat
for all, it made a shadaw under it for the beasts of the field, and the
fowls of the heaven dwelt in the boughs thereof, and all flesh fed of it.

10 I saw in the visions of my head upon my bed, and behold a watchman and an
holy one came down from the heavens,

11 And cried aloud and said thus: hew down the tree, and break of his
branches: shake of his leaves and scatter his fruit, that the beasts may
fly from under it, and the fowls from his branches.

12 Nevertheless leave the stump of his roots in the earth, and with a baud of
iron and brass bind it among the grass of the field, and let it be wet with
the dew, and let his portion be with the beasts among the the grass of the
field.

13 Let his heart be changed from man's nature, and let a beasts heart be given
unto him, and let seven times be passed over him.

Nebuchadnezer does here tell his dream, the interpretation whereof shall
follow afterward. Yet because the bare narration should be unprofitable unless
we speak something of the matter, it is necessary that we touch somewhat
thereof, and the rest shall be differred. Now first of all under the figure of a
tree was Nebuchadnezer described, not that he did perform the full office of a
king, but because God has appointed kingdoms and dominions in the world to
this end that they should be like trees, of whose fruit all mortal me^ should
taste and eat, and under whose shadow they should also find rest and comfort.
And this ordinance of God is of such force, that the very tyrants, although
they be very far from right and true government by moderation, yet whether
they will or no, they are compelled to be trees: for it is better to live under
a most cruel tyrant, the^ to live without any regiment. Let us imagine that
all were of like authority: what will such a disorder bring in the end? No man
will give place to an other: every man will try what he were able to do: so
shall there be all licencious liberty to rob and to steal, to begile and to
kill one an other: finally all men's lusts shall be set at liberty. Therefore
have I said that tyranny may better be borne, then a dissolute disorder where
there is no government at all, where there is none that has power over others
to keep them in order.

Wherefore they dispute over subtly which think that a king is here
described which had great virtues: for there was no such excellency of justice
and equity in king Nebuchadnezer. But first of al God would declare under this
figure, how he would have the world governed by a politic order, and therefore
appoynteth kings and Monarchs and other magistrates. Secondly he would
declare that although tyrants and other Princes which forget their duties, do
not perform that which is appointed unto them by God, yet the grace of God is
always evident in all empires and dominions. The tyrants go about to
extinguish all comfort of justice and equity, and to confound all things
together: but God in the mean season does restrain them by a secret and
incomprehensible manner, that they are compelled to be profitable to mankind,
will they nyll they. This then is to be learned by the figure or the Image of
the tree.

And where it is added: That the birds of heaven dwelt in the branches, and
the beasts did feed of the fruit thereof, this must be referred unto men. For
although ye beasts of the field have some commodity by politic
government, yet we know that God did appoint it for man's sake. He says then
that the beasts of the field were shadowed under it, because we are defended
under the shadow and defense of the Magistrates: for else there is no such
burning heat of the Sun that can so broyle or scorch miserable men, as if
they were spoiled of this shield and shadow under the which God would have them
to find rest.

Also the fowls of heaven make their nestes in the boughs. Some do make a
difference betwixt the birds and the beasts over subtly, but I am content
to learn thus much by the Prophet, that men of all states and condition, do
feel and perceive no small vtility by the protection of Princes. For if they
were destitute of this aid and comfort, it were better for the^ to live
among wild beasts, then one to kill an other. And this should be of
necessity, if we consider how great a pride is engendered in us all, and how
blind love every one of us have toward our selves, and how raging our lusts
are. Seeing it is so then, God declares by this dream, yt of what state so
ever we are, yet stand we in need of the help of the Maiestrates. And by meat
and feeding and by the shadow of the tree, he does signify the manifold
commodities which come unto us by politic order. Some man might object, that
he needs not the Magistrate in this or in that point: but if we try all the
necessities of our life, we shall find that this benefit of God is very
necessary.

Now it follows: That the height thereof was great, and that it grew up unto
the heavens, and that the sight of it was extended to the ends of the earth.
This is restrained to the Monarchy of Babylon. For there were at that time
other kingdoms in the world, but their condition was but poor and slender:
and the Chaldees had such a dominion that none of those Princes came to such
power and authority. Seeing then there was such excellency in king
Nebuchadnezer, it is no meruell though he be described by the tree that
reaches to the heaven, and spreads to the ends of the earth.

And where some of ye Rabbines will have Babylon to stand in the midst of the
earth, because it is under the same line with Jerusalem, it is to foolish. And
they that say that Jerusalem is in the midst of the earth, are in a childish
error, as Hierome, and Origene, and other of the ancient writers which hold
this principle. But they are worthy to be mocked with that answer of
Diogines: who when he was required to point the midst of the earth, he
touched the earth that was under his feet with his staff. Then when an other
objected, that it was not the middle of the earth, he said, measure thou the
earth and thou shall see.

Where it is said: That the boughs thereof were beautitifull, and the fruit
was plentyfull: this may be referred to the common opinion of the multitude:
for we know how their eyes are daseled with the glory of Princes. For if any be
far more excellent then other by the greatness of his power, all do worship
and reverence him, and are ravished as it were into an admiration, so that they
are able to judge nothing. When the imperial Majesty or the kings highness is
showed, they are all amassed and astonished. For they think that it is not
lawful for them to behold what is in those Princes. Seeing then there was so
great riches and power in king Nebuchadnezer, it is no marvel though ye
Prophet do say: that his boughs were beautiful, and his fruit plentiful.
But in the mean season we must remember that which I have lately spoken, that
is to say, that the blessing of God does shine in the Princes, although they be
far from doing their offices: for God does not suffer his grace to be utterly
taken from them and therefore they are compelled to bring forth some fruit. It
is much better therefore to see some kind of dominion, then one equal
condition, where every one would pluck forth his neighbors eyes. And this
is meant by the meat for every one. The second part of the dream follows.

Hitherto Nebuchadnezer has described the beauty and excellency of his state
by the figure of a high tree, which shadowed the beasts and fed them with
fruit, and gave quiet nestes to the fowls of heaven in his branches. Now
follows the cutting down of the tree. I have seen (says he) in the visions
of my head upon my bed, and behold a watch man and a holy one came down from
the heavens. There is no doubt but by the watchman he means an angel. He is
also called holy for a further declaration. And the Angels are so called
worthily, because they watch continually to execute Gods co^maundeme^ts. For
they are not subject unto sleep, because they are not nourished with meat nor
drink, but live a spiritual life: therefore also they have no need of sleep,
for we fall into sleep by meat and drink. Finally because the Angels have no
bodies: therefore they watch always by their spiritual nature. Howbeit not
only their nature, but their office is also here expressed. Therefore because
God has them always ready at his appointment, and he does send them to
execute his commandments, therefore are they called watchme^. It is read in
ye Psalm: Psalm. 10.20.
Ye Angeles which perform his will, because they go to and fro by an
incomparable swiftnes, and fly straight ways from the heaven unto the earth,
and from the uttermost part of the earth unto the contrary, from the east unto
ye west. Because therefore that the Angels are so ready to accomplish that
which God commands, they may well be called watchmen.

They are also called Saints or holy, because they are not infected with man's
filthynes. For we are stuffed full of vices and sins, not only because we
dwell upon the earth, but because we have gathered corruption of our first
parents, which have poluted all the parts both of body and soul. Wherefore
Nebuchadnezer does descerne the Angels from mortal men by this title. For
though God does here sanctify his elect, yet so long as they dwell in the
prison of their flesh, they never come to ye perfection of Angels. So is here
noted the difference betwixt men and Angels. Nebuchadnezer cold not perceive
this of himself, but that he was taught of God, that he might understand the
cutting down of this tree not to come by man, but by Gods appointment.

Afterward he says, that the Angel cried with a loud voice: Cut down the
tree, beat down the leaves, break of the branches, scatter abroad the
fruit, and let the beasts fly from the shadow thereof, and let not the fowls
of the air breed in the branches. God would express by this figure that the
king Nebuchadnezer should for a time become like a beast. Neither may we think
it any absurdity, although it be somethyng straungely spoken, that the tree is
named to be spoiled of man's heart, for Daniel does now turn from the alligory.
Yea Nebuchadnezer himself had the dream so in an alligory, that God yet mixed
something whereby he might gather some other thing to be noted under the figure
of the tree. The Angel therefore commands man's heart to be taken from the
tree after it was cut down, and his boughs and fruits spoiled. Then does he
command the heart of a beast to be given unto it, that his portion may be with
the wild beasts of the field. But because this must be repeated again, I
pass it now the more lightly.

This is the sum: that ye king Nebuchadnezer should for a time not only be
spoiled of his empire and dominion, but also of all humane understanding, that
he should nothing differ from a beast, because he was unworthy to be in the
lowest place of the common people: and though he seemed to him self far to
exceed all mankind in dignity, yet he should be cast down and abased, that
he should not have the lowest place amongst men. Then follows the order of
this punishment, when it is said: Let seven times pass over him. Again: Cut
not down his whole root, but let him be watered with the rain of heaven.
Again: let his portion be with the wild beasts. Although this be a severe
and horrible chastisement, when Nebuchadnezer is cast forth of man's company,
and made like the wild beasts, yet this is somewhat, that God does not pluck
him up by the roots, but will have his root to remain, that it may grow and
be a tree, yea that it may be grafted in the own place, and gather new
strength out of the root. Daniel has respect unto this, that God laid such a
punishment upon king Nebuchadnezer, in the which yet he showed some token of
his mercy, because he spared him and cut him not of wholly, but suffered some
root to remain.

Where some do here dispute of the mitigation of the pain when God sees men
repent, I know not whether this be a place for it or no. For this conversion of
the king was not perfect, as we have seen plainly before. Therefore where God
would press him no more, this ought to be attributed to his only mercy,
because even when he seems to punish man's sin most sore, yet in all his
temporal punishments he leaves some taste of his mercy, that the reprobate
may remain inexcusable. For where they bring this, that the punishment is not
mitigated unless the fault be forgeuen, it is false, as we see in the example of
Achab. For God did not forgive the fault unto that wicked king: but because he
did seem to show some tokens of repentance, God did abstain from sharper
punishment. So also may we perceive the same in king Nebuchadnezer. God would
not pluck him up by the roots (and this is referred to the metaphore of ye
tree) but would have seven times to pass. Some do understand seven weeks:
others seven years, but we shall treat this at large afterward.

Now this is last of all to be noted, that even in the midst of the
vengeance of God toward this miserable king, yet were Gods benefits mixed,
as appears in these words: Let his portion be with the beasts of the
field, that is to say, let him have some portion of meat to sustain his life,
and let him be washed with the rain of heaven. God does signify ye though he
would punish this king, and show an horrible toke^ of his wrath, yet does he
regard what he is able to bear, and does so temper the pain, that there
remains hope in the end. This is the cause that he has meat with the
beasts of the field, and has also comfort of the heavenly dew.

The Prayer.
GRraunt almighty God, that whereas we see how hard a thing it is for us to
bear prosperity, and not to be deme^ted therewith to forget that we are
mortal: that our frailty and wretchedness may evermore be before our eyes,
which may retain us in true humility, whereby we may glorify thee, and being
admonished by thee, may learn to walk with carefulnes and fear, and submit
our selves unto thee: and that we may live modestly with our brethren, that
none of us despise an other, but study by all means to do his office and duty,
whiles at the length thou gather us unto that glory which is purchased for us
by the blood of thine only begotten Son. Amen.

14 In the decree of the watchmen is the sentence, and in the word of the holy
ones is the request: to ye intent that the living me^ may know, that the most
high has power over the kingdom of men, and gives it to whom so ever he
will, and appoynteth over it the most abject among men.

God does confirm by this verse, that which he had showed in a dream to
Nebuchadnezer. Daniel therefore says, that the king was certified of a matter
of truth, because it was decreed before God and his Angels. The purpose is that
Nebuchadnezer should know, that he could not escape that punishment whereof he
did see the figure in his dream. There is some darkness in the words, but we
perceive the mind of ye Prophet. Yet is here a doubt: for it seems an
absurdity to give unto the Angels this power and authority, for this is to
make them equal with God. We know that God is the only judge, and therefore
that it pertayneth to him alone to decree and to pronounce what sentence he
pleases. If this be attributed to the Angels, so much seems to be taken away
from Gods high dignity: for it is not meet for his majesty to admit any
companions. But we know by the scripture, that it is no strange thing, that God
takes his Angels unto him, not as equals, but as ministers: to whom yet he
gives so much honor, that he will admit them to his counsel. And so are the
Angels called Gods counselors. Wherefore they are named in this place to decree
with God: not of them selves at their own pleasure, but because they do
subscribe unto Gods judgment.

And here must we note two persons to be attributed unto them. For in the first
place Daniel makes them to subscribe unto Gods decree, afterward he says that
they require or demand. And this may well be, that the Angels do require in
their peticions that all mortal creatures may be abased, that God alone may
have the preeminence, and that al things may thus be brought down that obscure
the glory of God. It is meet and right that the Angels require this
continually, seeing we know that there is nothing that they do more desire,
then that they them selves should worship God, and all creatures with them. And
when they do see Gods authority to be diminished by man's pride and arrogance,
then doubtless they require this, that God would bring down under his obedience
and yoke those proud men that set up their creastes against him.

Now do we see why Daniel says that this sentence is in the decree of the
watchmen and in their word a request: as though he should say, thou have all
the Angels thine, adversaries. For with one consent and as it were with one
mouth, they do accuse thee before God, that thou do obscure his glory, as
much as in thee lies: and God agreing to their requests, has decreed to cast
thee away, and to make thee contemptible and shameful before all the world: and
this decree is ratified by all the Angels, as it were common with him and them.
For their consent and subscription might have some authority with this profane
king. And doubtless God (as he does many times) does now accommodate the vision
to this man's capacity, who was never taught in the law, but had only a
confused knowledge of the divinity: so that he did not discern betwix God and
the Angels. And yet this sentence is also true, that the sentence was published
by the common decree of all the heavenly army, and that together by supplication
and request: because doubtless the Angels did take it grievously, that any thing
should be withdrawn from Gods glory, and that there should be such madness in
men, that they would draw and catch to them selves that which is proper and
peculiar to God alone. This seems to be the true sense. And so that which
follows depends well hereof: that mortal men may know that God has power
over the kingdoms of men. For Daniel does note the end of their request: that
the Angels would have Gods authority to remain wholly to himself, and that
nothing should be taken away therefrom by man's churlish ingratitude. For man
can challenge to him self never so little, but he robs God of his due praise
and glory. Therefore do the Angels crave of God continually that he would cast
down all the proud, and that he would not suffer him self to be defrauded of
his authority, but that all power may remain with him wholly. And this is
diligently to be noted: that all mortal men may know that the most high does
bear rule in the kingdoms of men. For the most wicked will grant that God
has the chief power and authority (for they dare not draw him down from his
heavenly throne with their blasphemies) but in the mean season they imagine
that they can both get and defend kingdoms in this world, either by their own
power, or riches, or other means. Therefore the unbelievers would gladly shut
up God in heaven, even as the Epicure fayneth that God uses his delicates in
idleness. Therefore Daniel shows that God is spoiled of his right, except he be
acknowledged to be ye ruler in the kingdom of men, that is, in the earth, that
he may humble who^ he pleases. So is it also said in the Psalm: Power is
neither from the east nor from the west, but from the heaven. Psalm. 75.7. Psalm.
113.6.
And in an other place also: It is God that lifts up the poor from the
doung. Again, in the song of the holy virgin: He casts down the proud from
their throne, and exalts the humble and abiectes. Luke 1.52.
They all do confess this thing: but yet scarcely the hundredth man does
thoroughly feel in his mind that God does rule in this world, so that no man
can extol him self or remain in the degree of honor, but that it is the
peculiar benefit of God.

Seeing this can be so hardly persuaded unto men, Daniel does here very well
express that he is the high ruler in the kingdom of men, that is, he does not
only exercise his power in heaven, but does govern also mankind, and
appoynteth every one his degree or place, and will give it to who^ he pleases.
He speaks of diverse empires in the singular number: but it is as though he
should say, that some are extolled by Gods appointment, and others cast down,
and all is as it pleases God. The sum is, that every man's state is given him
of God, so that they which covet to come to any hyghnes either by their
ambition, or science, or wisdom, Romans 13.1.
or riches, profit nothing at all except God does as it were stretch forth his
hand to help them up. Paul does also teach the same thing with other words,
that there is no power but of God: and afterward Daniel does often repeat the
same sentence.

He adds: that he will lift up the humble amongst men, above it. In this so
evident alteration ye power of God does better appear, whiles he lifts from
the doung those which before were unknown and despised, and does also prefer
them before kings. The profane men whiles this comes to pass, do say that
God plays, and so men are tossed by his hand like balls, that sometime they
are extolled high, and sometime cast down to the earth. But they do not wey
the cause, that is, because God would show by open documentes, that we are
under his government, so that our state should hang thereof: and because we do
not apprehe^d this thing willingly, it is necessary that we have examples set
before us, in the which we may be compelled to see this which all men in a
manner would gladly be ignorant of.

Now, we see the whole judgment of the Prophet, that is, that the Angels do
continually ask of God that he would declare his power to mortal men, and
therefore that he would throw down the proud which do think that they excel
by their own virtue, or power, or fortune, or help of men. Therefore that God
might shake of from them this horrible pride that robs God of his honor, the
Angels require that he would overthrow them, and that he would so show that he
is the king and ruler, not only of heaven but also of the earth. Now, this did
not only happen in one king, but we know that the historyes are filled with
documentes thereof. For whereof, or of what state are kings oftentimes created?
And seeing there was no greater pride in the Roman Empire, we see what has
been done. For God has brought forth certain monsters, that we might be
astonished with such a sight and spectacle, both greeks, and of all parts of
the East, and Spaniardes, and Italia^s, and Frenchmen. For nothing was more
monstrous then certain Emperors. Furthermore their beginning is so filthye
and shameful, that God could no more evidently show that empieres are not
transferred by man's will, nor gotten by virtue, counsel, and many armies, but
that they are vnder-hys hand to make ruler whom he will.

15 This is the dream that I king Nebuchadnezer have seen: therefore thou O
Beltsazar, declare the interpretation thereof: for all the wise me^ of my
kingdom are not able to show me the interpretation: but thou art able, for the
spirit of the holy Gods is in thee.

Here does Nebuchadnezer repeat that which he had spoken of before, that is,
that he seeks the interpretation of the dream. He knew what figure had been
showed unto him: but he could not understand the counsel of God, neither yet
persuade with himself whereto it belonged: therefore he tries in this part
the faith of Daniel. He affirms that he saw a dream, that Daniel might be
more ready to interpret it: and he adds this also to the same end, that all
the wise men of his kingdom could not declare the dream. Where he confesses
after a sort, all the Astrologians, Southsayers, and all other of that kind
which said they knew all things, to be false and deceitful. For some were
Augures, some Southsayers, some dream readers, others Astrologians, which did
not only dispute of the order, and course, and distance of the stars and of
the property of them, but also which would foretell by the aspectes of the
stars, all that was to come. Whereas the^ they did boast so greatly of the
knowledge of all things, Nebuchadnezer does confess that they were deceauers.
For he ascribes this to Daniel, because he had a divine spirit. Wherefore he
excludes all the wise men of Babylon from so great a gift, because he
perceaueth by experience that they were destitute of the spirit of God. He does
not speak plainly, but this is easily gathered of his words, that falshode
was found in all the wise Chaldees. Again in the second part he seperateth
Daniel forth of their number, and also notes the cause: even because he had a
divine spirit. Wherefore Nebuchadnezer does here give unto God that which is
due unto him, and does also acknowledge Daniel to be his Prophet and minister.

In that he calls the Angels holy Gods, it is no marvel (as we have said
before) seeing he was a profane man and not exercised in the doctrine of true
religion, but only had tasted certain principles. And we know that by common
opinion ye Angels were mixed with God. Therefore Nebuchadnezer speaks after
the common manner when he says, that ye spirit of the holy Gods does dwell in
Daniel.

16 Then Daniel whose name was Beltsazar, held his peace by the space of one
hour, and his thoughts troubled him, and the king spoke and said: Beltsazar,
let neither the dream nor the interpretation thereof trouble thee. Beltsazar
answered and said: my Lord, the dream be to them that hate thee, and the
interpretation thereof to thine enemies.

Here Daniel does recite, that he was after a sort astonished. And I refer
this unto the sorrow which the holy Prophet conceived by the horrible punishment
which God showed under this figure. Neither ought it to seem marvelous that
Daniel was touched with sorrow for the calamity of the king of Babylon. For
although he was a cruel tyrant, and straitely handled the Church of God, yea
almost did destroy it: yet because he was under his dominion, it was mete that
he should pray for him. For God did expressly command the Jews so to do, by
the Prophet Jeremy: Iere. 29.7
Pray ye for the prosperous state of Babylon, for in the peace thereof shall be
your peace. And at the end of seventy years it was lawful for the true
worshippers of God, to pray unto God to deliver them: but until that time was
ended which was before limited by the mouth of the Prophet, it was not lawful
for them either to hate the king, or to ask any vengeance at Gods hand. For
they did know that he was the executor of Gods just judgment, and also that he
was their governor, and must be holden in the stead of their lawful king.
Seeing then that Daniel was gently entreated of the king, and was by the law of
war made an exile, it was his part to keep fidelity unto his king, although
he did exercise tyranny against the people of God. This was the cause why he
conceived such sorrow by the grysely vision.

Some think that he was ravished in spirit: but me think that this does
better agree. For he does not simply say that he was astonished, but also that
he was troubled and afraid in his own cogitations. Yet this is to be noted,
that the Prophets were straungely moved when God did pronounce his judgments
by them. Therefore so often as God ordained his Prophets to publish great
calamities, they were moved with diverse affections. For of the one part they
pitied man's miseries, whose destructions they did see draw near: yet did they
pronounce boldly that which was commanded them of God: so that sorrow did never
let them, but that they did their office boldly and constantly. And we may see
both these things in Daniel. Wherefore this was of good affection that he so
sorowed for the king, that he was speachles almost an hour. And whereas the
king bids him be of good courage and forbids him to fear, here do we see
painted ye careless security of the^, which have not yet perceived Gods
judgment and vengeance. The Prophet is afraid, and yet is he without all
danger. For God does not manace him in any point: but contrary, the
punishment which he sees appointed for the king, gives him some hope of the
deliverance to draw near. Why is he the^ afraid? Forsooth ye faithful, even
when God spares the^ and shows him self merciful unto the^, yet can they
not consider his judgments without fear: because they do know that they are
also gilty of the same, and worthy of the same punishments, but that God
deals more mercyfully with them. Agayny, they never put of ma^s affections,
and so pity compels them to lament when they see the wicked destroyed, or
their vengeance draw near. For these two causes are they in heaviness and
sorrow. But the wicked although God do openly sommon them and set his
punishments before them, are nothing moved, but stand amassed, and either do
deride his power openly, or count his threatenings fables, whiles they be clapped
in the necks. Such an example the Prophet sets us forth to be seen in the
king of Babylon, who says: Beltsazar be not afraid: Let neither the dream
nor the interpretation thereof fear thee. Yet Daniel was afraid for his sake.
But (as I said before) the faithful although they perceive God to be
merciful, yet do they fear: the wicked so long as they rest in their
security, are not moved nor troubled with any threatenings.

Daniel adioyneth the cause of his sorrow. My Lord (says he) let this dream be
to thine enemies, and the interpretation thereof to thine adversaries. Here
Daniel declares why he was amassed, even because he desired such a horrible
punishment to be turned away from the kings person. For although he might
worthyly have abhorred him, yet he did reverence the power that was given him
of God. Let us learn then by the example of this Prophet, to pray for our
enemies, and chiefly to pray for kings though they be tyrants, if God has
given us into their hands. For although they be unworthy of any prayer or any
office of humanity, yet because they are set over us not without Gods express
pleasure, let us bear their yoke patiently, not only for wrath, as Paul
admonishes: but even for conscience sake. Otherwise we are not only
rebellious unto them, but unto God. Howbeit of the contrary part Daniel
declares that he is not so overcome with any affection of pity, but that he
will go forward in his office and vocation, and says:

17 The tree that thou saw which was great and mighty, whose height reached
unto heaven and the sight thereof through all the world:

18 Whose leaves were fair and the fruit thereof much, and in it was meat for
all, under the which the beasts of the field dwelt, and upon whose branches
the fowls of the heaven did sit:

19 It is thou O king, thou art great and mighty: for thy greatness is grown,
and reaches unto heaven, and thy dominion to the ends of the earth.

Here we do see, (as I have touched) that Daniel did see his duty to the king,
that he did not forget his prophetical office, but boldly executed Gods
commandment. And this diversity is to be noted: for there is nothing more
hard to ye Ministers of Gods word the^ to keep this mediocritie. For some under
the pretense of zele do thunder and forget that they are men, breathyng forth
nothing but only bitterness, showing no sign of beneuole^ce. So comes it to
pass that their words are of none authority, and their admonitions are
abhorred. So make they the word of God to be lothed and evil spoken of, when
they go about to terrify men so rigorously without any sign of compassion or
sorrow for them.

Others which are cowardly, or rather which are deceitful flatterers and bury
with silence most great and grievous sins: do always pretend that neither the
Prophets nor the Apostles were so fervent that they cast of all humane
affections. Thus do they delight miserable men, and destroy them with their
flatteries. But our Prophet (as all the others do the like) shows here a
mean way which the servant of God must hold and keep. Iere. 9.1.
So Jeremy conceiueth sorrow and grief of heart by his heavy and grievous
prophecies, and yet does he not turn from bold rebuking and most grievous
threatenings, for both were godly. So do all the rest: for this many times is
seen in the Prophets. Daniel therefore of the one part pitieth the king: of
the other, because he knows that he is ye preacher of Gods vengeance, he is
not afraid for any danger, but sets forth boldly unto the king that
punishment that he had despised. Hereby also do we collect that he was
astonished because he feared the tyrant, as many dare not mute nor once open
their lips when a message that may breed hatred is committed unto them, or
that may stir the wicked to rage. But Daniel was not stricken with any such
fear, but only because he desired that God would deal mercyfully with his
Prince. For he says here: Thou art that king. He speaks not doubtfully
neither by circumstances, neither does he bring it in obscurely and darkely,
nor yet use many excuses: but with open mouth he does pronounce king
Nebuchadnezer to be signified by that tree that he had seen.

20 Whereas the king saw a watchman and an holy one that came down from heaven
and said: Hew down the tree, and destroy it, yet leave the stumpe of the
roots thereof in ye earth and with a band of iron and brass bind it among the
grass of the field, and let it be wet with the dew of heaven, and let his
portion be with the beasts of the field, till seven times pass over him.

21 This is the interpretation O king, and it is the decree of the most hye
which is come upon my Lord the king.

Daniel here prosecuteth the matter that he began, with great liberty and
constancy, saying, that the king of Babylon this great tree must be cut down.
He calls him Lord, and that unfeignedly: but because he was the Ambassador of
the high king, he doubts not to lift up his words, and to set out his
message committed unto him with a more hye style. For this is the common use of
all the Prophets, to rise up stoutely against the mountains and the hills,
as is said in Jeremy: Iere 1.10.
J have set thee this day over kingdoms and over nations, to pluck up, and to
root out, and to destroy, and to throw down, to build, and to plant. God
therefore will challenge so great reverence to his word, that nothing shall be so
hye or excellent in the world, which shall not give place unto it. Daniel
therefore concerning men and the politic order, confesses the king to be his
Lord: notwithstanding he goes forward with his Embassage, as he was
appointed: That the king (says he) did see a watchman come down from the
heavens, which said cut down the tree, and scatter it until seven times pass
over. He repeteth that he which he spoke before, that the time of the
punishment should have an end. For God might have abolished the king of
Babylon and his whole memory and posterity, but he would mitigate the
punishment. Albeit he would not for a short time punish this king Nebuchadnezer
lest it should be neglected as an usual thing: but because it was his will to
set forth a notorious example for all ages, therefore would he prolong his
punishment for a long time. To this end therefore pertains the number of seven
years. For we know in the Scriptures that a long time is signified by the
number of seven, because that number signifies perfection.

The Prayer.
Grant almighty God, that so often as thou set our sins before us, and
do pronounce thy judgments against us: we do not abuse thy long
sufferance, and so heap upon us the store and treasure of greater vengeance
through our slothfulnes and dulnes: but let us fear betymes and tremble at thy
judgments, and so take careful heed unto our selves, that we may taste the
comfort of thy swetenes, and thereby be allured to submit our selves willingly
unto thee, that we may desire nothing more then to give our selves wholly unto
thy service, that thy name may be glorified by us in Christ Jesus our Lord.
Amen.

22 They shall drive thee from men, and thy dwelling place shall be with the
beasts of the field. They shall make thee to eat grass as the oxen, and they
shall wet thee with the dew of heaven, and seven times shall pass over thee
till thou know that the most hye bears rule over the kingdom of men.

The verse that went before did say, that this dream did belong to the king
Nebuchadnezer. And it was meet so to be expressed, for this was a heavy and a
sharp message to the king. And we know how hardely kings can bear, not only
to be brought into order, but also to be sommoned before Gods judgment seat,
there to be beaten down with shame and reproach. For we know that prosperity
does make, even common persons dronken. What can come unto kings then, but
that they forgettyng them selves to be me^, should exempt them selves from all
incommodities and griefs, because they do not think that they are of the
common condition with men? Wherefore, because Nebuchadnezer could hardely bear
this message, therefore did the Prophet admonish him in few words, that the
cuttyng down of the tree was but a figure of that ruin and fall which he
shortly should have. This does he prosecute with more words, and says: They
shall cast thee from among men, and thy dwelling shall be with the wild beasts.

Whereas Daniel did treat before of the four Monarchies, there is no doubt;
but that the kings mind was at the first time stirred and sore grieved: but
this was much more sharp and much more intolerable to the kings mind, that
he is compared to the brute beasts, that he is cut of from the company of men,
and sent into the fields and woods to feed with the beasts. If Daniel had
said only that he should have been spoiled of his prnicely dignity, he would
have been greatly offended with that abasement: but when he is cast down into
this so great ignominy and shame, there is no doubt but he was raging mad
inwardly. Notwithstanding God did bridle his fury, that he did not covet to
avenge him self of this, which he thought to be an injury done unto him. For
we shall see by the text afterward that he did not rightly repent and amend his
life. Seeing then that he fostered the same pride still in his heart, there is no
doubt also but he was cruel: for these two vices do always go together. But God
restrained his rage so, that he spared this holy Prophet.

By the way we may note the constancy of the servant of God, in that he does
not insinuate unto the king by subtle means what should come upon him, but
openly declares with many words, how foul and shameful a condition was
appointed for him. They shall cast thee out (says he) from among men. If he
had said: thou shall be as a common person among men, and shall nothing differ
from the base people, now that had been very grievous unto a king. But when the
king is cast out of all humane society, that he may not have one corner
amongst them, neither is it granted that he may lead his life with the
Neatherdes and Swinherdes: how greauous and horrible this was, every man may
conjecture by his own mind. Yet does not Daniel here doubt to pronounce this
sore judgment. And the words that follow are of the same importance: Thou
shall feed of the grass, thou shall be watered with the dew of heaven, and thy
dwelling shall be with the wild beasts. Where the prophet teaches that this
punishment is at hand unto the king of Babylon, that he shall be brought to
extreme ignominy and shame, and that he shall differ nothing from brute
beasts. This liberty then (as I have said) is worthy to be noted, that we may
know that the servants of God which have the charge to teach and to preach
unto others, can not execute their offices faithfully, unless with close eyes
they pass by and despise all the hautines of the world.

Again, by the example of the king we may learn, that it is in vain for us
to be stubborn and froward when God by his messengers threatens us. For
although Nebuchadnezer did not rightly repent (as has been said, and it will be
more evident afterward) yet do we see how he suffered this horrible judgment
of God to be pronounced against him. If then we which are but chafe in
comparison of him, and of no reputation, can not abide the threatninges of God
when so ever they shall be pronounced against us, even he shall be a witness and
judge against us, who though he were in so great power and dignity, yet durst
he do nothing against the prophet.

Now in the end of the verse the sentence is repeated again which was
expounded before: until thou know, that the most hye bears rule in the
kingdom of men, and he gives it to whom he will. This place does teach how
hard a thing it is for us to give all power unto God. We are in deed great
speakers of the glory of God with our tounges, howbeit there is no man but he
restrayneth his power whiles that he usurps some what to him self, or
turns some what thereof to one or an other. Especially when God does raise us
up to any honor or dignity, we forget that we are men, and we rob God of his
honor, and thrust our selves into his place. This disease is hard to be cured,
and this punishment which God has laid upon the king of Babylon is an example
for us. For God would have been content with a smaller punishment, but because
this madness does so stick in the bowels and mary that men dare challenge unto
them selves that which is peculiar unto God. Wherefore there must needs be
some sharp medecin to teach them modesty, humility, and meekenes.

Kings and Monarchs at this day do always pretend in their titles that they
are Kings, Dukes, and Earls by the grace of God: but how many do falsely
pretend that name to this end and purpose, that they may challenge to them
selves authority over all? For what means that title [by the grace of God]
but that they should knowledge no superior? And in the mean season they would
tread under foot God him self, under whose shield they maintain and defend
them selves: so far are they from earnest consideration that they do reign
by his benefit and goodness. Wherefore this is but a mockery, that they boast
them selves to have their authority by the grace of God. Seeing it is so, we may
easily judge how proudly profane kings do despise God, although they do not
pretend the name of God deceaueably as these vain tatlers do which mock God
openly and so profane and pollute the name of grace.

23 Where as they said, that they should leave the stumple of the tree roots,
thy kingdom shall remain unto thee: after that, thou shall know, that the
heavens have the rule.

Here Daniel does end the interpretation of the dream, and teaches that God
will not so severely deal with the king Nebuchadnezer, but that he will leave
some place for his mercy. Therefore he does mitigate the great rigor of the
punishment, that Nebuchadnezer hoping for pardon, might call upon God and
repent, as there shall follow afterward a more evident exhortation. But now
Daniel does prepare him to repentance, when he says that the kingdom shall
remain unto him. For God could have cast him out of man's company, so that he
might always have remained with the wild beasts. He might also have cast him
straight way out of the world: but this is a sign of clemency, that he will
restore him not only unto some mean state, but to his own dignity, as
though he had been always upright. Therefore we see that this dream had been
profitable to king Nebuchadnezer, if he had not despised the admonition of the
holy Propeht: yea if he had not been vntha^kefull unto God. For Daniel did not
only forewarne him of the calamity which hanged over his head, but also he
brought the message of reconciliation. God therefore had taught him profitably,
had he not been stubburne and despised to learn, as the most part of men
commonly do.

But hereof many we gather a general doctrine, that when God does appointe an
end for his punishments, we are moved to repentance, because God gives some
taste his mercy, that we may hope to obtain pardon of at his hand, if we fly
unto him unfeignedly and in sincerity. This also is to be noted, that Daniel
adds in the second part of the verse: After that thou shall know that the
heavens have the rule. For under these words is the promise of the spiritual
grace included, that God would not only punish the king of Babylon to humble
him, but also would inwardly work and change the heart, like as at the length
(though long first) it came to pass.

I have said that the grace of Gods spirit is here promised: for we do know
how smally men do profit without it, although God correct them an hundredth
times. For the stubburnes and rebellion of our hearts is so great, that we are
rather more and more hardened when God calls us to repentance. And doubtless
Nebuchadnezer had been like unto Pharao, save that God did not only humble him
with outward punishments, but also did give him the inward motion of his
spirit, that he suffered him self to be taught, and did submit him self to
the power and judgment of GOD. This means Daniel when he says: After that
thou shall know. For Nebuchadnezer would never of his own mind have come
down to such a knowledge, unless he had been touched with some secret motion
of the spirit.

He adds: That it is the power of heaven: that is to say, that God governs
the world and has the whole rule. For here he sets the heavens, as it were,
contrary to the earth and to all mortal creatures. Now, the kings when they
see all things quiet about them, if no man fear them they think that they
are safe enough, and whiles they will make them selves sure, they look round
about them hither and thither, but they never lift up their eyes to the
heavens: as though this perteined nothing unto God to maintain kingdoms, and
to raise up whom he will, and to cast down all the proud. As though then that
this were not in Gods hand, the Princes of this world do never consider that
the heavens have the authority and rule: but (as I have said) they look this
away and that way, before and behind, even every way save only to the heavens.
This is the cause that Daniel affirms that the heavens bear the rule. He
sets God as it were against all mortal men, as is before.

24 Wherefore, O king, let my counsel be acceptable unto thee, and break of
thy sins by righteousness, and thine iniquities by mercy toward the poor: Lo
let there be an healyng of thine error.

As though he should say: take my counsel, break of thy sins, cease from
thy wickedness, enter into a new trade of life, that is, turn thy cruelty into
humanity and mercy, and thy tyranny into pityfull compassion of the poor:
thus let the error of thy former life be redressed. Thou have long enough gone
astray. For hitherto thou have wandered without all judgment, whiles thou have
followed thine unbridled lust. Put an end therefore to thine error, open thine
eyes and understand at the length that thou ought to repent. This seems to
be the meaning of the words. Now for the points of the doctrine.

Daniel does deal more mildly with this profane king, then if he had preached
to his own countrymen. For the^ he would have used his prophetical
authority, and not have talked of his own counsel. But because he did know
that the king knew not the first principles of Religion, he takes upon him the
person of a counsailer because he was not an ordinary teacher. That
Nebuchadnezer had now called him, it was not usual every day, as though he
would submit him self to his doctrine. Daniel does therefore consider with what
manner of man he had to do, when he says: Let my counsel be acceptable unto
thee, and then does utter it in few words: Break of thy sins, [or cast them
from thee] by righteousness, and thine iniquities by mercy toward the poor.

There is no doubt but that Daniel would exhort ye king to repentance: howbeit
he does touch but one kind, as we do know that it is usual in the Prophets.
For when they call the people home, they do not always comprehend what
repentance is, neither do they generally describe it, but they touch by a
figure, either the outward declaration thereof, or some part of it, especially
wherein men are most fauty. Daniel does so now.

If thou do ask what is repentance: it is the turnyng again of man unto God,
from whom he was departed. And is this conversion and returnyng only in the
hands, and the feet, and the tongue? Nay, it rather begins in the heart,
and then it goes forth into outward works. True repentance then begins in
the mind of man: to wit, that he which would be wise in his own conceit,
should now renounce his own wisdom and forsake the foolish confidence in
his own wit, and then that he should subdue his wicked and corrupt affections
and submit them unto God: then shall follow the reformation of the life
outwardly. Howbeit the works are but testimonies of repentance. For
repentance (as I said) is a thing more pure and precious, then that the root
thereof can evidently be seen with man's eye. By the fruits therefore do we
only testify our repentance. But because the works of the second table do,
as it were open and declare man's mind what it is, therefore the Prophets often
times when they require repentance, do only set forth the works of charity,
as Daniel here does.

Break of thy sins (says he) with righteousness. When men do see that they
are called to repentance and amendment of life, they do feign unto themselves
many pretty kinds of service, which yet are not worthy to be accounted Gods
service, because they do not regard what does please God, neither yet what he
commands by his word: but as they themselves do allow this or that, they do
without regard obtrude it unto God, as we do see in Popery. For what call they
an holy and just life amongst them? To trot hither and thither, to vow and go
pilgrimages, then to set up some Image, to found some Masses, to fast this or
that day, and to heap up such a sort of fond toys, of ye which God has never
spoken one word. Because therefore that me^ do so far and so grossly wander a
stray in the knowledge of true justice, the Prophet does here join ye name of
mercy as an exposition, as though he should say: Do not think that God is
pleased with outward pomps and shows which do please men, as they are carnal
and addicte to earthly things, and therefore do they wickedly esteem God after
their own disposition. Let not this vanity therefore begile thee: but know
thou that true justice stands in compassion toward the poor.

Also in this second member the part is named for the whole, by a figure called
Sinecdoche: for true justice is not restreined to this matter simply, but to
all ye works of charity. We must then deal faithfully with all men, and
neither beguile rich nor poor, neither yet be grievous unto any, but give unto
every man that which is his own, as apperteineth. And this manner of speaking
ought to be well known of us, if we be any thing exercised in the doctrine of
the Prophets. How so ever it is, Daniel would hereby show unto ye king of
Babylon, what it is to live justly: to wytt, even to keep fidelity and upright
dealing with men: and yet does he not neglect the first table of the law. For
the worship of God is more precious then all humane justice, that is to say,
the^ any thing that can be done betwixt man and man. Howbeit true justice
declares it self by outward works and testimonies, as is said before. And he
rather speak to of the second table then of the first, because ye whiles
hypocrites do pretend to worship God by ceremonies and many outward shows,
they suffer themselves to live in all cruelty, bribery, craft and deceit, so
that they care not how they live with their neighbors. Because then that the
hypocrites do cover their wickedness under this cloak, God does set forth a
touchstone to try them, when he calls them to the works of charity.

There may be double understanding of the end of the verse. If we retain the
futer tense] Behold there shall be a medicine to thine error] it is a
confirmation of the doctrine that went before: as though he should say, thou
may not deal by long delays and vain shifts, that will not serve: this is
the only medicine that I tell thee. Or if we take it as an exhortation, the
text will go very well: [Let this be a medecin to thine errors] that is to
say, do not follow thy lusts still as thou have done, but open thine eyes and
perceive how miserably thou have lived, and labor to redress thy former
errors.

Now, where the Papists have abused this place, to prove that God is pacified
with sacrifices, it is to foolish and ridiculous, if we examine their doctrine.
For when they will define satisfactions, they call them the works of
supererogation. If a man do that which God has commanded in his law, yet can
he not satisfy for his sins: as the Papists are compelled to confess. What
remains then? Forsooth that we offer more unto God then he commands.
Wherefore they call them also, opera indebita, works that are not due. But
Daniel does not here require of king Nebuchadnezer any work of supererogation:
but he requires justice, and afterward declares that man's life is not
ordered by justice unless humanity and kindness be amongst us, and especially
unless we be merciful unto the poor. Surely here is no work of
supererogation. For whereunto tends the law? It follows the refore that this
can not be drawn to the works of satisfaction, and that ye Papists are
foolish and filthy herein.

But although we grant unto the^ this thing, yet it does not follow that ye
sins are redeemed before God thereby, as though the works could recompense
either for the punishment or for the crime. They confess that the crime is not
redeemed with satisfactions: but the punishment they say is redeemed. But see how
this agrees with the mind of the Prophet. I do not strive with them now for
the word of redemyng, but I would have them to regard whether this redemption
be in the judgment of God, or before men. It is certain that Daniel here did
regard how wickedly and cruelty Nebuchadnezer had behaved himself, how
tyrannously he had vexed his subjects, how proudly he despised ye poor and
miserable that were under him. Because then he had given him self so
dissolutly to all wickedness, Daniel declares the remedy. And though this
remedy be taken for a redemption or deliverance, there is no absurdity: for
we redeem our sins with men when we satisfy for them. I do redeem my fault
at my neighbors hand, when I do labor to reconcile my self unto him after I
have offended him, knowledging my crime and asking forgeuenes. And if I have
diminished his goods, I restore that which was unjustly taken. Thus do I redeem
my crime. But it does not follow therefore that my sins are purged before the
judgment seat of God, as though this which I do unto my neighbor were any
kind of recompense before God. We see therefore how foolish the Papists are
to abuse the Prophets words.

Here they use to demand a question, to what purpose Daniel does exhort the
king Nebuchadnezer to break of his sin, or to redeem his sin? For either
it was a thing depending of chance (which were a great absurdity to grant) or
else it was an heavenly decree, like as ye dream of the king was a publication
of Gods decree, as we did see before. If this were determined with God, it
could by no means be changed. Therefore it was in vain to redeem his sin.
If we follow the other exposition of breaking of this sin, there remains no
doubt. But although we confess that the Prophet here does speak of the
redeming of sins, yet is the exhortation not unprofitable. For although king
Nebuchadnezer should have prepared himself to bear Gods correction, yet was
it not unprofitable to know God to be merciful. And the time also might have
been shortened, which was prolonged by his ostinate malice: not that God at any
time changes his decree, but because he often times preaches threatningly
unto me^, to cause them to repent, that he may deal more mercifully with them,
and restrain the rigor of his vengeance, as we see by manifold examples.

This had not been then unprofitable nor fruitles, that Daniel exhorted the
king to redeem or break of his sin, if the king had considered it: for he
might have found favor in some point, although he had been punished. Yea
though there had not been one day shortened of vij. years, yet was this no
small profit, if the king had humbled him self betymes before God, yt yet he
might be capable of that mercy in the end, which was promised. For because the
time was named by the Prophet, therefore had it been profitable for the king, if
he had prepared himself to receive that mercy by humble prayer unto his judge.
Wherefore this dictrine was profitable many ways, like as it is unto us at
this day. For although we must be ready to receive Gods corrections, yet is
this, no small comfort in our miseries, when we do so submit ourselves unto
God, that we are persuaded of the contrary part, that he will be merciful unto
us, because he sees us displeased with our sins and heartily abhor them.

The Prayer.
Grant almighty God, that we may learn patiently to bear all manner of
adversities, and that we may know that thou do exercise toward us the
office of a judge as often as we are afflicted in this world, that we may by
this means prevent thy vengeance, and may with true humility so condemn our
selves, that we yet trusting unto thy mercy, may always fly unto thee, by the
comfort that we have in the mediator whom thou have given unto us thine only
begotten Son, and that we may so crave pardon of thee, that we may in the
mean season meditate true repe^tau^ce, not by vain and unprofitable
inventions of men, but with true and earnest trials of our selves, that is,
that we may exercise true charity and fidelity one toward an other, and may
thus testify unto the world the fear of thy name, that thou may be truly
glorified amongst us by the same Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

25 All these things did come upon the king Nebuchadnezer.

26 At the end of twelve months he walked in the royal palace of Babell.

27 And the king spoke and said: Is not this great Babell that I have built for
the house of the kingdom by the might of my power, and for the honor of my
majesty?

28 While the word was in the kings mouth, a voice came down from heaven
saying: O king Nebuchadnezer, to thee be it spoken: thy kingdom is departed
from thee.

29 And they shall drive thee from men, and thy dwelling shall be with the
beasts of the field: they shall make thee to eat grass as the Oxen, and
seven times shall pass over thee, until thou know that the most high bears
rule over the kingdom of men, and gives it to whomsoever he will.

After that Nebuchadnezer has declared that Daniel was the preacher of Gods
judgment unto him which was at hand, now he adds how and after what sort God
did execute that judgment which he had pronounced by his Prophet. He speaks
in the third person: but we know how often the changing of the person is used
with the Hebrews and Chaldees. Furthermore Daniel did not write the saying of
the king, but did only comprehend the sum. So it comes to pass that
sometimes he brings in the king to speak, and sometimes he speaks in his
own person. There is no cause therefore why this diversity should trouble us,
for it does nothing obscure the sense.

In ye first verse Nebuchadnezer teaches that that dream which Daniel
expounded was not in vain. So he admonishes by the effect that followed, that
it was a heavenly oracle: for other dreams (as we do know) do vanish away. But
because God did accomplish at his due time that which he had showed to the king
of Babylon by dream, hereby it appears that it was no trifling dream, but a
certain and sure revelation of ye punishment which should shortly come upon
the king. And the manner also is expressed. Daniel says, that after a year
was ended, the king did walk in his palace and boasted of his glory and
majesty, and the same moment a voice came down from heaven whereby this was
repeted which he heard before in the dream. Afterward he declares how he was
cast forth from the company of men and remained a long time with brute beasts,
so that he differed nothing from the beasts.

Some do think that Nebuchadnezer was stricke^ with repentance when he was
admonished of the wrath of God, and that for this cause the time of his
punishment was deferred. But I think not so. I think rather that God stayed
his hand unto the end of the year, that the pride of the king might be more
inexcusable. For he ought to have been afraid by that voice of the Prophet, as
though God himself had thundered and lightened from the heaven. Now it appears
that he was always one. I do not deny in deed, but that he might be afraid at
the first message, and I will not dispute of that matter. Howsoever it is, I do
not think that God spared him for a time because he did show any token of
repentance. I grant that God does sometimes spare the reprobate if he see
the^ humbled, as we have a most plain example in king Achab. For Achab did
never repent heartily: King 21.
but God would show how much repentance pleased him, whiles he pardoned ye
wicked and obstinate king in his malice for some small sign of repentance.

The same might be spoken of king Nebuchadnezer, if the Scripture did teach it.
But, as may be gathered by the words of the Prophet, Nebuchadnezer went
forward in his pride, until his careless negligence came to the highest. For
this was intolerable, that after God had threatened so sore, the king remained
yet in his pride. It is a monstrous dulnes that he could remain careless,
although he had lived a hundredth years after that threatening. Finally I do
think that although Nebuchadnezer did understand that a sore and horrible
punishment was prepared for him, yet though he were afraid for a time, he did
not lay down his pride and hye mind. In the mean season, that prophecy might
seem vain, and it is probable yt the thing which he had heard was now a long
time gone out of his mind: Like as the wicked are wont to abuse ye long
sufferaunce of God, and so heap unto themselves the treasure of greater
ve^geaunce, as Paul says, Romans 2. Romans 2.
Wherefore it may be that he derided this prophecy, and so was more and more
hardened. Howsoever it is, there can none other thing be gathered by the text
of the Prophet, then that the admonition of ye Prophet was then in vain, yea
that the oracle it self was of no force whereby he was called to repentance.

If there had been any drop of a Godly mind in him, truly he should have
fled to the mercy of God, he should have weighed with himself by how many
ways he had provoked his wrath, he should have given himself wholly to the
works of charity: as he had executed grievous tyranny against all, so should he
have given himself to humanity and mercy, as the Prophet had exhorted him: but
he is so far from doing this, that he does vomit out vain boastinges, which
do show that his mind does swell with disdainfulnes, and also with the
contempt of God. Because therefore here is noted the space of the time, hereby
it appears that God will sometimes defer his judgments, if paraduenture
they will repent even which seem altogether desperate: But the reprobate do
abuse that humanity and mercy of God, because they do more harde^ their hearts
by this occasion, whiles they suppose that God cease from doing the office of
a judge when he suffers for a season.

At the end [then] of twelve months, the king walked in his palace, and spoke,
and said: This doubling of the word, does express that the king spoke of a
purposed pride. The Prophet might have said more simply, [the king spake] but
he says, that he spoke and said. Whereby I suppose that the Prophet means
that the king did, as it were vomit forth that which he had before conceived
and purposed in his heart: Is not this that great Babylon, which I have builte
for my kingly palace by the might of my power, and for the honor of my
majesty. In these words we see no open blasphemye which should offend God so
greatly: but we must consider that the king did speak thus, to challenge unto
him self all things, as though he were in the place of God. And this may be
gathered by the words: Is not this Babylon the great? He boasts of ye
greatness of his city as though he would set it against the heavens, as the
old Giants did. Which, says he. This Pronowne does seem also to be put for
vehemence. Which I (says he) have builte, and that with the might of my power.
We see how he spoyleth God of his honor, challenging all things unto him
self.

Yet before I go any further, we must see wherefore he says that Babylon was
builte of him. For all the Historiographers do agree in this, that that city
was built of Semiramis. Now, a great while after Nebuchadnezer does declare it
for his praise and glory, that he has built that city. But the answer is
easy. For we know how earthly kings do study by all means possible to throw
down the glory of others, that only they might excel and get to them selves
a perpetual name: especially where they change some thing in buildinges, or
in palacies, or in Cities they would seem to be the first builders, and so
blot them out of memory of whom the foundations were laid. So it may be that
Babylon was beautified of the king Nebuchadnezer: therefore does he translate
all the glory unto himself, whereas the greater part should have been ascribed
to Semiramis and Ninus. Wherefore it is a tyrannical kind of speech, that is,
which the tyrauntes do often usurp, and commonly whiles they draw to them
selves other men's praises: Therefore (says he) I have built it with the
strength of my power.

Now we may easily see what did displease God in this boasting of ye king of
Babylon, eue^ his sacrilegious boldness when he says, that the City was built
by his own might or power. But God shows, that that praise is due unto him,
and worthily: Psalm. 127.
For except God build the City they watch in vain etc. Therefore how strongly
soever men labor in building Cities, yet they profit nothing except God
himself rule the work. Where as then Nebuchadnezer does magnify himself, and
does set forth the strength of his power against God and his grace, this
arrogant boasting was intolerable. And this was ye cause that God was so angry
with him. Therefore let us learn that this is tried true by this example which
the Scripture does so oftentimes inculcate, that is to say, Psalm. 18.28
that God resists the proud, Iam. 4.6.
that he plucketh down their hauty looks and countenaunces, and that he can
not abide their arrogance. Where as God therefore in every place does pronounce
that he is an enemy to the proud, it is confirmed by this example, 1. Pet. 5.5
as if God did hereby set forth unto us the Image of his judgment as in a
glass. This is one lesson.

Also the cause is to be noted why God makes open war against all the proud:
because we can lift up our heads never so little, but we fight against God.
For all rule and power is in his hand, yea our life is in his hand. Neither are
we any thing neither can we do any thing, but only of him and by him. Who
soever chalengeth therefore this or that, be it never so little, to himself,
he withdraws so much from God. Wherefore it is no marvel though God do
testify that he can not abide the high countenaunces of men: for they do
wilfully provoke him to anger when they usurp the least thing that can be,
unto themselves.

It is true that Cities are built by the industry and labor of men, and that
those kings are worthy commendation that either built Cities or fortify them,
so that due praise remain unto God and nothing be taken therefrom. But when
men extol and magnify themselves, and will have their power seen, they bury
the blessing of God as much as in them lies. Then is it necessary (as we have
said) that their sacrilegious temerity robbing God of his honor, be called to
account.

Also the king shows his vanity when he says: I have built it for my
princely palace and for the excellency of my majesty. By these words he does
not dissemble, but that he regarded his own glory in all his buildinges, to
the intent that his name might be advanced amongst his posterity. To be
short, therefore would he both in his life and after his death be thus renowned
in the world, that God should be nothing in respect of him: and so all the
proud shoot at this mark, that they may set themselves in Gods place.

It follows: The word was yet in the kings mouth, when a voice was heard
from heaven. Here we see how soon God can even in a moment repress the madness
of them that do outragiously extol themselves. And it is no marvel though
this voice was heard suddenly, seeing there had been a space for repentance
given before unto the king Nebuchadnezer. Now in this kind of speech: They say
unto thee, we need not to be curious to know who spoke. The name of the king
is not given him for honor, but in derision, as though he should say: thou art
dronken with thy present dignity: for whiles all men do honor thee as a God,
thou do forget thine own fraility: howbeit this princely Majesty and power
can not let, but that God can cast thee down: because thou will not humble thy
self willingly, thy kingdom is departed from thee. This was incredible then:
for Nebuchadnezer was in a quiet possession of the kingdom. No man did show
himself an enemy, his Monarchy was terrible to all nations: yet does God
pronounce at that present, that the kingdom was departed from him. And this
makes for the certainty of the oracle, that Nebuchadnezer may know that the
time is now fulfilled, and the punishment can no longer be deferred, because he
had so abused Gods mercy and mocked his clemency.

It follows: And they shall drive thee from amongst me^, and thy dwelling
shall be with the beasts of the field, and they shall make thee eat grass
like the oxen. That some me^ think that Nebuchadnezer was transformed into a
beast, it is to great an absurdity. Therefore we need not to imagine any such
metamorphosis: but that he was so cast forth of man's company, that except only
man's shape, he differed nothing from brute beasts. Yea there came such a
deformity upon him in that exile, that he was horrible to look upon: as we
shall see afterward, that all the hears of his body did grow as the feathers
grow upon the Egles, and his nails did grow like birds claws. This had he
common with the beasts and birds: in the rest he was like a man. For we know
not whether God did strike this king with madness, so that he ran away and hid
himself for a space, or whether he were cast forth by tumult and the
conspiracy of his nobles, or by the consent of the whole people. This we do not
know, because the histories of those times are unknown unto us.

Now, whether he were enraged, and so ran forth of man's company, or he were
cast forth as tyrants are many times, or not: this example is very notable,
that he remained with beasts for a season. Yet is it probable that he was so
beside himself, that God yet left him the form of man and took away his
reason, as shall better appear by the text.

They shall cast thee forth of man's company, and thy dwelling shall be with
wild beasts, and they shall make thee eat grass like the bullockes. That is
to say, thou shall be deprived of all thy princely delicates, yea of all ye
common diet of the vulgar people, thou shall have none other meat then brute
beasts have. And seven times shall pass over thee. Of this we have spoken
before. Some do restreine it to vij. days, which neither has reason nor
color. Neither do I expound it of months, for that had been a short time.
Wherefore their sentence is more probable which do extend it to seven years.
For if Nebuchadnezer were cast forth by any tumult, he could not be so shortly
called in again. Furthermore, because that God would show in his person an
example, the remembrance whereof might continue many ages, I doubt not but
that he was separated from ye common state of men for a long season. If it had
been but for seven days or months, we see how little Gods judgments, unless
they be severe, are regarded in the world. Wherefore, that God might print this
punishment in the hearts of all, he continues it for a long space: I do not
say vij. years precisely, for (as I said) ye certain number is put for ye
uncertain, but I do say that it was a long space.

Seven years (says he) shall pass over thee, whiles that thou know that the
most high is the ruler in the kingdom of men. This is the end of the
punishment. Wherein we note, that God does mitigate the bitterness of the pain,
because he does limite it unto a certain time, and also had his end
determined that Nebuchadnezer should repent in the end, because he could none
other ways wax wise but by punishment, as the proverb is of the foolish. So
was it of necessity that king Nebuchadnezer must be compelled by scourges to
submit him self unto God, because nothing could be done with him by
admonitions, neither yet before by heavenly visions. God deals not thus with
all. Wherefore we have here a special example of his clemency and mercy, which
caused that this punishment which was laid upon Nebuchadnezer, took place and
was profitable. The reprobate do more and more harden their hearts against God,
yea they are more and more enraged and wax furious. That Nebuchadnezer was
chastened for a space by the hand of God and afterward repented, to perceive
that God bears the whole rule in all the world, this was of special grace.

He says, that God is the ruler in the kingdom of men: because that tyrauntes
will be persuaded of nothing more hardly then that they are under the power of
God. They will confess in one word that they reign by his grace, but in the
mean season they suppose that they are come to their authority either by
their power or by fortune, and that they are maintained therein either by their
power, their wisdom, or by their riches. Wherefore they shut forth (as much as
in them lies) God from the government of the world, whiles they are puffed up
with this fond opinion, that they remain in their state and dignity by their
own power or wisdom.

This was no small profit then, that Nebuchadnezer began to perceive that God
is the governor in the kingdom of men: for the kings would set him in a mean
state, betwixt them and the people. They grant in deed that the people must be
in obedience unto God: but they think the^ selves to be exempted from the
common order, and they imagine after their lusts, that they have a privilege
that they need not to be under the hand and government of God. So was this (as
I have said) no vulgar nor common lesson ye Nebuchadnezer learned at ye last,
that God does reign in the earth. For kings do commonly shut him up in the
heavens, and imagine that he does content him with his own glory, so that he
does not intermedle with men's matters.

Afterward he adds what kind of government God has, even that he raises
up whom he pleases and casts down others. God is not the governor then
only in this respect, that he susteineth the world by his universal
providence: but because no man comes to any authority but at his pleasure.
He gyrdeth some with a gyrdle, he vngyrdeth others: he powers contempt upon
Princes and makes the mighty weak, as it is written in the book of Job. Job.
12.18
We may not imagine then any power of God that is idle, but we must join it
with the present act. Whether then that tyrauntes have the government, or good
and godly kings, altogether is governed by the secret counsel of God: for
other ways he could not be the king and governor of the world.

30 At that same hour was this thing fulfilled upon Nebuchadnezer and he was
driven from men, and did eat grass as the bullockes, and his body was wet with
the dew of heaven, till his hears were grown like Egles feathers, and his
nails like birds claws.

The Prophet does conclude that which he had spoken before, that is, as soon
as the voice came from heaven, Nebuchadnezer was cast forth of men's company. It
may be that they had some occasion to drive him forth. But because the
conjecture is doubtful, I had rather leave it indifferent which the holy ghost
has not reueiled. I will only touch this briefly, that when he boasted that
Babylon was built by the strength of his power, it might be that eue^ the
nobles also did disdain, whiles they saw him puffed up with so great
arrogance: or it may be also that he spoke after this manner when he thought
that they lay in wayt for him, or when he perceived that troubles were moved
against him. How soever it is, God sent forth his voice, and drove forth of the
company of me^ the king Nebuchadnezer in the same moment. Therefore, In that
hour (says he) was the word fulfilled. If it had been a long space afterward,
the cause might have been ascribed to fortune or other lower means: but where
there is such copulation of the word with the work, the judgment is more
manifest then can be darkened by ma^s malignitie. Therefore he says: that he was
cast forth and did eat grass, so that he differred not from the oxen: that
his body was watered with rain, because he did lie without the house. For we
oftentimes are watered with rain, and there is none which can escape that
necessity in the fields: and often times the travelers do come wette to
their Inn. But here ye Prophet does speak of the continual judgment of God,
that he had no house to go into, but did lie in the fields.

So he says: He was watered with the dew of heaven, until (says he) his
nails did grow like birds claws, and his hears like Egles feathers. This
place does more confirm that which was spoken before, that seven times should
be expounded of a long time, because his hears would not have so growe^ in
seven months, neither would there have been such a deformity and so great in
this space. Therefore this chaungyng which is described of the Prophet, does
sufficiently declare that the king Nebuchadnezer was punished with a longer
time. Neither could he so quickly be humbled, because arrogancy is untameable
even in a mean man: how much more in such a great and mighty Monarche?

31 And at the end of these days I Nebuchadnezer lift up mine eyes unto heaven
and mine understanding was restored unto me, and I gave thanks unto the most
high, and I praised and honored him that lives for ever, whose power is an
everlasting power and his kingdom is from generation to generation.

Now the Prophet does bring in the king speaking again. Therefore he says:
After that time was passed, he lift up his eyes unto heaven. There is no doubt,
but he does mean of those seven years. And seeing he began at the length to
lift up his eyes unto heaven, hereby it appears how long the healing of his
disease, that is, of his pride was. For even as where there is some living part
corrupted and almost consumed, the remedy is hard and long: even so because
pride is altogether fastened in men's hearts, and does occupy even the very
marow, and does infect what soever is in the soul, therefore is it not so
easily plucked away. And this is worthy to be noted. Furthermore, we are also
taught by this word, that God did so work in the king Nebuchadnezer, that he
did not forth with bring forth ye effect of his grace openly. It was profitable
for Nebuchadnezer to be so shamefully handled for ye space of seven years or
such a time, and to be banished from the company of men: but he could not so
soon perceive this until God had opened his eyes. So then God does often
times chastise us, and calls us by little and little, and also does prepare us
to repentance: but his grace is not straight way known.

The Prayer.
Grant almighty God, seeing that, although we are nothing yet we do never cease
to stand in our own conceit, and also are blinded by the vain confidence of
our selves, and furthermore do vaynely boast of our virtues and powers which
are nothing: that we may learn to put of this perverse affection, and so to be
subject to thee, that we may hang of thy mere grace and favor, that we may
know that we stand and are sustain by thy only power: and so may learn to
glorify thy name, that we do not only obey thy word in true and pure
humility, but also may continually desire and seek for thy help, and
mistrustyng our selves may rest in that grace and favor which is our only
stay, until at the length thou gather us into thy heavenly kingdom where we
may obtain that blessed eternity which is gotten for us by thy only begotten
son. Amen.

For as much as Nebuchadnezer says that he lift up his eyes unto heaven, and
his understanding was given him again, hereby we gather that he was a space
without his mind. Neither yet was he so without his mind, in my judgment,
but he knew his misery: but in the mean season he did byte the bridle, and
was like a brayneseeke man. Other say that he was altogether mad. I will not
contend of this matter: but this is sufficient for me, that he was without his
mind, so that he had some part of a beast. But it is probable that he had some
intelligence left, that he perceived some punishment by his misery. In the
mean season he did not lift up his eyes into heaven until God drew him to
him. For the rods of God do nothing profit us except he work within us by his
spirit, as we said before.

The speech is as much as if he should say: he began to think that God was a
just judge. For although his shame did trouble him for a while, yet he did not
look unto the hand of ye smiter, eue^ as is said in an other place. Therefore
he began to acknowledge that God is the revenger of pride, after that time
which was appointed before was past, of yt which we have spoken. And they do
lift their eyes into heaven which do also cast the^ down to the earth. Because
Nebuchadnezer should have risen up unto God whom before he had forgotten as
wakened from his deep dream: he should also have thrown down him self to
the earth, because now he had received the reward of his arroga^cy. For he
durst lift up his head above man's state, when he took to him self those things
which were due unto God. Therefore he did not now lift up his eyes unto heaven
by a vain confidence, as before when he was made dro^ken with the beauty of
his Monarchy: but he did so look upon God, that he was cast down and
protestrate in his mind. Afterward he adds: And J blessed the most high,
and I praised and glorified him that lives for ever.

This chaungyng does show that the punishment was laid upon king Nebuchadnezer
especially for this cause, because he spoiled God of his just honor. Here he
does describe the fruit of his repentance. If this affection did spryng of
repentance that Nebuchadnezer should bless God, it follows then that first
he was a sacrilegious person which took from God his lawful honor, and
would set him self in his place, even as has been said before. And here also
we may learn what it is to praise God truly, that is, when we being brought to
nothing do acknowledge and determine with our selves, that all things are
under his government (and as we shall see afterward) that he is ye governor of
heaven and earth, that his will should stand both for law and reason, and for
the chief rule of justice. For otherwise we may celebrate the praises of God
with open mouth, but it shall be a mere dissimulation: because no man can praise
him sincerely and purely, but he which does ascribe unto him all these things
which we will speak after.

And first Nebuchadnezer says: because his power is the everlasting power, and
his kingdom from generation to generation. In the first place here he
confesses that God is the eternal king: which is a great thing. For there is
set against this perpetuity the weakness which is in men: seeing that all the
chief Monarchs which excel with greatest power, have nothing safe or
certain, not only because they are subject to the chaunges of fortune (as the
profane men do commonly judge) or rather they hang on the government of God:
but because they fade away for the most part by their own vanity. We see the
whole world, as it were tossed, and to be like the troubled sea. If there be
any quietness in one part or more, yet in every moment there may some new and
soddayne thing come to pass which was not looked for. As in a quiet and bright
heaven a tempest will soddaynely rise, even so we see it come to pass in men's
affairs. Seeing then it is so, there is no firm nor stable state in the earth,
and especially Monarchs do shake them selves with their stormy stirs. This
is then the perpetuity which is here declared of the king Nebuchadnezer, that
God is a Monarche which by him self reteyneth and governs his empire, and
therefore he is without all danger and peril of changing.

32 And all the inhabitants of the earth are reputed as nothing: and according
to his will he works in the army of heaven, and in the inhabitants of the
earth: and none can stay his hand, nor say unto him, what do thou?

Now is added the contrary member, that the Antithesis might be full. For,
although it follows that among men there is nothing sure or sound where that
principle is of force, that God is the everlasting king: yet few do so reason:
because all men do grant unto God with one word a sure and perpetual state,
but in the mean season they do not desce^de into themselves that they might
earnestly wey and consider their own weakness, but being unmindful of their
state, they rage even against God himself. Therefore this explication was
necessary which is set forth, that is, after that Nebuchadnezer praised God
because his power is everlasting: he adds of the contrary part, that all the
inhabitors of the earth are reputed as nothing, Kela: which some do think to
be one word and take it for a thing that ends. For Kala signifies to finish
or to fulfill, and some times it signifies to consume, whereof they think the
name is derived, because that men are reputed in their own measure, but God is
unmeasurable. But that is a hard interpretation: and this opinion is more
received, that [He] should be put for [Aleph]: and so says Nebuchadnezer that
men are reputed as nothing before God.

Now therefore we see how aptly these two members do agree betwixt themselves,
that is, that God is the everlasting king, and men are nothing. For if any
thing be given unto me^, so much is diminished from ye power and high empire of
God. Therefore it follows that Gods right can not stand whole, until all
mortal men are brought to nothing. And although men do set much by them
selves; yet Nebuchadnezer does pronounce by the instinction of the spirit,
that they are nothing, that is, before God: because it comes to pass none
otherwise that they should extol them selves so much, but that they are
blinded in their own darkness. But when they shall be drawn unto the light,
they shall know that they are altogether nothing. And what so ever we be, it
hangs altogether of the grace of God, which does keep us every moment, and
does join unto us a new strength. Therefore our part is nothing else but to
rest and stand steadfast in God: because, as soon as he draws back his hand
and the power of his spirit, we fade away. Therefore we are something, that
is, in the Lord God: but we are nothing in our selves.

Now it follows: that God works according to his will in the army of
heaven, and in the dwellers upon earth. This might seem absurd, that God is
said to do as he will, as though he had neither moderation, nor equity, nor
rule of justice. But we must mark that which we have spoken in an other place,
that men are governed by laws, because their wills are perverse, and are
carried hither and thither after their own lusts without measure: but God is a
law unto him self, because his will is most perfect justice. Therefore as often as
the Scripture sets forth unto us the power of God, and does command us to
be content therewith, it does not attribute unto God a tyrannical Empire, as
the wicked do falsely imagine. But because we do not leave of to speak against
God, and do set our reason against his secret counsels, and so strive with
him as though he did not that justly and wisely which is not allowed of us:
therefore that the holy ghost might bridle this presu^ption, he does pronounce
that God does all things after his own will. Let us then remember yt when we
hear mention made of God, there ca^ no perverse nor unjust thing be laid unto
him: his will is not changed by any lust, but is great justice. Seeing then it
is so, let us also remember how great, how stubburne and how proud our rashness
is, which dare cast and object this or that against God. Whereof it follows
that this doctrine is necessary to cast upon us a bridle of modesty, that God
does all things after his own will, as it is said in the Psalm: Psalm. 115.
our God is in heaven, he has done what soever he would.

Now we do gather by this sentence, that nothing comes by chance, but what
soever comes to pass in the world, comes by the secret providence of God.
Neither ought here to be admitted that unsavory distinction betwixt the
sufferaunce of God, and his will. For we see that the holy ghost which is the
best master to teach us to speak, does here plainly express two things, that
is, ye God works, and he works after his own will. And sufferance, as also
these curious searchers do say, differs from will: as though God did grant as
it were against his will, that which yet he would not have done. There is
nothing more worthy to be laughed at the^ to imagine this weakness to be in
God. Furthermore the very force of doing is added. Therefore (says
Nebuchadnezer) God does what he will. And he does not speak according to the
sense of the flesh, but by the instinction of ye spirit, as has been said. He
should therefore as well be heard as if a Prophet were sent from heaven.

Now then we see that the world is so governed by the secret providence of
God, that nothing comes to pass but that which he has commanded and
decreed: and furthermore that he should also worthily be counted the author of
all things. Where some do object a kind of absurdity, that God is therefore
the author of sin if nothing be but by his will, yea if he work it: this
cauillation is easily put away, because there is a diversity betwixt the doing
of God and the workyng of men. For when any man sins, God after his manner
does work there: but in the mean season he far differreth from man, because
he exercises his judgment: even as he is said to blind and to harden. When
then God does command the reprobate or the devil, those does he give up to be
cast into all kinds of lusts. When God then does so, he does exercise his
judgments. And he which sins is worthily guilty, neither can he inta^gle
God in the society of his wickedness. Why? For God has nothing common with him
as concerning the action of sin. Therefore we see that these things which
many would have to disagree betwixt them selves, do well agree, that is, that
God does rule by his will what soever is done in the world, and yet he is not
the author of sin. Why? For he so uses the devil and all the reprobate,
that he is always a just judge. The cause does not always appear unto us, but we
must mark this principle: because that with God is all power, therefore it is
not right to speak against his judgments, what show of absurdity soever they
have. And therefore it follows in the text: There is none that can stay his
hand, or can say unto him why have thou thus done?

When Nebuchadnezer says that the hand of God can not be stayed, hereby he
derideth the madness of men which yet do not doubt to rise against God. Now let
them lift up their finger if they can, to stay his hand: and yet being overcome
of their infirmity they go forward in that their rage. Therefore Nebuchadnezer
does worthily show their foolish madness, whiles they lift up them selves so
presumpteously, that they would put God to silence or shut him up in their
cages, or make some chains whereby they may bind him. Seeing then that men do
burst forth into such outrageous fury, they are worthily laughed at. And hereto
belong the words which we read in Daniel.

Afterward he adds, that none says: Why have thou done so? We know that
men's tounges are losed to all wickedness of talk, because scarce ye hundredth
part of me^ does contain them selves in this sobriety, to give the glory unto
God, and to confess that he is just in his works. But here Nebuchadnezer did
not look what men were wont to do, but what was lawful. Therefore he says
that God can not be corrected, that is, by right: seeing how soever the
reprobate do talk, yet their vain talkyng does fall by it self, because it
has no ground neither yet any color. The sum is that the will of God should
be a law unto us, because we strive against him in vain: and furthermore
because, if we permit unto our selves so much lust, and if our madness also do
brust forth so far that we will braul with God, this shall be without success.
For God him self shall be justified in his judgments and so all men's mouths
shall be stopped. This is the sum. But we must mark that which is added: That
the will of God is done as well in the army of heaven as in the dwellers of the
earth. By the army of heaven I do not understand as in other places, the Sun,
the Moon, the Stars, but the Angels themselves, and even the very devils,
which may well be called heavenly in respect of their beginning: and
furthermore we know that they be the Princes of the air. Therefore signifies
Daniel as well the Angels as devils and men to be governed by his will: and
although the wicked do rush out never so outragiously, yet they are held in by
a secret bridle, that they can not fulfill what soever they lust. Therefore is
God said to work as well in the army of heaven as in men, what soever he will,
because he has the Angels obedient unto him, that is, the elect: but the
devils are compelled to obey his rule, although they would do the contrary. We
know that ye devils are by all means against God, but yet at the length they
are compelled to obey him, not willyngly but by constraint. And even as he
deals with the Angels and devils, so also he does with the dwellers on earth.
For some does he govern with his spirit, that is, the elect: which after that
they be regenerate by his spirit, are so led of him, that his righteousness
does truly shine forth in all their works. He works also in the reprobate,
but after an other sort: for he draws them headlong by the hand of the
devil, he drives them by his secret power, he strikes them with the spirit
of brayneseekenes, he blyndeth them and casts them into a reprobate sense, he
hardens also their hearts to stubbornes. Behold how God does work all
things by his will in men and Angels.

Now, there is an other kind of working for as much as belongs to the
outward state. For God does lift this man on high, and casts down an other.
So we see that rich me^ often times become poor, and some are lift up from the
donghill to clime to high degrees of honor. The profane men do call it the
play of fortune, but it is the incomprehensible and most just moderation of the
providence of God. Thus God works then after his will in men and Angels. But
that inward action should be put in the first place, as we have said.

33 At the same time was mine understanding restored unto me, and I returned to
the honor of my kingdom: my glory and my beauty was restored unto me, and my
counsaillers and my Princes sought unto me, and I was established in my
kingdom, and my glory was augmented toward me.

Here does Nebuchadnezer declare more copiously that which he had touched
briefly before, that is to say, that he had recovered his wit again: and so
does he commend the mercy of God, because he was content with a small temporal
correction, and at ye length gave him his merciful hand to make him a man
again of a brute beast. Not that he was changed into a beast (as is said
already) but because he was brought to that shameful misery that he was like
the wild beasts, and fed also with them. Wherefore that deformity was so
horrible that the restoryng might be called as it were a new creation: and
therefore Nebuchadnezer does so much celebrate this grace of God not without
cause. Therefore, in that time mine understanding was restored to me. He had
spoken this once but because understanding and reason is an inestimable
benefit of God, Nebuchadnezer does inculcate this se^te^ce, and does confess
that he had tried ye singular grace of God, because he was restored to his
mind again. And he does also add, that he was restored to his honor, and to
the excellency of his kingdom, because he was sought to of his counselors,
and nobles. It is not known how this was fulfilled, because the memory of
those times is buried: but that it is probable, that at the length the Princes
of the kingdom were bowed to clemency, that they coueted to receive to them
the king that was cast forth.

We will not say that this was done of them of purpose: for God so used them
that yet they knew not that they did execute that which he determined. They
heard a voice from heaven: To thee be it spoken O king Nebuchadnezer, behold
the kingdom is gone from thee. etc. This thing ought to have been known
amongst all men, and to have been spread abroad amongst all: but we know that
men do very easily forget when God speaks. The Princes therefore though they
did not know that they did God service therein: yet required they their king.
By this means he returned to his dignity of the kingdom, and his honor was
greater then it was before.

34 Now therefore I Nebuchadnezer praise and extol and magnify the king of
heaven, whose works are all truth and his ways judgment, and those that
walk in pride he is able to abase.

This is the end of the commandment: where Nebuchadnezer does join a notable
confession of his fault with the praises of God. For that which he does add of
the proud, he does undoubtedly properly apply to his own person: as though he
should say, God would set me forth as a notable example, whereby all might know
that the proud are humbled by his hand. For I was puffed up with pride: but God
has thus corrected me by an horrible punishment, that now my example might
profit all men. Therefore have I said that the king Nebuchadnezer did not
thank God here simply, but did also confess his fault, because he was
worthily brought by such severity into subjection: for his arrogance could by
no lighter remedy be corrected.

But first he says: I praise, extol, and glorify the king of heaven. There
is no doubt but this heap of words came of a vehement affection. And here
also the antethesis must be understand by that principle which we have seen
before, that is, that God is never rightly praised until the shame of men be
uncovered: that God is never rightly extolled but when their highness is thrown
down: that God is never glorified but when men being as it were overwhelmed
with shame, fall down upon the earth. Therefore also whiles Nebuchadnezer does
in this place praise, extol, and glorify God: he does also confess, as
before, that both he and all mortal men are nothing, do deserve no praise, but
are worthy of all shame.

Afterward he adds: because all his works are truth. Here [Kesot] is taken
for righteousness and integrity. For [emez dine] are called true judgments:
but it is here referred to equity: therefore all the works of God are verity,
that is, they be upright: as though he should say, that nothing is worthy to be
reprehended in the works of God. Therefore the explication follows, that all
his ways are judgment. We see therefore that here is praised in God perfect
justice. This ought to be also referred unto Nebuchadnezer: as though he should
say, God did not handle me over roughly, there is no cause why I should find
fault with him, or murmr against him as though he has been over severe
against me. Therefore I confess what punishment soever I sustain, I was
worthy of it. Why? For all the ways of the Lord are judgment: that is, there
is great vprightnes in them. Furthermore, all his works are truth, that is,
there is no unequal thing found in them, neither any deceitful thing: but
great righteousness shall shine in them every where.

We see then how Nebuchadnezer does condemn him self by his own mouth with
these words, whiles he declares the righteousness of God in all his works.
Neither does this generality hinder, that Nebuchadnezer should not set himself
gilty openly and freely before the judgment seat of God: but this word has
more hehemency, whiles he being admonished by his own example, does confess
universally that God is just, and whatsoever he does is right and true. And
this point is worthy to be noted. For many can easily praise Gods justice and
equity when they have all things at their own hearts desire: but if God
begin once to deal sharply with the^, then pour they forth their poison,
and begin to quarrel with God and to accuse him of injustice and cruelty.
Wherefore in that that Nebuchadnezer does here confess without exception, that
God is just and true in all his works when as he was so severely punished,
this confession is not feigned: for that which he speaks must needs come
forth of the inward and lively feeling of the heart, because he had tasted the
rigor of Gods judgment.

Now in the end is added: That he can humble them that walk in pride. Here
Nebuchadnezer does disclose his own sin and shame more plainly, and he is
not ashamed to confess his fault before the whole world, seeing that the
punishment was evident. Wherefore like as God would have his madness to be
detested of all men when he executed such a terrible example of so horrible a
punishment upon him: so does Nebuchadnezer now come forth and testify that he
did worthily suffer this so grievous punishment because in deed he was to
proud. And here do we see the power of God joined with his justice, as was said
before. He does not attribute unto God any Tyranny that should be lawles. For
when Nebuchadnezer has confessed all the ways of God to be judgment,
straight ways after he says of himself, that he was proud. Wherefore he
doubts not to set forth his shame before me^, that he might glorify God. And
this is the right way to praise God, not only when we confess our selves to
be nothing, but also when we recount our vices: again when we do not only
knowledge within our selves and in our own consciences that we are wicked and
worthy to be condemned before God, but testify the same with open mouth before
all mortal men so often as shall be necessary. And when the word of humilitation
or humbling is named, it is to be referred to that outward abbasing and casting
down when God cast Nebuchadnezer forth into the woods to live among the wild
beasts. Howbeit he was also humbled after an other sort, even as one of the
children of God.

Seeing then there be two kinds of humiliation, Nebuchadnezer speaks of the
first, where God does cast down and deface ye proud. This is one kind of
humbling, which has no fruit unless the Lord do afterward govern us with his
spirit of humility. Thus Nebuchadnezer does not here comprehend the grace of
God, which yet should have had the chief praise: neither yet does he describe
in this decree whatsoever were to be required of a godly man that had been long
exercised in the schole of God: but yet he makes it manifest that he had much
profited under Gods corrections, when he attributes unto him the most high
power, and joins thereunto the commendation of justice and equity.

The Prayer.
Grant almighty God, seeing this sin of price is so fast fixed in all our
hearts ever since we have been corrupted in our father Adam: grant that we may
learn to examine our selves thoroughly, that we may be so displeased with our
selves as becomes us: and that we may perceive that there is no wisdom
neither equity but that comme^th from thee only, so that we may fly unto they
mercy: and that we may confess our selves worthy to be judged to eternal
death, and yet trusting to they mercy which thou have vouchedsafe to offer unto
us by thy Gospel, and believing in the mediator whom thou have given, unto us,
we may doubt nothing to fly unto thee and to call thee father, that we being
regenerate by thy spirit, may walk in true humility and modesty, whiles at
the length thou do raise us up unto that heavenly kingdom which is purchased
for us by the blood of thine only begotten Son Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Chap. 5. The Text.
KIng Beltsazar made a great feast to a thousand of his Princes, and drank
wine before the thousand.

DAniel does here declare and history which was done at the same time that
Babylon was taken: but in the mean season he leaves the judgment of God to
be considered of the readers, of the which the Prophets prophesied before the
people was banished. Here does he not use a prophetical style (as we shall see
afterward) but is content with the simple narration: but the use of the history
may be learned by those words which follow. Therefore it is now our duty to
weigh in this history, that which may make to the edification of faith and of
the fear of God. In ye first place we must note the time in the which
Beltsazar did celebrate this feast. Now the seventy years were passed from
that time that Daniel was brought into exile. For although Nebuchadnezer were
called afterward the father of Beltsazar, yet is it manifest enough that
Euilmerodah was betwixt them two. And Euilmerodah reigned three and twenty
years. Other also number two kings before Beltsazar: for they do put Regassar
after Labassardach, which two make eight years more. Metastenes says so, and
many do follow him. But it is manifest that Nebuchadnezer the great (which
brought Daniel away, which was the son of the first Nebuchadnezer) reigned
45. years. Other do transfer two years to his fathers Empire. Howsoever it
is, he obtained the kings power 45. years. Now add moreover 23. years to
Euilmerodah, which will make threescore and eight. Beltsazar also reigned 8.
years. Therefore we see 72. years to be passed after Daniel was carried away
captive. Metasthenes reckeneth 30. years in ye reign of Euilmerodah: and
moreover there are added unto him 8. years: So should the years be more then
fourscore. And this is probable enough. Although it seems that Methasthenes
erred in this that he made diverse kings, seeing they were only diverse names.
For Herodotus Herodot. Lib. 1.
does not call this king of whom now mention is made, Beltsazar: but calls
his father Labinetus, and him also by the same name. Therefore it seems that
Methasthenes was deceived in the names. But forasmuch as belongs to the
reckening of time, I wyllingly receive yt which he says, that Euilmerodah
reigned thirty years. For when we speak of the seventy years whereof Jeremy
did prophecy, we may not begin at the captivity of Daniel., neither at the
destruction of the City: but at that miserable destruction which came betwixt
the first victory of king Nebuchadnezer (which he had whiles his father was
alive) and the burning and utter ruin of the temple and the City. For when
report was brought of ye death of his father (as we have said in an other
place) he returned into his country lest any tumult should arise in his
absence.

Therefore that we may find the seventy years in the which God would end the
captivity of his people, it shall be necessary to prolong the reign of
Euilmerodah longer the^ three and twenty years: Although there is no great
difference in that matter. For a little after Nebuchadnezer returned and carried
away the king, although he left the City standing. And though the temple did
stand still at that time, yet God had laid a most grievous plague upon the
people, which was almost as evil as the last destruction. Howsoeeuer it is, we
see that Beltsazar does celebrate this feast when ye time of deliverance was
now at hand. And here is the providence of God to be considered, which rules
the hours and times, that the wicked when the time is ripe for their fall,
cast themselves down hedlong. So chanced it to this wicked king.

It was a marvelous madness and blindness that he prepared so great a feast full
of delicates, when as the City was yet besieged. For Cyrus had now a long time
besieged the City with a great army, and this miserable king was half
surprised: yet notwithstanding as it were in despite of God, he makes a
dainty feast and calls a thousand gestes. Hereby may we easily conjecture
what business there was and what charges in ye feast. For if one would
intertaine but either ten or twenty men, there will be much business and
travail if so be he will treat the^ sumptuously. But when there was
preparation made for the Prince, when there were a thousand noble personages,
the Queen and the kings concubines, when so great a multitude was then
gathered together: no doubt there must needs be much searching out of many
parts, to find sufficient delicates: and this thing may seem increadible.
But Xenophon, (although he tell many fables, and do neither keep the gravity
nor fidelity of an historiographer because he will set forth the praises of
Syrus like and orator: yet in this point there is no cause why he should lie)
says that there was preparation of vitayle laid up in store that ye
Babylonians might bear the siege ten year more. And Babylon may worthily be
called a country. For the greatness of that City was such that is is incredible
to be told. Doubtless it must needs be that is was very full of people. And
seeing they carried vitailes from all Asai thither, it is no marvel if the men
of Babell had vitaile laid up in store, that they might sustain themselves a
long space, the gates being shut up.

But this is wonderful, that the king which should have watched himself, or
at the least have sent forth his watchmen lest the City should be taken, gave
himself to banketing and to pleasure, as though he were in great peace, and
were in no danger of the outward enemy. He had to do with Cyrus a stout man,
if there were ever any: who also not only excelled in wisdom, but also in
actiuitie far passed all other. Seeing then he was so mightily assaulted, it is
marvel that he was so careless to give himself to feasting and banketyng.
Xenophon says, that that day was a feast day. Whereas the Jews think that the
victory was gotten of the Chaldeis against the Persians, that is a trifle. For
Xenophon, whom we may believe in this matter when he does not lie in the favor
of Cyrus, for then he is a most grave author and a witness worthy to be
believed: but when he will praise Cyrus there is no end: in this point is an
historiographer, when he says yt this was every year a feastiuall day and a
solemn feast with the Babilonians. He shows also how Babylon was taken: that
is, Gobria and Gabatha being captains. For this Beltsazar had gelded the one
to put him to shame, and had killed the son of the other, the father being
yet alive. Therefore when the one did burn with the desire of reuengement for
the death of his son, and the other for the shame that he had done unto him,
they both conspired together. So it came to pass that Cyrus turned away many
rivers of Euphrates, and so Babylon was suddenly taken.

We must also note, that Babylon was twice taken: or else the prophecies should
not be believed. For whereas the Prophets threaten to the Babylonians the
vengeance of God, Ierem. 50.
they say that their enemies should be most cruel, which should not seek gold
or silver, but should desire men's blood. Furthermore they speak of the most
horrible acts which were wont to be committed in battle. But no such thing
came to pass when Babylon wan taken of Cyrus. But when the Babylonians casting
of the yoke had delivered themselves from the dominion of the Persians, Darius
recovered the City: which was wrought by ye means of Zopirus, who maimed his
body, and feigned that he was so cruelly handled of the king, that he might
betray the City. How sore the Babylonians were then afflicted, we may gather
in that he crucified three thousand of the nobles. What was done among the
common people, when those three thousand nobles were destroyed and all were
hanged on the gallows, yea even crucified? Hereby then it plainly appears
that the punishment was reserved for the Babylonians until that time, although
in the mean season they were subject to a strange power, and were
reprochfully handled of the Persians, that is, brought to bongade and slavery,
for they were forbidden to were weapons, and they were taught of Cyrus even the
first day to serve, so that they durst not carry a sword.

It is needful to touch these things briefly, that we may know that men's
affairs are so governed by the secret judgment of God, that he casts down
the reprobate when their punishment is near them. Of the which thing we have
here a notable example in the king Beltsazar. The time of the deliverance
which was spoken of by Jeremy Ierem. 25.
was come, the 70. years were ended, Babylon was besieged. Now the Jews might
lift up their heads, and hope well, because the coming of Cyrus chanced
above all men's opinion. For he rushed in suddenly from the mountains of
Persia, when that nation was barbarous. Seeing then that Cyrus came suddenly
like a whirle wind, this alteration might give some hope to the Jews. But
when he did lie long in vain (that I might so speak) in besieging the City,
this might discorage their minds.

Now when Beltsazar did banquet with his nobles, he thought that he could cast
Cyrus forth by play and sport, as they say. But in the mean season the Lord
did not sit idle in heaven. For he so blinds the mind of the wicked king,
that he wyllingly goes forth to his own punishment, and although no man draw
him, he offers himself. How is this, but because God had given him up to his
enemy? according to the decree whereof Jeremy Ierem. 25.
speaks. Therefore although Daniel tell the history, yet it is our part (as I
have said) to weigh far greater things: that is, that God which had promised
a deliverance to his people, should now put forth his hand out of the secret,
and should fulfill that which was prophesied of by the Prophets.

Now it follows, that king Betsazar did drink wine before a thousand. Where
as one of the Hebrew Doctors says that he strove with ye thousand nobles, so
that he was equal with them all in the intemperancie of drinkyng, that is over
gross. For as much then as he says that he did drink wine before a thousand,
he had respect to the manner of the nation. For this was a rare thing, that the
Chaldey kings should receive any to their table. For they were wont to banquet
so alone, as the kings of Europe do now: and they think it belongs to their
dignity, to have a table prepared for one alone. Such was ye pride of the
kings of Chaldey. Seeing then it is said, that Beltsazar did drink wine before
a thousand: some extraordinary thing was noted, that in deed he celebrated a
solemn feast and did, contrary to his daily manner, give his nobles so great
honor, that he did receive them to his table. Neither is that very credible
which some do conjecture, that he drank wine openly, because he was wont to be
dronken without witnesses. But this word before, is taken for communication or
society.

2 And Beltsazar whiles he tasted the wine, commanded to bring him the golden
and silver vessels which his father Nebuchadnezer had brought from the temple
in Jerusalem, that the king and his princes, his wife and his concubines might
drink therein.

Here the king Beltsazar does hasten his punishment, because he furiously
provoke the wrath of God against him self, as though it were tedious unto
him, that God did differ his judgment so long. And this is it which I have
said, that the wicked when the fall of ye house draws near, Prouer. 17
they lift up the posts and the gates, as Solomon says. Therefore when God
will execute his judgments, he drives the reprobate by his secret
instinction, that they might as it were, run willingly, and procure to them
selves a swift destruction. This did Beltsazar. His security and carelesnes
was a sign of astonishment: and this was a token of the wrath of God, when he
could be so carelessly given to pleasure in his adversity and in the mids of
perils: but this excecation does more clearly show forth the vengeance of God,
that he not being content with his intemperancie in feastyng and bankettyng
without all regard of the time, does even make battle openly against God.
Therefore says he: he commanded the silver and golden vessels to be brought
unto him which Nebuchadnezer had taken away.

It appears that those vessels were laid up in the treasure. Therefore
Nebuchadnezer as long as he lived, did not so abuse those vessels. Also
Euilmerodah is not read to to have done any such thing: but now Beltsazar of
set purpose will thus despite God. Neither is there any doubt but that he
commanded those vessels to be brought forth in derision, that he might triumph
again over the true God, as we shall see afterward. Whereas ye Prophet calls
Nebuchadnezer the father of king Beltsazar, we have now expounded in what sense
it should be taken: because it is a common thing that as well the grandfathers
as the great grandfathers and fathers of the great grandfathers are called
fathers. Therefore because Beltsazar did come of the seed of Nebuchadnezer and
was of his ishue, therefore is he called his son: whereof we shall see more
again hereafter. There be some also which think that Euilmerodah was stricken
with that grievous plague which was rehearsed in the chapter before. And it may
be that he was called Nebuchadnezer: but there is no necessity to move us so
to think. For this was to vain when the name of father was mentioned,
straight way to fly to that conjecture.

The Prophet says that Beltsazar did command this in the tasting of the wine.
Because [taam] signifies to taste, there is no doubt but he speaks here of
tastyng. But because this is metaphorically transfered to understanding,
therefore certain do expound, that he was forced by the wine, and so in stead
of reason and judgment, he was led by his dronkennes. Ovid. 1. Amor. Eleg. 6.
Night, love, and wine do persuade no moderate thing. But that exposition does
seem unto me overmuch forced. Therefore I take it simply, that when Beltsazar
was warm with wine, he commanded the vessels to be brought unto him: and this
is more received. When the taste of the wine did overcome, that is, when wine
had oppressed the kings senses, then he commanded the vessels to be brought
unto him. And this is worthy to be noted, that we may learn to beware of all
intemperatenes of drink: because nothing is more easy then to take in hand
many things rashly as soon as the taste of wine has troubled our senses.
Therefore we must use wine soberly that it may strenghten, not only the body,
but also quicken the mind and all the senses, and not debilitate and weaken
the body, much less astonish the senses. And this is now over much usual, as
it was also noted in the old proverbs, that pride comes of dronkennes.
Therefore the Poets did feign ye Bacchus had horns, because they which are
inte^perate in drinkyng, do triumph, and the most miserable in their dronkennes
do think that they are kings. What shall then be done to the kings them
selves, which forgetting the^ selves do dream that they are not only kings
of kings, but also Gods. Therefore the Prophet notes this vice when he says,
that Beltsazar commanded in the tastyng of wine that the vessels should be
brought unto him.

3 Then were brought the golden vessels that were taken out of the temple of
the Lords house at Jerusalem, and the king and his princes, his wives and his
concubines drank in them.

4 They drank wine and praised the Gods of gold and silver, of brass, of
iron, of wood, and of stone.

Here the Prophet does show more clearly and distinctly that the king did then
deride the true and only God, when he commanded the vessels to be brought
unto him. For when they were brought: they praised (says he) all their golden
and silver Gods: that is, they celebrated the praises of the false Gods in the
reproach of the true God, as though they would thank them, as also Habacuc
Habac. 1.
says. Albeit there is no doubt but they sacrificed to their power, to their
strength, as the Prophet says in the same place: but they set up their Gods to
that intent that they might overthrow the glory of the true God. And this is
also the reason wherefore the Prophet does now plainly tell, that those vessels
were brought out of the temple of the house of the Lord. For here he does
exaggerate the wickedness of the king and his nobles, that they did lift up
their horns against the God of Israel. Therefore this antithesis is to be noted
betwixt God which commanded that they should built him a temple in Jerusalem
and that sacrifices should be offered, and betwixt ye false Gods. And this was
a castyng down unto punishment, when Beltsazar did of set purpose so rise
against God: and did not only tyrannically and cruelly oppress the miserable
Jews, but did also triumph over their God, even the maker of heaven and earth.
By this ragyng means he did haste^ to him self utter dostruction. But this
was done because the time of deliverance was nigh. Therefore have I said that
he was drawn by the secret instinction of God to such madness, that the
vengeance might be hastened.

They drank (says he) wine, and praised their Gods. The Prophet does not here
ascribe it to dronkenes yt they praised their Gods, but yet he teaches by the
way that this wickedness was more kindled with drink. For if every man had been
sober at his own house, they would not have so stubbornly risen up against
God. But seeing that wickedness reigned in their hearts, thereunto came also
intemperatenes in drink, as bellows to blowe^ the fire. This does the Prophet
seem unto me to note when he repeteth, that they drank. For he said: The king
and the nobles, his wife and concubines did drink. Now does he inculcate the
same thing again almost with like words, that they drank: but he adds,
that they drank wine: as though he should say, their madness was more kindled
when they were stirred up with the heat of the wine.

Then did they praise the silver Gods etc. The Prophet does reprochfully speak
here of the Gods of gold, silver, brass, wood, and of stone, because we knew
that God has no affinity with gold or silver. Therefore his true Image ca^ not
be expressed in corruptible matter. This is the reason wherefore the Prophet
does say here that all the Gods which the Babylonians worshipped, were of gold,
silver, brass, wood and stone. Doubtless the profane men were never so
doltish, that they thought the essence and substance of God to be of gold,
silver, or stone: they so called only the images of the Gods. But because they
imagined in their opinion that the power and Majesty of God was always shut
up vnderstone, wood, gold and silver, the Prophets do worthily thus condemn
their doltish grossenes. For we know how diligently the Idolaters do devise all
the shifts they can, to fly unto: and at this day the Popedom is a document
clear enough that the superstitious never want their excuses, which they
pretend when they will excuse their errors. Therefore the Prophet does not here
admit those vain pretenses, whereby the Babylonians and such like did color
their shame: but he says that their Gods were gold and silver. Wherefore? For
although they did confess with their mouth that the Gods reigned in heaven
(for such a multitude and rabble of Gods was received amongst the^, that the
Majesty of ye very true God was, as it were wrapped in darkness) although, I
say, the Babylonians did confess that the Gods dwelt in heaven, yet did they
fly to Images and pictures. Wherefore ye Prophet does worthily reprove them for
worshippyng the Gods of gold and of silver.

And whereas he says: that the vessels were then brought away, hereby it
appears how servants do obey tyrants in the most wicked things: for
without any delay straightway the vessels were brought forth of the treasures.
Daniel therefore signifies that all his servants were ready at this
commandment, that they might please this beastly dronkard. But now he
shows how short a time that same dronken triumph lasted.

5 At the same hour appeared fingers of a ma^s hand, which wrote over against
the candelsticke upon ye plaster of the wall of the kings palace, and ye king
saw ye palm of the hand that wrote.

Here Daniel begins to tell what a change there was: for in that same
moment the king knew that some heavy and sorrowful thing was toward him. Yet
did he not understand what it should be: for God did but only show a sign, as
it were of some evil luck, as the profane men were wont to speak.
Thererfore God did by this means begin the pageant, when he saw the king so
fervent in all outrageous dissolutenes with his nobles. Therefore says the
propphet: there appeared the hand of a man. He calls it the hand of a man
because of the likeness or fashion. For it is certain that it was not the hand
of a man: but because it did resemble a hand, therefore is it called a man's
hand. And the scripture also speaks after this manner often times, especially
where there is any mention of the outward sacraments. Therefore this is also a
sacramental kind of speech (that I might so speak). For God him self did
write by his power, but he showed the figure to king Beltsazar, as though some
man did write in the wall. Therefore, the fingers of a hand went forth.

When he says, that the fingers went forth, this makes much for the
certayntie of the miracle. For except Beltsazar had seen this beginning, he
might have coniectured that that hand was set there by some art. But whereas
the wall was without that form before, and also the hand came forth sodeinly:
hereby one may easily gather that that hand was a heavenly sign, whereby God
would show some great thing to the king. Therefore, says he, the fingers of a
hand came forth over against the candelsticke, or the light. It is certain
that this was a night banquet: and Babylon was taken also at midnight. Neither
was it any marvel that ye feast was continued long. For intemperancy has no
measure: and moreover they were so wont to riot. I confess, they did not
feast every day till midnight: but when they celebrated some gorgious and
daynty feast, they thought that their mirth should not be long enough, except
they should as it were rotte and putrify at the table (that I might so speak).
So then over against the candelsticke there appeared a hand, whereby it might
be the more evidently seen. And that hand did write (says the prophet) upon
the plaster of the wall in the palace.

If any man should have told the king that there appeared the form of a man's
hand, this might have been doubted. But he says that the king did see it him
self, For God would terrify him, as we shall see afterward: therefore did he
set before him such a spectacle. The king then saw: peradventure not the
nobles: and we shall see afterward that ye king was only smitte^ with fear,
saving that other began to tremble with him. For when they saw his face
changed, and that he was overcome with sorrow, they began also to fear,
although they all studied to give some comforth. Therefore God would after a
sort sommon the wicked king to his judgment seat, when the hand of a man which
wrote, appeared in his sight.

The Prayer.
Grant almighty God, seeing we are so prone to forgetfulness that we do over
gredely follow our lusts and pleasures of the flesh, grant we beseech thee,
that often times every one of us may call him self back to consider thy
judgments, that we may always walk carefully and warely as in thy sight:
and that we may so be affrayd of thy just vengeance, that we do not provoke it
by our stubbernes and other vices, but that we may so submit and subject our
selves unto thee, that we being raised up with thy hand and confirmed, may go
forward in the holy course of thy vocation, whiles at the length thou do raise
us again unto that heavenly kingdom which is purchased for us by the blood of
thine only begotten son. Amen.

6 Then the kings countenance was changed, and his thoghts troubled him, so
that the joints of his loins were loosed, and his knees smote one against the
other.

Here Daniel declares that the kings mind was stricken with fear, lest any
man should suppose that the fear was conceived without cause. And he does also
express by many circumstances how the the king was troubled, that it might be
evident that the cause was not small. And it was necessary that he should thus
be stricken, that all men might understand, that God did sit in his throne as
judge, and sommon ye king as gilty. We have spoken before, and Daniel has also
declared the great pride of the king, and his careless security has been a
plain and clear proof of the same. For whereas the long continued seege
ought to have made him careful, he makes a great feast, as if he had had no
war at all. Whereby it appears that he was overcome with a dronkenes of
mind, that he could not feel his own miseries. This was the cause therefore
why God would waken him and raise him out of his deadly dream: because he
could not return neither be called home to a sober mind by any usual means.
Now that he was thus terrified, it might seem to be a good preparation to
repentance. But the same is set forth unto us in his person, which is set forth
in Esau. Genesis 27.34
For Esau was not only stricken with sorrow when he saw him self refused, but
he also asked the blessing of his father with great mourning and lamentation,
but over late. The same is now set forth in king Beltsazar. But all things are
to be noted in order.

Daniel says: that the kings countenance was changed: furthermore the joints
of his loins were loosed and he was troubled or terrified in his thoughts.
Last of all he adds: that his knees smote one against the other: for the word
does properly signify to rush against. The prophet declares the matter by the
signs, that is to say, that the king Beltsazar was affrayd at the vision,
whereof mention was made. There is no doubt (as I said before) but that he was
thus terrified by Gods apoyntment. For we know that the reprobate, although God
do openly declare that he calls them to his judgment seat: yet do they
remain senseles, and are nothing affrayd. But God would strike the heart of
this wicked king, so that there should be no excuse of ignorance.

And here we may note that God does by diverse means touch men's hearts. I
speak not only of ye reprobate, but also of the elect. For we see even very
good men to be slack and slow when God does sommon them to his judgment seat.
Therefore is it necessary that they be compelled with chastisementes, for they
would never come willingly unto God. He can move their minds without any
violence: but he will set forth unto us, as it were in a glass, how great our
slownes and slacknes is: for we never obey his word but against our wills.
Wherefore he brings down his own children by correction, when he does not
prevail by his word alone. But as concerning the reprobate, he does often
disclose their contumacy. For he does entise them by fair means before he
take upon him the office of a judge: and when he prevails not hereby, he
threatens: and when threatenings avail not or can take no place, then does he
sommon them to his judgment seat.

As concerning the king of Babylon, God had suffered Daniel to keep silence.
For the kings ingratitude and pride had stopped the way that Daniel could not
do the office and part of a teacher, as he was willing. The king of Babylon
therefore lacked a teacher. But God suddenly appeared as a judge by this writing,
of the which some thing is lightly touched, and more shall be said in place
convenient. Howsoever it is, we do see that king Beltsazar was not only
admonished by an outward sign, of his destruction that was at hand: but that
he was also wakened inwardly to know that he had to do with God. For ye
reprobate do flatter the^ selves often times, although God show him self to be
their judge. But he has dealt otherwise with king Beltsazar: for he would have
him to be terrified that he might be the more attentive to read the writing.
This terror (as I said before) was a preparation to repentance: but he failed
in the mid way, as we see many do, which tremble at the voice of God or at the
signs of his vengeance as soon as he admonishes them: but they vanish away
straight ways, so that they are not taught as they should be.

Like unto this is the example of Esau: Genesis 25.
for he despised the grace of God when he heard that he was deprived of the
heritage that was promised from God. He counted the blessing therefore but as a
fable, until he perceived that the matter was executed in deed: then began he
to lament, but altogether in vain. Such was the trouble of king Beltsazar. For
as we shall see afterward, even when Daniel did expound unto him the writing,
yet was he nothing moved with this matter, but adorned Daniel with royal
ornaments. But this was for an other end and purpose. For whiles his nobles
were moved and the thing was made open, God by this means did declare his
glory: and Darius also which took ye City with Cyrus his son in law,
understood that he got not ye victory by his own power or industry, neither
that he was so helped of the two Princes Gobria and Gabatha: but all the thing
was done by the providence of God. So then does God show, as it were in a
glass, that he is the revenger of his people, as he had promised seventy
years before.

7 Wherefore the king cried loud that they should bring the Astrologians, the
Chaldeans and ye soothsayers. And the king said to the wise men of Babel:
Whosoever can read this writing and declare me the interpretation thereof shall be
clothed with purple, and shall have a chain of gold about his neck, and
shall be the third ruler in the kingdom.

The Prophet declares that there was a redemy sought of king Beltsazar for his
sorrow. And hereby we gather again that his mind was so depely wounded, that
he perceived that he could not escape the hand of God: for he would not else
have called the wise men so suddenly in the mids of the feast. Furthermore when
the Prophet says: that he cried loud, hereby it appears that he was so
astonished that he forgot that he was a king: for it was not agreyng to his
dignity to cry so loud at the table. But God had shaken of all his pride:
therefore was he compelled to burst forth in an outcry, as though he were a mad
man.

But now let us see what was his remedy. He commanded that ye Chaldeans,
soothsayers, and Astrologians should be called. Hereby we gather how ready the
wits of men are to vanity, lies and deceites. Daniel should have been the
first among the Chaldeans: and that answer was worthy to be remembered when
he showed to the grandfather of king Beltsazar before, that he should be like
the wild beasts. Seeing then yt this prophecy was thus approved by the
success, ye authority thereof ought to have stand in force eue^ above a
thousand years. He was also daily in ye kings sight, yet was he despised, and
the king called for all the Chaldeans, Astrologia^s, Sothsayers, and Mages. In
deed the Sothsayers, Astrologia^s, and Chaldeans were in such high estimation,
that they might easily darken the fame of Daniel. For they counted it an
unworthy thing that a prisoner should be preferred before their Doctors, when
they now knew that they did excel in this glory amongst all people, that they
were only wise. Seeing then they would keep that estimation that they were, as
it were the counselors of God, it is no meruell though they despised a
stranger. Howbeit this thing has no color before God. For what can be
alleged for the defense of the wicked king? His grandfather was set forth as a
spectacle of Gods vengeance never to be forgotten, when he was cast forth of
the company of men, when he dwelt with the brute beasts, yea with the wild
beasts of the forest. And this could not seem to come by chance. For God had
admonished him hereof in a dream, and also made his Prophet an interpreter of
the oracle and vision: wherefore the fame of this matter ought to have been in
perpetual remembrance amongst the Chaldees.

The Nephue of king Nebuchadnezer forgetting this example, does rage against
the God of Israel, does pollute the vessels of the temple, and makes a
triumph with his Idols. But when God sets forth a sign of his judgment, he
calls for the Chaldees and Mages, and forgets Da: niel. Can this be
excused by any means? We see therefore that men's minds are over prone to the
crafts of Satan, and this proverb is true: the world would be deceived. And
this is worthy to be noted, because that many men now a days would gladly
pretend ignorance in the stead of a shield in doubtful matters. But they may
easily be answered, that they are willingly blinded, yea that they shut their
eyes against the manifest light. For if God did count king Beltsazar
inexcusable because he had a Prophet once offered unto him, what shall it
avail us at this day, to pretend these colorable excuses? Oh if I knew
certainly which were the will of God, I would straight ways obey. For God
daily cries openly and calls us unto him, and shows the way, but there is
none that answers, or follows, or at the least very feawe. Therefore we
ought diligently to consider the example of the king of Babylon, when we see
that he is very dilligent, and yet in the mean season does not seek God as he
ought. Wherefore? He wandreth about the bush, he sees that he is taken and
that he can not escape Gods judgment: but in the mean time he seeks comfort
at the Mages and Chaldees, that is to say, at the deceauers. For they had been
already found so to be once or twice, as we have seen before: and this ought
to have been published and known unto all.

We see then that king Beltsazar was blind, because he shut his eyes against
the light offered: as all the world is blind at this day almost, because it
does not wa^der in darkness, but when the light is offered it shuts the eyes,
as though it refused the grace of God, and would cast it self down wilfully:
And this is over common.

Now whereas the Prophet says: that the king promised to the wise me^, that
whoseuer could read the writing should have a golden chain: furthermore, he
should be clothed with purple, and should be the third ruler in the kingdom:
hereby it appears yt he was not sincerely touched with the fear of God. And
this resisting is worthy to be marked in the reprobate, because they fear the
judgment of God, and yet in the mean season the pride which is in their
hearts is not corrected, but it bursteth forth: even as we see in this king:
For, his knees did smite one an other: Furthermore, the joints of his loins
were loosed: and to conclude, there was no part of his body which did not
tremble. Therefore the king was as it were dead, because that fear had
oppressed all his senses. Yet see we in the mean time a secret pride lying hyd
in his heart, which burst forth afterward when he promised, that he should be
the third in his kingdom whosoever should interpret the writing. God had now
cast him down from the dignity of a king: yet will he set up others in dignity,
fighting as it were against God. What means this? We see hereby that
whenever the wicked are terrified, yet do they cherish within themselves a
secret pride and stubbernes, so that God can never bring the^ under. They do
show many signs of repentance, but in the mean space if any man do wisely
consider all their deeds and words, he shall find that which the Prophet here
speaks of king Beltsazar, that they do eue^ rage against God, and that they
will neither learn nor be obedient although they be utterly astonished. We
have seen this thing partly in this verse, and we shall see it more manifestly
in the end of the chapter.

Now forasmuch as belongs to the end of the verse, where he says: he shall
rule as the third in the kingdom, it is not sure whether he promise the third
part of the kingdom, or whether he says that he should be the third: for many
think that the Queen of who^ there shall be mention made hereafter, was the
wife of king Nebuchadnezer and the Grandmother of king Beltsazar.

8 Then came all the kings wysemen, but they could not read the writing, nor
show the king the interpretation.

9 Then was king Beltsazar greatly troubled, and his countenance was changed
in him, and his Princes were astonished.

Here Daniel declares that the king was deceived in his opinion, because he
trusted that there should be some interpretation of that writing amongst the
Mages, Astrologia^s, Chaldees, and Soothsayers: but there was none which could
read it. Therefore here he is punished for his ingratitude, because he counted
the Prophet of God nothing, when yet he knew that it was foretold unto his
grandfather that came to pass afterward, and that Daniel did always excel in
wisdom, so that there were proofs both many and sure enough of his calling.
Because then he had so contemned the incomparable benefit of God, here he is
destitute of counsel, and he sees that he called all the Chaldeans and
Astrologians in vain.

And Daniel says: that there was none which could read the writing or show
the interpretation thereof to the king. Because this seems absurd, the
Hebrew Doctors do labor much herein. Other think that the letters were set
out of order: and other think that the letters were changed, and other do
suppose that the characters or form of the letters were changed. But we have
said in an other place, that the Jews are bold in their diuinations as often as
they have not a sure reason. And we have no need of those conjectures: for it
is probable that the writing was either only set forth to the king and was hid
from all the Chaldees, or else they were so blinded, that in seeing they should
not see: as God does also often times show such astonishment even unto the
Jews. We see what he did pronounce by Esaias: Isay. 29.10.
your law shall be as a book that is shut up. If any man say, read this, he will
say the book is sealed, I can not: or let the book be opened and all ye
shall be as it were blind, yea they which do seem most expert above other,
shall say they are idiots, and not to be learned men. Therefore that which God
threatened to the Jews, and we know was fulfilled in them, and is fulfilled at
this day, because there is a covering cast over their eyes (as Paul says) that
they should be blind in the most clear light: 2. Cor. 3.14.
what marvel the^ is it if the same happen to the Chaldees, that they can not
read the writing? Therefore what need is there now to conjecture that the
letters were set out of order, or written in an other order, or some put under
other, that the word Tekel should go before, and then Mean Mean? These things
be to vain. This is certain, that God would admonish the king of his
destruction now at hand: also that his mind was troubled, not that he would
repent, but that his carelesnes should be inexcusable: and that whether he
would or not he should call for some remedy, because he knew he had to do with
God.

Now as concerning the writing, God should not have been free except it had
been in his will to speak sometime with one man alone, sometime with more.
Therefore he would that king Beltsazar should know this writing. In the mean
season all the Mages, as though they had been blind, could not read the
writing. As concerning the interpretation, it is no marvel if they were
doubtful in it. For God spoke darkly when he says: Mean, Mean, and then,
Tekel, that is, weighed: Peers, it is divided. Although those Mages had read
these four words an hundredth times, yet they could neither conjecture, nor
comprehend in reason what they meant. For that was an allegorical prophecy,
until there was an interpreter ordained from heaven. But forasmuch as
belongs to those letters, there is no marvel though the eyes of the Mages
were shut and closed up, because it pleased God so, which would sommon the king
to his judgment, as we have said.

The Prophet says: that the king was astonished, his countenance was
changed, his Princes were also troubled. The feeling of the judgment of God
must of necessity increase, lest the thing should have been hid. For (as we
shall see afterward) king Beltsazar himself was slain in that same night.
Cyrus entered when the Babylonians feasted and were carelessly given to their
daintyes and delicates. In that same dronkenes this so notable an example of
the judgment of God might have been straight way buried, except it had been
made manifest by many circumstances. Therefore the second time Daniel
repeateth, that the king was troubled after that he saw that there was no
counsel nor help in the Mages and Astrologians. Also he says: that his
Princes were astonished: because it was not meet that the king only should
have been troubled, but also ye whole Court, that ye fame might not only
spread through the City, but also to other Countries: because there is no
doubt but Cyrus was afterward taught of this prophecy, neither would he have so
loved Daniel, or treated him so honorably, but that he knew this thing.

10 Now the Queen by reason of the talk of the king and his Princes, came
into the banquet house, and the Queen spoke, and said: O king live for ever:
let not thy thoughts trouble thee, nor let thy countenance be changed.

11 There is a man in thy kingdom, in whom is the spirit of the holy Gods, and
in the days of thy father, light and understanding and wisdom like the
wisdom of the Gods was found in him: whom the king Nebuchadnezer thy father
the king I say, thy father made chief of the Enchaunters, Astrologians,
Chaldees, and Soothsayers.

Here Daniel declares, by what occasion he was brought before the king: that
he might read and interpret the writing. He says that this was done by the
Queen. Men doubt whether it was the wife of king Beltsazar, or his
grandmother: but it is probable that the woman was now old which speaks of
the time of king Nebuchadnezer. Albeit this conjecture peradventure is not very
certain: therefore it is better here to suspend the judgment hereof, then to
judge any thing rashly, but that we saw before that his wife satte at the table
with him. But we must diligently note that which we may surely gather by the
words of the Prophet, that is, that the kings ingratitude is cast him in the
teeth, that he did not send for Daniel among the Mages, Chaldees, and
Astrologians.

The holy man would not be counted in that order: and he were worthy that God
should spoil him of his prophetical spirit, if he had joined him self with
these deceauers: and it easily appears that he was separated from them. The
king Nebuchadnezer had made him ruler over all the Mages: but he would not use
this honor, because (as I have said) he should have deprived him self of the
gift of prophecy. For we must see what is lawful for us to do. We know that we
are prone to nothing more then to be drawn away with the entisementes of the
world, especially with ambition, which blinds us, and troubles all our
senses: and there is no greater pestilence. For when any man sees yt he can
either get some honor or some gain, he does not consider what is lawful or
what God permits, but is carried away as it were with a blind madness. The
same thing might have come unto Daniel, if he had not been holden back
through a hearty zele of true piety. But he refused that honor offered unto
him of king Nebuchadnezer. Therefore would he never be counted among the
Soothsayes, Astrologians, and such like deceauers, which did delude that nation
with their enchauntmentes. Hereof comes it that now the Queen says that
there is a certain man named Daniel. But the king was not blameles by this
pretense: because (as we have said) Daniel had gotten him a famous name for
many years, and God would note him forth with a sure note, that men's minds
should be bent upon him as upon an heavenly Angel. For as much then as king
Beltsazar knew not yt there was such a Prophet in his kingdom, it is the sign
of a shameful and beastly carelesnes. Therefore God would cast this in the
teeth of king Beltsazar by a woman, when she says: Let not thy thoughts
trouble thee. She calls upon him gently, because she saw him to be afraid:
But in the mean season she shows that he erreth over grossly, because he
wandereth about the bush and yet might soon come to his purpose, for as much
as God had given to his Prophet a light in his hand to lighten him, except he
desired willyngly to wander in darkness, as all the reprobate do.

Furthermore, we may see in this king ye common vice of all mankind, that is,
that none does run out of ye way, but he which either flattereth him self in
ignorance, or else that would have all light extinguished. Now, whereas ye
Queen says: That the spirit of the holy Gods is in Daniell, we have declared
in an other place what is men thereby. For it is no marvel though profane me^
do speak so, because they are not able to discern betwixt ye only God and
the Angels. Wherefore they called Gods indifferently what so ever came from God
or from the heavens. Hereby it comes then, that ye Queen calls the Angels
holy Gods, and in ye mean season she sets God but amongst the common sort.
Howbeit it is our part so to knowledge the only God, that he alone should
have the preeminence: and that the very Angels be brought under him, and that
there is no excellency neither in heaven nor in earth, which can obscure his
glory. For the Scripture labors to this end, to set God in most high degree:
and also that nothing should be of such excellency which should not give place
to his Majesty. But here we see how necessary it is that we be taught of the
one only essence of God: because from the beginning of the world men were
always persuaded of this, that there was some one most hye power: but
afterward they all vanished away in their own cogitations, so that they did
forget God: and moreover did join him with the Angels, so that all things
were confounded. Seeing then we see this, let us know that we have need that
the Scripture should be our guide and teacher to shine before us and to give us
light yt we imagine nothing of God, but so far as he calls us unto him by
his word and does willingly open him self unto us.

The Prayer.
Grant almighty God, seeing thou do continually call upon us by thy
Prophets, and do not suffer us to wander in the darkness of errors: grant
we beseech thee, that we may diligently hearken to thy voice, and that we may
show our selves willing to learn and to be obedient: especially seeing thou
do set forth unto us such a master and teacher, in whom all the treasures of
wisdom and knowledge are enclosed. Grant O Lord that we may so submit our
selves to thine only begotten sonnne, that we may continue in the right course
of our holy vocation, and that we may always bend our selves to that mark unto
the which thou do call us, whiles that we having overcome all the battles
of this life, may in the end attain to that blessed rest which is purchased
for us with the blood of the same thy son. So be it.

We have said before, that the king was admonished by the Queen, and that he
was convinced of ingratitude so plainly as might be, in that he had suffered
that excellent Prophet of God to be despised, whereas that worthy prophecy
whereof we have treated, ought to have been renowned, and published amongst all
me^, to maintain a perpetual authority to this holy man. Now that Daniel
says that the Queen entered into the house of the banquet: hereby we may take a
probable conjecture, that she was not the kings wife, but rather his
grandmother. I said that I will not contend about that matter, because in
doubtful things every man may freely use his own judgment. But these things
seem not to agree betwixt the^ selves, that the king did banquet with his wife
and concubines, and also that the Queen entered into the banquet house.
Therefore here we gather that she was called Queen for honor sake, who though
she had no power, yet was she in authority and favor. And the testimony of
Herodotus does also confirm this, which prayseth the wife of king
Nebuchadnezer, whom he calls Labynetus: He prayseth her for her singular
prudence, and he calls her Nitocris. Therefore these things will agree well
enough, that this matrone was absent from the feast, because it was not mete
for her age and gravity to feast with others which did delight in riotousnes.
She then entered into the banquet house and admonished the king of Daniel: and
now she adds the cause wherefore Daniel was ruler over the Mages, Soothsayers,
Diuiners and all the Chaldees.

12 Because a more excellent spirit and knowledge, and understanding (for he
did expound dreams and declare hard sentences, and dissolved doubts) were
found in him, even in Daniel whom the king named Beltsazar: now let Daniel be
called and he will declare the interpretation.

The Queen does here show the cause wherefore Daniel got that dignity, that
he might be counted the prince and master of all the wise men: Because (says
she) the excellency of the spirit was found in him: so yt he did interpret
dreams, and declare secrets, and open doubtful matters. Here she reckeneth
three gifts wherein Daniel was excellent, and so she proves that he passed all
the Mages, and that none was able to be compared unto him. The Mages in deed
did boast that they were interpreters of dreams, that they could disclose all
doubts and declare dark matters: but their vanity and foolish boastyng was
now already twice tried out. The Queen therefore does worthily attribute these
three things unto Daniel, to declare that he excels all others. Again she
reasons of his authority when she says, that he had a name given him of the
king. We have spoken of this name Beltsazar before: but for this purpose did
the Queen say that this name was given him, that king Beltsazar might know
that he was had in great estimation and honor with his grandfather: and
therefore is he named, because Beltsazar might have despised foreners: but
reason compelled him to yield somewhat to the judgment of his grandfather,
whom all men did know to have been an excellent man, although God for a time
did abase him, as we have seen, and Daniel does again repete it.

13 Then was Daniel brought before the king, and the king spoke and said unto
Daniel: art thou that Daniel which art of the children of the captivity of
Judah, whom my father the king brought out of Iewry?

14 Now I have heard of thee that the spirit of the holy Gods is in thee, and
that light and understanding and excellent wisdom is found in thee.

15 Now therefore wise men, and Astrologians have been brought before me, that
they should read this writing and show me the interpretation thereof: but they
could not declare the interpretation of the thing.

16 The^ heard I of thee that thou could show interpretations, and dissolve
doubts. Now if thou can read the writing and show me the interpretation
thereof, thou shall be clothed with purple and shall have a chain of gold
about thy neck, and shall be the third ruler in the kingdom.

Here the king does not acknowledge his carelesnes, but does ask Daniel
without shame, and does ask him as a captive: Art thou that Daniel of the
captivity of Judah, who^ my father carried away? He seems here to speak
conte^ptuously, that he might briue Daniel to flatter him like a bond slave:
Although we may read this sentence as though Beltsazar should inquire by manner
of admiration: art thou that Daniel? J have in deed heard of thee: He had
heard of late and regarded him not, but now when extreme necessity presses
him, he gives some honor to Daniel. I have heard therefore (says he) that
the spirit of the Gods is in thee, that thou can dissolve doubts, and
disclose secret things. As concerning the spirit of the Gods, we have said
before, that king Beltsazar after the common manner of the heathen, makes no
difference betwixt God and the Angels: for those miserable men could not extol
God as it was convenient, so that the Angels should be as it were under his
feet. But yet this manner of speech does show that men were never so brutish,
but they did ascribe unto God every thing that was excellent: like as we see
even of profane writers all such things to be called the good gifts of the
Gods, which did serve for the commodity of men, or had in them selves any
excellency or worthynes. Thus the Chaldees called the gift of understanding or
knowledge which was rare and excellent, the spirit of the Gods, because they
did know that men did not atteine nor get unto them selves the gift of prophecy
by their own industry and diligence: but that this is a heavenly gift.
Therefore they are compelled to give God his praise. But because the true God
was unknown unto them, they spoke intricatly, and (as I said) they called the
Angels Gods, because in ye darkness of their ignorance they could not discern
who was the true God. How soever it be, Beltsazar here declares in what
estimation he had Daniel.

But he affirms that he has this thing only of other men's report: whereby
his dulnes is again declared. For he ought to have knowledge of the Prophet by
trial and experience: but when he is content only with the bare rumor, hereby
does it appear how proudly he despised the teacher that God offered, and yet
would neither consider nor acknowledge his own wickedness. Howbeit God does
thus oftentimes wring out a confession from the wicked, whereby they should
condemn themselves, although they would most gladly anoyde it.

To the same effect also tends that which he says: all the wise men and
Southsayers, and Enchaunters were brought forth before me, which should read
the writing unto me, and open the interpretation: but (says he) they could
not. For God did punish him when in his extreme necessity he showed that all
the Chaldees and Soothsayers, in whom yet he put his whole trust, did nothing
profit him. Seeing then his hope failed him, hereby he acknowledges that he was
deceived when he nourished the Mages and Soothsayers, and thouht that he was
well defended with counsel, so that he had them with him. In the mean
season, that the holy Prophet was rejected, it was intolerable unto God, and
that worthily. Beltsazar does confess this, although he does not think it.
Therefore have I said that the confession was not free nor voluntarily, but
violently extorted and wrong forth by the secret power of God.

And he does promise also unto Daniel the same which he had promised before
unto the Mages: Thou shall be clothed with purple (says he) if thou read this
writing, and thou shall have a chain of gold about thy neck, and thou shall
be the third in my kingdom. But even then was his kingdom at an end: and yet
does he offer this dignity unto Daniel without all care. Whereby it appears
that the terror which God had stricken his heart wythall, was gone and
vanished: like as men taken with a phrenesy are meruelously unquiet, and so can
have nothing certain, and they will so leap up in the midest of their fear,
as though they would clime to the heaven or fly in the air. Even so this
tyrant although he tremble at the judgment of God, yet does he retain a
secret pride in his heart, and imagines that he shall be a king for ever,
whiles he does thus promise unto others both riches and honors.

17 Then Daniel answered and said before the king: keep thy gifts to thy
self, and give thy rewards to an other: notwithstanding I will read the
scripture to the king, and open the interpretation thereof unto him.

Here Daniel does first of all refuse the rewards offered. We do not read that
he did so before: no he seemed to embrace that which was given him of the king
Nebuchadnezer. What is the cause of this diversity? for it is not like that the
Prophet changed his mind or purpose. What is the cause then that he was
content heretofore to receive honor of ye king Nebuchadnezer, and now refuses
the honor offered? Again, here is an other doubt. For in the end of ye
chapter we shall see that he was clothed with purple, and also it was publicly
proclaimed by decree, that he should be third in the kingdom. Wherefore it
seems that either the Prophet had forgotten himself when he did receive ye
purple which he had so boldly refused: or else what is the cause why he did so,
and did not deny afterward to wear this princely apparel? For the first, I
doubt not but that he would speak more roughly to that wicked and desperate
Beltsazar: but because that there remained yet some goodness in king
Nebuchadnezer, and he had good hope of him, therefore did he treat him more
gently. As for king Beltsazar, it was of necessity that he should be more
roughly dealt withal, because he was come to all extremities. I doubt not but
that this was the cause of the difference. For the Prophet went forward
constantly in his course: but it was his duty to put a difference betwixt the
diversity of the persons: and because there was greater pride, obstinacy, and
stubbornes in the king Beltsazar, therefore he declares that he gives unto him
less honor then he did unto his Grandfather. Furthermore the time of the
captivity and subjection was now at an end, in respect whereof he did before
reverence the Monarchy of the Chaldees.

As concerning the contrariety which appears betwixt his answer and his
fact (whereof we shall speak afterward) it ought not to seem strange unto
us, if the Prophet did at the first testify that he did not regard the kings
rewards, and yet did not contend over behemently in the refusal, lest he
might seem to do it craftily for the avoiding of present peril. He would show
therefore a great boldness in both twain. That he begins his preface with the
refusal of the kings gifts, he knows that the kingdom is but for a
moment: Again that he receives the purple and other honors, he does it
because he might have suffered blame if he had utterly refused it: for it had
been a sign of fearefulnes, which might also have been suspected of treason.

The Prophet therefore declares that he does boldly despise all that dignity
that king Beltsazar offered him (for he was now as a man half dead) and does
in the mean season show himself not to fear any peril at all. For ye kings
destruction was at hand, and the City either the same hour or within few
hours after was taken. Daniel therefore does not refuse this purple, to
declare yt he feared not death if need so constrained.

He might have been more safe in his secret places, if he had been amongst the
common people and without the Court: Again if he had been counted as one of ye
seruau^ts, he might have been in less danger. When he then doubts not to
receive the purple, he shows himself to be without all fear. In the mean
time there is no doubt but that he would beat down the foolish arrogance of
the king, when he says: take thy gifts to thy self and give thy rewards
unto others, I care not for them. When he despises the kings liberality in
such sort, he does it doubtless to correct the kings pride wherewyth he was
puffed, or at the least he would wound and prick his conscience that he might
feel Gods judgment, whereof Daniel should afterward be both a preacher and a
witness.

18 O king, hear thou: The most high God gave unto Nebuchadnezer thy father a
kingdom, and majesty, and honor, and glory.

19 And for the majesty that he gave him, all people, nations, and languages
trembled, and feared before him: he put to death whom he would: he smote whom
he would: whom he would he set up, and whom he would he put down.

20 But when his heart was puffed up, and his mind hardened in pride, he was
deposed from his kyngly throne, and they took his honor from him.

Before that Daniel does rehearse the writing, and before he gives the
interpretation thereof, he admonishes the king of the cause of this wonder. For
it had not been mete to have begone with the reading, to have said [mene mene]
as we shall see in the end of the Chapter: the king could not so have profited
by such a short manner of speech. But here he declares that it is no marvel
though God did stretch forth his hand or put forth ye likeness of a hand which
did write the kings destruction, because the king had obstinatly provoked Gods
wrath. We see then why Daniel begins with this history, that Nebuchadnezer
was a great Monarch, that he had subdued the whole world unto him, that all men
feared his countenance: again, that he was cast down from the throne af his
kingdom, even for this purpose, to make it more plain that Beltsazar did not
trespass of ignorance, because that he ought soberly and modestly to have
behaved himself, considering that notable and marvelous example of his
Grandfather. But because this domestical admonition did nothing profit him,
Daniel declares that the time is now at hand when God will show his wrath upon
him, even by a fearful wonder. This is the sum. But as touching the words,
he says first of all, that there was given to king Nebuchadnezer from God an
Empire, a majesty, honor, and glory: as if he should say, he was magnified and
adorned of God, that he should be the Monarch of the whole world.

We have said before, and Daniel will repete it again in many places, that
kingdoms do not come unto men by chance and fortune, Romans 13 1.
but from God, as Paul says: that there is no power but of God. And God will
have his providence to appear after a special manner in the distribution of
kingdoms. For although God govern ye whole world, and things which seem
most small in the government of mankind are ruled by his hand: yet his
special providence does appear most evidently in kingdoms and Empires. And
Daniel to confirm this doctrine, adds: that for the gaeat authority that God
gave him, all men did tremble before him. Whereby he signifies that the glory
of God is imprinted in kings persons so long as he will have the^ to reign.
This can not be outwardly seen, but the matter it self declares it plainly,
that kings are armed with authority from God, in that they are able thus to
retain under their hand and at their appointment, great multitudes of men: for
amongst mortal men, every one desires to be the chief. How does it then
come to pass, seeing ambition is so fixed in all men's hearts, that many
thousands will submit themselves unto one, and suffer themselves to be ruled,
yea that they can suffer at the hands of such many injuries? What is the cause
hereof, but that God does arm with the sword and power, whom he will have to
be excellent in the world? This reason therefore is diligently to be noted that
the prophet says, that all did tremble at ye sight of king Nebuchadnezer,
because God had made him great, that is to say, because God would have him
excellent above others in the world.

God has many causes and those many times most secret, why he does extol him
and cast down an other. Howbeit this must we know without all doubt, that no
kings come to authority unless GOD lend them his hand, and still stablishe them
therein: and when he will take away their power, they fall spedely: not that
there comes anything by chance in these mutations and chaunges, but because
that God, as is written in the book of Job, Job. 12.18
does loose their girdles whom he had before girded.

Then it follows: whom he would kill he killed, whom he would he did smite
Some think that the abuse of the kings power is here noted. But I had rather
take it simply, that Nebuchadnezer had authority to cast down whom he would,
and to exalt whom he would that it was in his power to give life and to take
away life. I do not therefore refer these words to tyrannical lust, as
though Nebuchadnezer had murdered many innocents, had shed ma^s blood without
reason, or had spoiled many of their possessions, and had made other rich or
raised them to honors: I do not take it so: but that it was in his power
either to kill or to give life, to set up or to cast down.

To be short, me think that Daniel does here describe what power kings have,
which may thus freely deal with their subjects: not because it is lawful,
but because none dare speak against it. For whatsoever pleases the king, all
me^ are compelled to agree thereunto, or at the least no man dare stir
against it. Seeing that kings then have such liberty, Daniel declares that
this king Nebuchadnezer was not raised hereunto by his own industry, wisdom,
or counsel, or by his good fortune: but he says that he gate this great
Empire, and that he was terrible unto all, because God had adorned him with
that glory. In the mean time yet it behooves all kings to regard, what is
lawful and what GOD permits them to do. For as they are kings, so must
they consider also that they must once give accomptes to the most high king. We
can not gather hereby then that kings are constitute of God to be lawles, to
live without order and to do what they list. But the Prophet (as I have said)
speaks of the power that they have. And seeing that kings have power of death
and life over their subjects, he says that the life of them al was in king
Nebuchadnezers hand.

Then he says: When his heart was lifted up, then was he cast down from the
throne of his kingdom, and they spoiled him of his dignity. He prosecuteth
that which he began. His purpose is to declare to king Beltsazar, that GOD for
a space does suffer their pride which do forget him when they have gotten high
authority. Therefore says he: king Nebuchadnezer thy grandfather was an hye
Monarch: this did he not atteine of himself, neither yet did he retain the
Empire and continue therein, but as he was stayed and vpholden by the hand of
God. Now the tra^sformation of him into a boast, was a notable document, that
their pride can not always be suffered, which are unthankful unto God, and
do not acknowledge that they do reign by his benefit. When his heart therefore
was lifted up (says he) and his mind was set upon pride, there came a sudden
change. Hereby should thou have learned O king, and all his posterity, to
deceive your selves no longer with pride: but rather the example of this thy
forefather should strike thy heart. Wherefore this writing is set before thine
eyes, whereby thou may understand that both thy kingdom and thy life are
even now at an end.

And this sentence is to be noted, that Daniel says: That his heart was
hardened in pride. For he gives us to understand, that he was not puffed up
suddenly with a light folly, as vain men many times use to be when there is
no cause, and no inward motion of the mind goes before: but he would utter
unto us a greater matter, that this pride had now been nourished in his heart
along time: as though he should say, that he was not taken with a sudden
vain motion, but that he had so long bent him self upon pride, that he was
obstinate and hardened therein.

The Prayer.
Grant almighty God that seeing every one of us have our state limited, we may
be well contented with our place and condition, and that when thou will humble
us, we may willingly submit our selves unto thee, and suffer our selves to be
governed by thee, and that we may never desire that height that should cast us
down headlong to destruction. Again, we beseech thee to grant, that every one
of us in our vocation may behave our selves so modestly, that thou may
always have thine high authority amongst us. Furthermore, that we may seek
nothing but to bestow our labor and travail to serve thee and our brethren to
whom we are joined, that thy name may thus be glorified in us all, through
Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

21 And he was driven from the sons of men, and his heart was made like the
beasts, and his dwelling was with the wild Asses: they fed him with grass
like Oxen, and his body was wet with the dew of heaven, till he knew that the
most hye God did rule over the kingdom of me^, and that he appoints over it
whom so ever he pleases.

This verse needs no long exposition, because Daniel does repete only that
which he had written before, that his grandfather Nebuchadnezer, though he
were not changed into a beast, yet at the least he was cast forth of ma^s
company, and that he was deformed throughout all his body, and that he him
self abhorred man's company and would rather dwell with brute beasts. This was
a horrible example, especially in such a great monarch, and worthy to be left
in memory to the posterity from hand to hand even to a thousand generatio^s,
if that Monarch had endured so long. But that his nephew had so soon forgotten
this lesson, hereby is he worthily reproved of shameful security and
carelesnes. This then is the cause why Daniel does again rehearse the history:
He was cast forth from the sons of men (says he) and his heart was like the
beasts, that is to say, he was destitute of reason and judgment for a time.
And we know that this is the chief difference betwixt men and beasts, that men
do understand and judge: but the brute beasts are only carried by their
senses. God therefore showed a terrible example upon this king when he thus
spoiled him of reason and understanding.

He says: That his habitation was with the wild Asses, which before had dwelt
in that palace which was known to all the world, from whence all the people of
the East did at that time receive their laws. Therefore seeing he was wont to
be worshipped for a God, this was a terrible judgment, that afterward he dwelt
with the wild beasts. And whereas now they fed him with grass like a
bullock, which before had all manner of delicates at his pleasure, and was wont
to be fed so dayntely as the abundance of his kingdom would bear: especially
seeing the East parts are more delicate then all other, and that Babylon was
also the mother of all riotousnes: seeing the condition of the king was so
changed, all men might know that this was not done by fortune, but by the rare
and the singular judgment of God. Afterward he adds that which he spoke
before: That his body was watered with the rain of heaven, until he knew that
the high God did rule in the kingdom of men.

Here is again expressed the end of his punishment, that Nebuchadnezer should
know that he was made king by Gods appointment, and that no earthly kings can
and but as God stays them by his hand and power. But they do think them
selves to be set safe and sure from all chaunges and misfortunes. And though
they set forth for a show in their titles these words, that they do reign by
the grace of God: yet do they despise all that is of God and God him self, for
they take unto them selves the glory of God. This is the madness of all kings,
as may be gathered of these words. For if king Nebuchadnezer had been
persuaded of this, that kings are set in place by God, and that they do depend
only of his good pleasure, and that they stand or faull as he decrees: there
had been no need of this punishment, as is plainly expressed in these words.
Therefore he shut forth God from the government of the world. And this is the
commune manner of all earthly kings, as I have said before. They will all (I
grant) profess otherwise: but the holy ghost does not regard such feyned
protestations, as they term them.

Wherefore in the person of king Nebuchadnezer, the dronken presumption of all
kings is set forth unto us as in a glass, that they think in deed that they
stand by their own power, and they exempt them selves from the government of
God, as though he did not sit as judge in the heavens. It was necessary
therefore that Nebuchadnezer should be humbled, until that he did know that
God reigns upon the earth, because that by commune opinion they do shut him
up in the heaven, as though he were contented with his rest, and had no care
for mankind.

In the end is added: and whom he pleases, he sets over it. Which
expresses more plainly that which he had spoken darkly, how that
Nebuchadnezer being daunted, tamed, and brought down by severe punishment, did
know that God reigns in the earth. For when earthly Princes behold them
selves so defended with their Gardes, so to abound with riches that they can
with a word gather great armies, when they see also that all men are afraid of
them, they think that God has no more authority over them, and they can not
perceive how any change can come unto the^: as it is spoken of all the proud
persons in ye Psalm: Psalm. 10.6.
and as Isaiah Isa. 28.15.
says to ye same purpose: Though the scourge passover, or the floude ouerflow
the whole earth, yet shall none evil touch us: As though they should say, all
though God should thunder and lighten from the heaven, yet shall we be safe and
sure from all discommoditie and danger. Thus do kings persuade them selves.
Wherefore, then do they begin to know God to be the king of the earth, when
they do perceive that it stands in his hand and pleasure to cast down whom he
has before raised: and again to exalte the humble and the abject: so that
this is the explication of the former sentence.

22 And thou his son Beltsazar have not humbled thy heart, though thou have
known all this.

Here Daniel declares to what end he has rehearsed that which we have heard
hitherto of ye punishment of king Nebuchadnezer. Beltsazar ought to have been
so moved with that example in his own family, that he should have submitted
him self unto God. Now it is credible that his father Euilmerodah had also
forgotten that punishment: yet because he did not deal so dissolutly against
God, neither did he reproach the true and sincere Religion, God did spare the
miserable tyrant which did reteyne him self in some mediocritie. But as
concerning his nephew Beltsazar, he was altogether intolerable: therefore God
strikes kim. This is it that the Prophet now teaches: Thou art his son
(says he). He urges him with this circumstance, because he neded not to fetch
an example far from strange nations, when he might know at home that thing
which was mete and necessary to be known. And he does also amplify the crime
after an other sort, when he says: Thou did know all this. For men use to
pretend ignorance for a shield, when they extenuate their faults and excuse
their crimes: but they which wittingly and willingly do offend, want all
excuse. The Prophet therefore co^uinceth this king of manifest contumacy: as
though he should say, that he had provoked Gods wroth of set purpose, because
he was not ignorant how great and how horrible a judgment does belong to all
proud persons, in that he has such a wonder full notable example in his
grandfather, which should always have been in his remembrance.

23 But have lift thy self up against the Lord of heaven, and they have
brought the vessels of his house before thee, and thou and thy princes, thy
wives and thy concubines have drunk wine in them, and thou have praised the
Gods of silver, and gold, of brass, iron, wood, and stone, which neither see,
neither hear, neither understand: and the God in whose hand thy breath is and
all thy ways, him have thou not glorified.

The Prophet does prosecute his purpose, and confirms that which I have
spoken, that king Betsazar would receive no doctrine, but was willyngly blinded
at Gods judgment. Thou have lifted thy self up (says he) against the Lord of
heaven. If he had proudly raised him self up against men, that had been a
fault worthy of punishment: but when he provoke God of set purpose, this
arrogance could in no wise be suffered. And he expresses ye manner of his pride
when he says, that he commanded the vessels of the temple to be brought
forth, and that he did drink in them. Now ye pollution was a wicked sacrilege.
But Beltsazar was not content with that wickedness, that he had abused the holy
vessels to his rioteousnes and filthy dronkenes, and that he had set them
before his concubines and harlots: but he adds a more horrible reproach and
despite against God: for he praised his Gods of silver, of gold, and of brass,
of iron, of wood, and of stone, which have no sense at all. This was not spoken
of before: but because Daniel does here bear the person of a teacher, he does
not speak it so shortly as he did before. For when he said in the beginning of
this chapter, that Beltsazar celebrated this filthy feast, he was an
historiographer: but now is he a doctor and a teacher. Thou (says he) have
praised the Gods made of corruptible substance, which neither see, neither
hear, nor understand, and thou have defrauded the living God of his honor, in
whose hand thy life is, upon whom thou do depend, and of whom also thou have
what soever thou boastest upon. Seeing then thou did so despise the living
God which was so merciful unto thee, how foul and shameful is this
ingratitude? We see therefore how severely the Prophet does here rebuke the
wicked tyrant for his sacrilege, for his outrageous pride, and rash boldness,
and also for his shameful ingratitude against God.

24 Then was the palm of the hand sent from him and has written this writing.

In the word [bedain] then, there is an emphasis, signifiyng that the full time
of the vengeance of God, or declaration thereof was now come. Wherefore Daniel
declares that God did use long sufferance toward the king Beltsazar, and did
defer his punishment of long time: but now he came forth as a judge, and sat
upon his judgment seat when his pride was at full, and his wickedness was in no
wise tolerable. We see therefore that this must be read with an emphasis, as
though he should say: thou can not here complain of the swiftnes of thy
punishment, as though God had done it before the time. Thou can not say, that
God was over hasty in this punishment. Consider and weigh with thy self how
many ways and how long space thou have provoked his wrath. And concerning this
last fact, thou wast come to the full measure of iniquity when this hand
appeared unto thee. God therefore now in due time draws thee forth to
punishment, because he has long suffered thee and thy horrible sins. After
this long sufferaunce what remained, seeing thou do so proudly set thy self
against him, but that he should bring thee down, because thou art utterly
desperate, and no amendment is to be hoped? And lest Beltsazar should demand
farther from whence this hand comes: he says, that it proceeds from the
presence of God, as a witness of his vengence from heaven, that thou should
not think it to be a vain vision: but should know that God by this figure
does declare himself to be displeased with thy sins: and because thou art
now come to the extremity of thy wickedness, thy spedy punishment is also fallen
upon thee. And this writing was noted, says he: as though he should say, that
the king Beltsazar is not deceived, because this is the hand of God that is
sent from his presence, that it might be a sure witness of his vengeance.

25 And this is the writing which he has written, mean, mean, tekel, vpharsin.

26 This is the interpretation of the thing, mean, God has numbered thy
kingdom and has finished it.

27 Tekel, thou art weighed in the balance and art found to light.

28 Peers, thy kingdom is divided and given to the Medes and Persians.

Here Daniel does expound those four words which were written on the wall.
The king could not read them, either because he was astonished, or because God
had troubled all his senses, and had, as it were dawbed up his eyes. And the
same may we say also of the Mages and Soothsayers. They might have read, if
they had not been blinded by God. Daniel does first of all therefore rehearse
those four words, mean, mean, tekel, vpharsin. Then does he interpret the^.
One word is twice rehearsed, Mean. Some do thus divide it, that both the years
of the life of ye king, and also the time of the kings raygne was numbered. But
this subtilty seems not substantial. Therefore I think that this word was
added twice for confirmation: as though the Prophet should say, that the number
was now fulfilled. For in accomptes it is easy to fail, as the proverb is.
Wherefore that Beltsazar might understand that his life and his kingdom was
now at an end, God does affirm that the number is full and perfect: as though
he should say, that there should not be added one minute of an hour to the
term appointed. And thus does Daniel him self interpret the same God (says
he) has numbered thy kingdom, that is, God has appointed and determined an
end of thy kingdom, so that it must needs come to an end because the time is
accomplished.

Although here God speak but to one king, and the writing was set before his
eyes: yet may we gather a general doctrine hereof, that God has determined a
certain time to all kingdoms. Job. 14.5.
The scripture testifies the same of every one of our lives. If God then have
appointed to every man his days, much more may it be said of public Empyres
and kingdoms, because they are of greater importance. Therefore let us know
that not only kings do live or die, but that kingdoms are changed also by
Gods appointment (as is said before) and that they are so set up by God, that
he appoints them also their certain end. And hereof should we take comfort
when we see tyrauntes deal so outragiously that there is no measure in their
lusts and cruelly. When then they do so rage as though they would mix heaven
and earth together, let us remember this doctrine: that their years are
numbered. God knows how long it is expedient for them to reign: he can not be
deceived. For unless he did know it to be profitable for the church and his
elect that ye tyrants should rage for a time, doubtless he would straight ways
bridle them and pluck them down: but because he has appointed the number
from the beginning, let us know that the full time of vengeance is not yet
come, as long as he suffers the^ to abuse so licenciously their rule and
power granted unto them of God.

Now follows the exposition of the word, tekel. Because thou wast weighed in
the balance (says he) and wast found faulty. Hear Daniel declares that God
does so order his judgments, as if he did hold the balance in his hand. It
is a similitude borrowed of the custom of men. We know that the use of the
balance is, that there should be a certain measure and an equal distributio^
in things. So also is it written that God does all things by weight and
measure, because he does nothing confusedly, Sap. 11.21
but with such measure, that there can be neither more nor less, as the common
saying is. For this cause Daniel says: that Beltsazar was weighed in the
balaunce, that is to say, that God was not hasty in punishing of him, but did
execute that punishment justly, after his usual manner and continual order:
because he was found faulty, that is, because he was light and of no weight: As
though he should say, thou supposest that thine honor should be spared, and
because all men do reverence thee, thou think thy self worthy of honor.
Thou art deceived (says he) for the judgment of God is otherwise. God does
not use the common balance, but he has waightes of his own, and thereby thou
art found faulty, that is, nothing worth, a man of no reputation. There is no
doubt but the tyrau^t was greatly moved with these words: but because his end
was come, he was forced to suffer the voice of the preacher. And undoubtedly
God did bridle his rage because he should not rise up against Daniel.

In the end is added this word [Peres] for the word [Vpharsin], that his
kingdom is divided, that is to say, by the Medes and the Persians. I doubt not
but that God did signify by that word the destruction of the Monarchy which was
at hand. When he says therefore [Vpharsin] and they shall divide, he means
that this Monarchy can continue no longer, because he will divide it and break
it asunder. But the Prophet does allude very aptly to ye division which was
made betwixt the Medes and the Persians: and so was their shame increased: for
the Babylonians were compelled to serve two sundry Lords.

It is a great grief when any people has gotten dominion far and large, and
being afterward overcome, should be compelled to bear the yoke of one Lord:
but when there be two Lords, this increases the grief. So therefore Daniel
does show, that the vengeance of God shall not be simple when the Monarchy of
Babylon is scattered abroad: and this shall also increase the greatness of the
punishment, that the Medes and the Persians shall rule over them. But true it
is that the City was taken by the strength and industry of Cyrus: but because
Cyrus did give so great honor to his father in law, that he did willingly admit
him to the society of the kingdom, therefore the Medes and the Persians are
said to have divided betwixt them that kingdom, although there was properly no
division of the kingdom. Cyrus afterward, as he was ravished with an
insatiable ambition and covetousness, was drawn forth into other wars. But
Darius, who was above 60. years old, (as we shall see afterward) did remain
quietly at home. He was of ye Medes, as is well known. For if we shall believe
many historiographers, his sister the mother of Cyrus was, as it were banished
into Persia, because there was a prophecy of the greatness of Cyrus. Who because
his Gra^dfather had given him out to be destroyed, did afterward revenge this
injury: yet not so cruelly but that he spared his life. He was content that he
should remain in some honor, and made him a governor. And after this his son
raygned over the Medes, and Cyrus suffered it willingly. Then Cyrus married his
daughter. So what for kindred, and what for ye love of this new affinity, he was
wylling to have him pertaker of his Empire. In this sense does Daniel speak of
ye division of ye Monarchy to be at hand: because the Medes and the Persians
should divide it betwixt them. 29 Then at the commandment of Beltsazar, they
cloched Daniel with purple, and put a chain of gold about his neck, and made
a proclamation concerning him, that he should be the third ruler in the
kingdom.

It is marvel that the king gave such commandment when he was thus roughly
handled of the Prophet. It appears that his heart did then fail him. For
before he would have raged without measure, and would have commanded this holy
Prophyt of God to have been put to death. How then does it come to pass that
he commands him to be appareled like a king, and causes him to be proclaimed
the third in the kingdom? Some think that this was done because the laws of
the kings of Babylon were in great reverence, yea their words were sure, and
whatsoever they spoke was unchangeable and inmoueable. They think therefore
that this came of the regard of his honor, that king Beltsazar did perform his
promise. But I suppose that he was first astonished when he heard the Prophet,
and so became like a block or a stone: howbeit I think that he did this for
his own safety. For he might have been brought into contempt with his nobles
if he had not showed some courage. Wherefore that he might show himself not to
be moved, he commanded Daniel thus to be adorned, as though that threatening
had been of no force. He did not despise that which had been spoken by the
Prophet: but he would have his Princes persuaded and all them which were at the
feast, that God did threaten only to make the^ afraid, but not to execute so
grievous punishment. And the kings when they are most afraid, are yet very
ware of this always that they show no sign of their fear: for they think
that their authority should thereby decay. Wherefore, that he may keep his
authority with his subjects, he would seem altogether careless and without all
fear. I doubt not but that this was the devise of this tyrant, when he
commanded Daniel to be adorned with purple and princely ornaments.

30 The same night was Beltsazar the king of the Chaldees slain: and Darius of
the Medes received the kingdom when he was 52. years old.

Here Daniel shows briefly that this prophecy was fulfilled the same night:
as we have said before, that there was then a solemn feast, because it was a
feastiuall day, which the Babylonians did yearly keep: and by this occasion
ye City was betrayed by two gouerners, Gobria and Gabatha, for so they are
named of Xenophon. And in this place do the Hebrew rabbines utter their
impude^cy and ignorance, as they are bold to babble after their manner, of
things unknown. For they say that the king was slain, because that one of
the Guard heard the voice of the Prophet, and therefore would execute that
judgment of God: as though forsooth, that the judgment of God should depend
of one profane man's will or pleasure. Wherefore passing over such childish
trifles, we must remember the truth of the history, that Beltsazar was taken in
his feast, when he had made himself dronken and rioted with his noble men and
concubines. In the mean time we may observe the marvelous mercy of God toward
the Prophet. For it was not possible but that he was in danger amongst the
rest. For he was clothed with purple: and within an hour after ye Medes and
the Persians entered ye City. In that tumult he could not have escaped, if God
had not covered him with the shadow of his hand. We see therefore how God
cares for his, and delivers them from most great dangers, as though he did
draw them forth of the grave. And there is no doubt but that this holy Prophet
was sore troubled in that tumult: for he was no stock. But it was necessary
that he should be thus exercised, that he might know ye God was the keeper of
his life, and that he should therefore prepare himself more readily to serve
him, because he did see that there could be nothing better then to cast all his
cares upon God.

Daniel says further: that this kingdom was translated unto the king of the
Medes, whom he calls Darius, but Xenophon calls him Cyaxares. Howbeit this
is certain, that Babylon was taken by the power and industry of Cyrus, for he
was a valiant warrior, and was in great estimation: yet is there no mention
made of him in this place. But whereas Xenophon does rehearse, that Cyaxares
(who is here called Darius) was the father in law of Cyrus, and that he was in
great honor and authority, it is no marvel though Daniel do name the king
himself: because Cyrus was content with the power, the praise, and the renown
of the victory, and he was well content that his father in law should have the
title, whom he saw to be aged and worn. But this is uncertain, whether this
were the son of Astyages and so ye uncle of Cyrus or no. For many
historiographers consent together in this, that Astiages was the Gra^dfather of
Cyrus, and that he married his daughter to Cambyses: because he had learned of
the Astrologians that the child that should be borne of her, should be ye Lord
of all Asia. And they tell many things beside, how he commanded Cyrus in his
infancy to be slain: but because these things are uncertain, I do pass over
them. Me think this is like to be true, that Darius was both uncle and father
in law to Cyrus. Although, if we do believe Xenophon, he was not yet married when
Babylon was woonne. For this his father in law or uncle, being unable to deal
with the Babylonians and Assyrians, called Cyrus to aid him. Howsoever it is,
this that the Prophet says, may agree well enough, that Darius the king of the
Medes received the kingdom: because that Cyrus, although he was more mighty
and of greater authority, yet wyllingly yielded unto him to be the king of
Babylon: and so was he king but by title only over the Chaldees.

The Prayer.
Grant almighty God, that that example of thy wrath which thou have once
showed against all the proud, may be profitable unto us at this day, and that
we being admonished by the punishment of this one man, may learn humbly and
modestly to behave our selves, and never to desire any such dignity as may
displease thee: but that we may so continue in our own state, as we may serve
thee, and may sanctify and glorify thy holy name: that we desire nothing
separate from thee: and that we may so bear thy yoke in this world, and suffer
our selves to be governed of thee, that we may come in the end to that blessed
rest and enheritaunce of thy heavenly kingdom, which thou have prepared for
us, and which is purchased for us by the blood of thine only begotten Son.
Amen.

Chap. 6. The Text.
IT pleased Darius to set over the kingdom an hundredth and twenty governors,
which should be over the whole kingdom.

2 And over these three rulers, of whom Daniell was one, that the governors
might give accomptes unto them, and the king should have no damage.

HEre may we behold again how God always cared for his Prophet, and that not
so much for his own sake only or any private respect, as for that some
comfort might come to the miserable exiles and captives by his means and
diligence. For God purposed to reach forth his hand by Daniel. And we may call
him worthily the hand of God, that stre^gthned the Jews: For it is certain
that the Persians as they were a barbarous people of their own nature, would
have been no more gentle Lords unto the Jews, had not God set up his servant
Daniel as a mean to succor them.

This then is to be noted, that Daniel was chosen one of the three gouerners by
Darius. He had been now the third under king Beltsazar, though it were but for
a moment: yet this might have brought him into hatred with the new king,
because he had such honor given him. But it is very probable that Darius was
admonished of those matters which Daniel has declared before: that is to say,
that a hand did appear upon the wall, that Daniel did declare the writing, and
that he was as an Herald sent from the heavens to pronounce the destruction of
king Beltsazar. For unless this report had been brought to Darius, he could
never have gotten such authority with Darius. For Darius had in his army very
many: and we know that when one is a co^querour by the sword, he has many
hungery men about him, for all men are desirous of the spoil. Wherefore Darius
would never have taken unto him this man being a stranger and a captive, to
set him up in such honor and power, unless he had known him assuredly to be
the Prophet of God and his Heralde in declaring the destruction of the Monarchy
of Babylon.

And hereby we gather that this was the work of God, that he should be
amongst the chief gouerners and the third in the kingdom, whereby he might
be more easily known unto Darius. For if Daniel had been cast down by king
Beltsazar, he had layne unknown at home: but when he sees him in princely
apparel, he enquireth who he is. The^ he hears by what means he came to so
great honor, and so knows him to be the Prophet of God, and appoints him to
be one of the three gouerners. Thus do we see Gods providence, whereby he does
not only preserve his servant without danger, but also provides for the
wealth of the Church, lest that ye Jews should have been oppressed more and
more by this alteration.

3 Now this Daniel was preferred above the rulers and gouerners, because the
spirit was excellent in him, and the king thought to set him over the whole
realm.

4 Wherefore the rulers and gouerners sought an occasion against Daniel
concerning the kingdom, but they could find none occasion nor fault, for he
was so faithful that there was no blame nor fault found in him.

5 Then said these men, we shall not find an occasion against this Daniel,
except we find it against him concerning the law of his God.

Now the Prophet sets forth the tentation that did arise suddenly, which
might have driven both himself and the elect people to despair, but that God
works miraculously. For although only Daniel was cast into the den of ye
Lions, as follows: yet unless he had been delivered, the condition of the
whole people had been more grievous and rigorous. For we know how impudently
wicked men do rail against miserable innocents, when they do see any
adversity toward them. If Daniel therefore had been devoured by the Lions,
all men would have raged against ye Jews with all their power. God therefore
did not only herein exercise the faith and patience of his servant, but also
he proved the Jews by the same trial, because they did see themselves ready to
suffer all extremity in the person of one man, unless God had suddenly helped
them as he did. First of all Daniel says: That he was preferred above all
others, because a more excellent spirit was in him.

This does not always come to pass, that they which are excellent in wisdom
or other such gifts, have also more authority and favor. For in kings
courts we see very beasts in the chief offices. And at this day (to leave
of old histories) as all kings almost are foolish and bruttsh: so also are
they the horses and asses of brute beasts. Wherefore the more proud and
dissolute every man is, the more authority has he in Princes courts. But
when Daniel says, that he was excellent, he commends two benefits of God:
the one, that he was endued with more abundance of Gods spirit: the other,
that Darius did knowledge this, and therefore set him in honor when he did see
him to be a man of great virtue and wisdom. We perceive then that which the
Prophet would here teach, that he was endued from heaven with wisdom and other
gifts: and also that king Darius judged a right in weighing his wisdom and
other virtues, and therefore set him in honor. Because then a more aboundaunt
spirit was in him, therefore did he excel all others. Yea the king minded to
set him above all his kingdom, even above those three gouerners.

Now, although this was a singular privilege which God did the^ vouchsafe to
bestow upon his people and his Prophet: yet have we great cause at this day to
lament, that kings do so proudly contemn the gifts of God in all the best
men which might be most profitable rulers of the people, and in the mean
season set so much by blockeheades, like themselves, and me^ that are given to
covetousness and extortion, yea most cruel and dissolute in all wickedness.
Seeing then we see that there is no wisdom or discretion in kings to discern
who are worthy of rule and authority, we may worthily bewail the state of the
world: for this is unto us a manifest spectacle of the vengeance of God, when
kings are so destitute of wisdom. But king Darius alone shall be sufficient at
the great day to condemn them: who had so great a judgment, that he doubted
not to set over all his officers, a man that was a stranger and a captive.
This was therefore a right princelike and heroical virtue, that Darius
preferred one captive before all his familiars. But now kings regard nothing
else but to set in authority their baudes, their iesters, and their flatterers.
So in the mean time they set none up but evil men, of no valewe, and whom God
has marked with some note of ignominy: who though they be unworthy to be
counted in ye number of men, yet are they kings of kings: for kings are at
this day for the most part but servants. And this comes upon them for their
slothful negligence, which refuse and cast away from them all cares, and will
take no pains. Therefore are they compelled to commit the government unto
others, retayning only the title to themselves. These things (as I have said)
are certain tokens of Gods wrath: because the world is unworthy that God
should stretch forth his hand to govern it.

Now, as concerning the envy of the nobles, we see that this vice has reigned
in all ages, that they despise virtue which do ambitiously aspire to honor.
For seeing they are guilty in their own consciences, they can not but hate the
virtue of others. Yet this may be though nothing strange, that the Persians
which had sustained great labors and undertaken great dangers, could not
suffer a base and an unknown man, not only to be made a companion unto them,
but also to be set over the^ as a superior. Their envy therefore seemed to have
some ground, or at the least some color. But this is a thing most worthy to
be condemned, that any man should so be addicted to his own commodity, that he
should not regard the common profit. For who so ever desires authority and
does therein regard his own profit only, and not the common commodity of
the people, he must needs be covetous, a briber, cruel and unfaithful and do
nothing less then his office. Seeing then that the nobles of the kingdom envy
Daniel, they bewray their wickedness thereby, that they have no regard of the
common wealth, but that they covet to scrape and to catch all things to the^
selves.

Now in this example we may see what comes of envy. And this is diligently to
be noted, because there is nothing more easy then to fall from one vice to an
other. He that enuieth an other can be restreined by no equity, but that he
will try all means possible how he may overthrow his adversary. These nobles
do stomach the matter, that Daniel should be preferred before them. Now if they
went no further, yet that fault (as I have said) were a sign of a wicked
nature. Howbeit they do burst forth further, for they seek some quarrel or
some crime in Daniel. We may see therefore how envy does stir the^ up to
search some crime. So are all envious men, as it were in continual watch and
ward, to catch them in a snare whose prosperity they do envy, and to
overthrow them by any means. This is one point. But when they find no crime,
then tread they all equity under foot, and without all shame and humanity, no
less cruelly then traitorously they give the^ selves wholly to destroy their
adversary. Daniel utters this of those that enuyed him.

He says first, That they sought an occasion and found none. Then he shows
the occasion which they took of no just ground but traitorously. For there is
no doubt but that they did know Daniel to be an holy man and approved of God.
Wherefore when they lay snares for this holy Prophet, they fight against God, as
it were of set purpose: but they are blinded with that wicked affection of
envy. And whence comes envy, but of ambition? So do we see ambition to be a
most wicked poison, whereof springs envy, and of this does falshode and
cruelty grow up. But Daniel does admonish us by his example, that we must
labor to live uprightly, that the occasion which the envious and the wicked do
seek for, may be taken away. Wherefore there can be no better defense against
the envious and the sclaunderers, then to behave our selves uprightly and
innocently. For how soever they lay snares against us, they shall not prevail:
for our innocence shall be like a shield to repulse all their malice.

Yet do we see by ye way that Daniel did not escape clear: for a quarrel was
sought against him in an other matter, even in the worship of God. But here
must we learn also, that holiness and the care thereof, ought to be more esteemed
of us then our own lives. Daniel was faithful and upright in his government,
he did execute his office so that he stopped the mouths of his enemies and
euilwyllers. Wherefore upright dealyng (as I have said) is ye best shield.

Again, Daniel was in danger because he would not forsake the pure worship of
God and his profession. Therefore must we suffer dangers boldly and constantly
when the question shall be touching the worship of God. For this transitory life
ought not to be more dear unto us, then the most holy and precious thing of
all that is to say, that God may have his due honor. We see then that we are
taught to deal uprightly of the one part, because we can not be more safe by
any means then by a safe conscience, as Peter 1. Pet. 3.16
does exhort us by the same reason in his first Epistle. But what soever we
fear, and what end soever may follow, although an hundredth deaths be offered
us, yet may we in no wise fail from the pure worship of God. For Daniel
doubted not to enter into death and to go down into the den of Lions, that
he might declare that he worshypped the GOD of Israel. Now that the nobles do
fall to that barbarous and cruel counsel, that is, that they might oppress
Daniel by the pretense of Religion, hereby we gather how blind the rage is
when ambition and envy do possess men's minds: for they do nothing fear at
all to fight manifestly against God. For they do not assail Daniel as a man,
but they break forth most wickedly and outragiously against God, when they
would extinguish the worship of God to satisfy their lust. Wherefore I say
that we are admonished by this example, how carefully we ought to fly ambition
and to take heed of it, and also of envy which spryngeth thereof. What crime
they committed against the law of God, it follows.

6 Therefore the rulers and these governors went together to the king and said
thus unto him: king Darius, live for ever.

7 All ye rulers of thy kingdom, the officers and governors, the counselors
and dukes have consulted together to make a decree for the king, and to
establishe a statute, that who soever shall ask a petition of any God or man
for thirty days save of thee O king, he shall be cast into the den of Lions.

The rulers of the kingdom went about by this policy to overthrow ye holy
Prophet of God, that either he being cast into the den of Lions should
perish, or else that he should forsake the outward profession of the worship of
God. But they thought that he was more constant and of greater courage, then
that he would redeem his life with such wickedness. Therefore they thought that
they were sure that he should dye. They think the^ selves very subtle, but
God sets him self against the^ and helps his servant, as we shall see.
Yet this was a detestable malice, that they go about to destroy Daniel under
this pretense. For though they did not worship the God of Israel, yet did they
know that the mind of the Prophet was right and good: and also they had proved
by experience the power of that GOD which was unknown unto them. They did not
condemn Daniel therefore in that conscience, neither yet were they able to
find fault with that Religion which he used. Wherefore I say that they were so
carried by the hatred of the person unto this cruelty, that they set them selves
against God. For they could not be ignorant of this, that God must be
worshypped. They them selves worshypped unknown Gods, and they durst not
condemn the worship of the God of Israel. We see therefore how the devil
bewitcheth them that they durst lay this crime against the holy Prophet.

Howbeit, it is unknown what occasion they abused to this their wicked
purpose. Some suppose that this was done because Darius could not well bear
the glory of his son in law. For where he was old, and the other was of a
florishyng age, he thought him self contemned. Some think therefore that
Darius him self was pricked with some secret envy, and that his nobles had
thereby an entry to deceive this miserable old man over light of belief, and so
blind his eyes. But this conjecture does not seem unto me of any great weight:
neither yet do I much travail about this matter. For it may be that they would
gratify their king in ye beginning of this new kingdom, and therefore that
they would decree some new and strange thing: the which thing we do see often
times to be done by such as do flatter kings and princes. Wherefore this old
man might be deceived herein now when his Monarchy was so lately increased. He
ruled only over the Medes before: now came the Chaldees, the Assiria^s, and
many other nations under his Empire. Such an increase of dominion might make
him dronken with vain glory: and the nobles thought that they had a plausible
matter in hand to decree divine honors unto their king. Me think this one
cause may suffice. Wherefore I am not to much careful to search any further:
for I do take that which offers it self and is most probable.

We said before that the nobles which laid snares for Daniel, were stricken
with a marvelous ragyng madness, when they durst publish this decree unto the
king, which Daniel recites. For that was an intolerable sacrilege, that the
king spoiled all the Gods of their honor: yet did he sign and subscribe the
decree, as follows, to the intent that he might hereby try the obedience of
his people, whom he lately brought into subjection by the help of his son in
law. For there is no doubt but that he meant to hold under the Chaldees, who had
been Lords until this present time. For we know how that pride of heart is
engendered by power and authority. When as the Chaldees therefore did reign
before this time so far and so wide, it was hard to bring them down and to
make them ready to all obedience: especially when they did see them selves to
be their servants, whose equals they were before. For we know that they had
often times encountered in battle with the Medes. Although therefore they were
now overcome by the sword, yet were not their hearts conquered. Therefore would
Darius prove their obedience. This seems to be the cause. For he does not of
set purpose provoke the wrath of the Gods against him self, but whiles he
regarded men, he forgate God and set him self in the place of the Gods, as
though he had authority to pluck down the power of the heavens to him self.
This was an horrible sacrilege, as I have said. But if any man could try the
hearts of kings, scarsely the hundredth man of the^ could be found which does
not after ye same sort despise all divine power. For although they confess
them selves to reign by the grace of God, yet will they be worshipped in Gods
stead. And hear we see how easily flatterers can persuade princes any thing
that may seem to set out their honors and majesty's.

The Prayer.
Grant almighty God, that as thou have governed thy servant Daniel when
honors were offered abundantly, and when he was set up in most high dignity,
that he yet always continued in integrity and lived innocently, where all
liberty was given unto all evil: graund we beseech thee, that we may learn to
reteyne our selves in that mean state whereunto thou do restrain us: and
that we being content with our poverty, may the rather endeavor our selves to
behave our selves innocently, both toward thee and toward men with whom we
have to do, that so thy name may be glorified in us, and we being defended by
thy protection, may go forward against the malice of men: and howsoever Satan
do assault us, and the wicked lay snares and like raging beasts rise up
against us, that yet we may remain safe under thy defense: yea and though we
should suffer an hundredth deaths, that we may learn to live and to die unto
thee, that thy name may be glorified in us through Jesus Christ our Lord Amen.

8 Now O king, confirm the decree and seal the writing that it be not
changed, according to the law of the Medes and Persians, which alters not.

9 Wherefore king Darius sealed the writing and the decree.

Hereby (as I have said) it is most manifest how prone the minds of Princes
are to be deluded, when they think that their authority should be increased
and their honor augmented. For the king does make no long disputation with his
noble men, but signeth the decree: because he supposes that this shall be
profitable for him and his successors, if he might have the Chaldees so
obedient unto him that they would be ready rather to deny all their Gods, then
to refuse any thing that he commands.

Which shall not be changed, say they: that is to say, let the decree be
immovable, after the manner of the Medes and the Persians, which alters not.
In that he joins the Medes with the Persians, hereby it appears (as we have
said) that Cyrus and Darius did reign jointly together. For whereas the
greater dignity and honor was granted unto Darius as long as he lived, yet
the power remained with Cyrus, and without doubt, his children were the heirs
of both those kingdoms, and of the Monarchy of the East, until they began
to fall out betwixt themselves. And whereas they do allege that the law of the
Medes and the Persians is immutable, this doubtless is commendable in the laws,
that their authority should be inviolable: and also that they should have their
force and obtain their effect, for the which they were made. For where the
laws are ever changed and altered, many men must needs be iniuried: for no
private man's right can be stable and sure but where the law is continually one.
Again, where it is permitted to make laws and to take away laws, there in
the stead of equity succeeds tyranny: lust for law. For they which have this
authority, being corrupt by money will now pronounce one law now an other. So
shall there be no equity where there is such liberty to alter laws at will.
Howbeit this must of necessity be warely considered: first that kings make no
law nor proclamation without great advise and long deliberation: secondly they
must take heed unto them selves, that they be not circumuented and deceived by
craft and cunning fetches, as it comes many times to pass. Wherefore
constancy is commendable and praise worthy in kings and Princes, so that
wisdom and justice do go before. But straight way we shall see how foolishly
kings would have the name of constancy and by their pride pervert all equity.

10 Now when Daniel understood that he had sealed the writing, he went into
his house, and his window being open in his chamber toward Jerusalem, he kneled
upon his knees three times a day and prayed and praised God as he did before
time.

Now Daniel declares that he was endued with the strength of the spirit of God
that he might offer his life unto God as a sacrifice: because he knew that
there was no hope of pardon left him if he had been found to have violated the
kings commandment. He knew also that the king himself should not be free,
although he would pardon him, even as it came to pass afterward. Seeing then
that death was before the Prophets eyes, he had rather go unto it willingly,
then cease from his duty in religion. We must note that here is nothing spoken
of the inward worshipping of God, but of the outward profession. If Daniel had
been forbidden to pray, this fortitude might seem to be necessary wherewith he
was endued: but now many may think that he was in ieoperdy without any great
cause, when he did set himself forth to death, whereas he was only restrained
from the outward profession.

But because Daniel does not here declare his own virtue, but the spirit
speaks by his mouth, we must mark that this boldness of mind pleased God in
the holy Prophet: and his deliverance does declare how greatly his Godly fact
was allowed, in that he had rather to renounce his own life then to change
any thing of his usual custom in serving of God. We do know that this is the
chief sacrifice which God requires, even to pray unto God. For we do testify
thereby, that he is the author and geuer of all good things unto us: and
again we do give a testimony of our faith whiles we fly unto him, and cast
all our cares into his bosom, and do offer unto him our requests and desires.
Seeing therefore that prayer has the chief office in the worship and service
of God, doubtless it was of no small importance, that ye king forbad yt any man
should pray unto God: for this was a manifest and over gross denial of
religion. And hereby do we gather again how blind the pride of this king was,
whiles he could subscribe unto their wicked and filthy decree: again how
greatly the nobles raged, who that they might destroy Daniel, went about as
much as in them lay, to destroy all religion and to pluck down God from
heaven. For what remains, when men think that they can want the help of
God, and so have no care of God at all? We know that unless God do strengthen
us every moment with his power, we are easily brought to naught. When the king
then did forbid all manner of prayer for a whole month, this was (as I have
said) to require of every man to deny God. Therefore Daniel could not obey the
decree without great injury unto God and falling from religion, because this
prayer is the chief sacrifice that God requires. Wherefore it is no marvel
though Daniel did boldly stand against this cursed decree. And concerning his
profession, it was necessary that he should testify before me^, that he did
stand steadfastly in the worship of God. For if he had changed any thing of his
usual order, it had been after a sort a denial of his religion. He had not
publicly pronounced that he contemned God for Darius pleasure: but the very
change had been a sign of a traitorous defection and faythles falling from
God. But we know that God does not only require the faith of the heart and the
inward affection, but also the testimony and profession of our religion.
Wherefore it was his duty, unless he would have been a shameful apostata, to
continue in that holy custom which he had used. For he was wont to pray unto
God with his windows open. Therefore kept he his order lest any man should
object against him that he had cast away the worship of God for a time to
gratify an earthly king.

And would to God that this doctrine were now graven so in the hearts of all
men, as were convenient. But this example of the Prophet is derided of many,
not openly I grant, but so that it may easily appear that the Prophet seems
unto them over simple and rash, which offered himself to danger in vain and
without necessity. For they do so separate faith from the profession thereof,
that they think they can remain upright, although it be hidden and buried,
and although they fall from the pure and sincere confession of their faith an
hundredth times for the avoiding of persecution. Let us consider therefore that
we ought not only to offer unto God the sacrifice of prayer in our hearts: but
also that an outward and free profession is required, that it may appear at
the least that we are the true worshippers of God. Yet do I not say yt we ought
to publish every where whatsoever we think, so that we should straightwayes be
carried unto death by the enemies of God and of the Gospel. But I say that
these twain are joined together, faith and the profession of faith, so that
they can in no wise be separate.

Now, the profession is after two sorts. For either we do testify plainly and
openly that which is in our mind: or else so far as is necessary, we keep us
in the worship of God, and give no sign of wicked and faithles dissimulation,
as though we should cast away the care of religion. As concerning the first, it
is not necessary always and at al times to profess our faith: but the second
must always be observed. For it shall never be lawful for us to dissemble or to
feign any apostasy or falling from religion.

Wherefore Daniel although he did not call together the Chaldees with sound of
trumpet so often as he would pray, but made his prayers and supplications in the
chamber as he was wont: yet did he not dissemble as though he had forgotten his
religion, when he sees that his faith is tried and that he is proved whether
he will remain constantly therein or no. For he plainly expresses, that he
came home after that he did know that the decree was signed. Doubtless if he had
been called unto that consultation, he would not there have holden his peace.
But the residue of the nobles did craftily shut him forth that he could not be
at it: and they thought that the remedy should be to late or none at all, like
as he him self did think that he should dye. Wherefore if he had been called
to the counsel by the king, he would there have done his duty and would boldly
have treated upon it. But because the decree was now signed, and he could not
admonish the king, he went into his house. This is to be noted that we may know
that the kings counselors can not be excused by any means, which of purpose
absent them selves from consultations when they see that they can not speak
their minds without some danger, and think that they have done enough
toward God, so that they give no voice but keep silence. Howbeit this faint
stomach can not be excused by any means. And Daniels example assuredly can not
serve the^: because (as we have said) he was shut out by the craft and malice
of the nobles, that he could not come in place to admonish the king in time as
he was wont.

Now he says, that the wyndowes were open toward Jerusalem. And it may be
demanded whether it were necessary for Daniel to open the windows? for some
man may object that he did this of some gross opinion. For if God do fill the
heaven and the earth, what neded he to open the wyndowes toward Jerusalem? But
there is no doubt but that the prophet did thus stir up him self to more
fervent prayer by this help and means. He prayed then for the deliverance of
the people: and when he looked toward Jerusalem, that sight was as a spur
whereby his mind might be the more inflamed. The Prophet did not then open the
wyndowes in respect of God, as though he should more easily be heard if there
were an open way through the air betwixt his house and Judea, but he rather
regarded him self and did help his own infirmity. Now if the holy Prophet
did stand need of this aid who was so diligent in prayer, we must consider
that our slothful infirmity stands need of many more helps at this day.
Let us learn therefore when we do feel our selves to be over slothful and
cold unto prayer, that we must gather all helps and aids which may wayken
our diligence and may redress our sloth which we do feel in our selves. This
then was the purpose of the Prophet when he opened his windows toward
Jerusalem.

Again, by this sign he would signify to him self and to his family, that
be does continue in the faith and hope of the redemption promised. When he
prayed unto God, he had Jerusalem as it were in his sight, not that his eyes
could see so far: but he turned his eyes toward Jerusalem at that time, as
though he should say that he was a stranger among the Chaldees, although he
was both rich and in great honor there and of great power. Thus would he have
it known to all men, that he did rest upon the heritage promised, although for
a time he was banished from thence. This was the second cause why he opened the
wyndowes.

He said also, that he prayed three times a day. And this is to be marked: for
unless every one of us appoint our selves certain hours for prayer, we shall
easily forget to pray. Wherefore Daniel, although he was diligent in pouryng
forth his prayers, yet did he appoint him self this solemn order, that he did
fall down before God thrice every day.
Like as when we rise in the morning, unless we begin with prayer unto God, it
is a brutish dulnes: so also when we go to bed, when we take our repast, and so
at other hours, as every man finds it most convenient for him self: for
herein God gives us liberty: howbeit every man must feel his infirmity that
he may seek for remedy. For this cause then did Daniel pray thrice a day.

Here is added also a sign of his fervent prayer when it is said: That he fell
down upon his knees: not that kneelyng is a necessary point of it self in
prayer: but because we have need of spurs and pricks (as we have said)
kneelyng does much profit. For first of all we are admonished that we can not
stand before God but with humility and reverence: again, hereby our minds
are better prepared to earnest prayer, and so this sign of worshyppyng is
acceptable unto God. Wherefore it is not in vain that Daniel says: that he did
fall upon his knees as often as he would pray unto God.

Now, where he says: that he prayed, and confessed or praised God, this is
diligently to be noted, because many do murmr against God in their prayers.
For although they pray for this or that earnestly, yet are they carried with
such immoderate vehemence, that they murmr against God as I have said) in
their prayers, unless God straight ways grant their requests. This is the
cause why Daniel joins praises or thankesgeuyng with prayer, even as Paul
also does exhort us to both twain: Phil. 14.6
Let your prayers (says he) be known unto God with thankesgeuyng. As though
he should say, that we ca^ not make prayers and petitions before God aright,
unless we bless his holy name, although he do not give us straight ways our
requests. And the circumstance is to be noted in Daniel. He had been an exile
a long time, and had been tossed with many and grievous storms: yet does he
celebrate the praises of God. Which of us can be so armed with patience that he
will praise God if he be vexed with great griefs and troubles but three or
four years? Yea scarce one day passes over wherein our desires do not so
boil yt some murmuring breaks forth against God. Seeing Daniel then could
persevere in praising God whereas he was yet oppressed with so many griefs,
sorrows, and distresses: this was a notable sign of invincible patience. And
without doubt he signifies a continual action where he puts that pronowne
demonstratiue [dena] which is referred to his ordinary usage, as he did before
of old time. When he notes the time, he notes (as I have said) a continuance,
so that he used not to pray once or twice, but continually every day he
exercised him self in this godly exercise.

11 Then these men assembled and found Daniel praying and making supplication
unto his God.

Here do the nobles of Darius bewray their craft, whiles they do watch Daniel
and that with mutual co^spiracy. For they had none other cause that moved them
to make that decree, but to draw Daniel unto death. Therefore they assemble them
selves together and find Daniel praying and making supplication before his
God. If Daniel had prayed privily, he had not been in danger of those traynes:
but he did not doubt to offer him self unto death: for he knew to what end
the decree was made, and he knew that the nobles would come. We see therefore
how he went willyngly to death, and that for none other cause but that he might
retain the true worship of God even in outward profession. Let them go now
which will cloak their treason, whiles they pretend that men may not rashly
cast them selves into danger: and that, seeing wicked men lie in wait for them
on every side, they are ware therefore that they do not unadvisedly cast their
lives away. For Daniel by their reason were to be blamed of to much simplicity
and foolishnes, because he went into known danger wittingly and willingly.
Howbeit (as we have said) he could not have escaped this danger but he should
after a sort have fallen from God. For straight way they would have cast him in
the teeth: Wherefore do thou leave of from thy wo^ted manner? why shuttest
thou the wyndowes? why dare thou not boldly pray to thy GOD? It appears
evidently that thou do more esteem the king then the reverence and fear of
God. Therefore Daniel because the honor of God should so have been diminished,
offers him self as a sacrifice unto death willingly, as we have said.

We are taught also by this example, that there be traynes prepared for the
children of God continually, how circumspectly and modestly soever they behave
and order them selves. But they must behave them selves so wisely, that in the
mean season they be not over crafty or to much careful: that is, that they do
not so much provide for their security, that in the mean season they forget
what God requires, and how precious his own name is to him, and how necessary
the confession of faith is in place and time.

12 So they came and spoke unto the king concerning the kings decree: Have
thou not sealed the decree that every man that shall make request to any God or
man within thirty days, save to thee, O king, shall be cast into the den of
Lyo^s? The king answered and said: the thing is true according to the law of
the Medes and Persia^s that alters not.

Now the nobles of Darius do come as conquerous unto the king: but they come
unto him craftily. For they do not straight way make mention of Daniel, who the
knew was beloved of the king: but they begin to repete again that which they
had spoken, that the decree can not be changed because the law of the Medes
and Persians is inviolable and can not be altered. Wherefore they ratify this
decree again as much as in the^ lies, that the king should not afterward be
at liberty to change it, or be bold to call back that which he had
commanded. Wherefore this craft is to be noted, how cunningly they compass the
king, and snare him that he should have no liberty to call back his word.
They come therefore and treat of the kings decree. They speak never a word of
Daniel, but begin to talk of the kings decree, that they may have yet more
sure hold of the king. It follows: That the king answered: the thing is true.

Here do we see, how much kings set by the praise of constancy: but they do
not discern betwixt constancy and obstinacy. For kings ought so to stand to
their decrees, that yet they should not be ashamed to retract and call back
that thing which they have unadvisedly published. If any thing therefore do
escape them without aduisement, wisdom and justice does require this, that
they should correct their error. But when as all regard of justice set apart,
they will have all things to remain inviolable whatsoever they have unwisely
decreed, this is extreme foolishnes, and they ought not in such case to pretend
constancy, for it is a proud obstinacy, as we have said.

The Prayer.
Grant almighty God, seeing thou have purchased us by the precious blood of
thine own son that we should not be in our own power, but that we should be
given wholly unto thy faithful service: that we may study and endeavor our
selves to consecrate our selves wholly unto thee, and to offer our selves in
body and soul so unto thy service, that we may be ready rather to suffer an
hundredth deaths the^ to fail from the true and pure worship of thy majesty:
and especially that we may so exercise our selves in prayer, that we may fly
unto thee every moment, and yield up our selves unto thy fatherly care, that
thou may govern us by thy spirit, defend us and strengthen us unto the end,
whiles that we be gathered into that heavenly kingdom which thy only begotten
son has purchased with his blood. Amen.

We began to declare the false accusation of Daniel wherewith he was accused
unto king Darius. The nobles of the kingdom (as I have said) came craftily
unto ye king. For if they had begone wih Daniel, the king might have broken of
their communication: but they speak of ye kings decrees: they declare what
danger may come unless all the kings proceedinges be obeyed: and by this
subtilty we perceive that they obtained their purpose. For the king confirms
that which they had spoken: to wit, that it was not lawful to disanull any
thing which was published in the kings name. For kings flatter themselves in
their dignity, and whatsoever pleases them, they will have it to be counted
for an heavenly oracle. That decree was wicked and detestable wherein Darius
did forbid any thing to be asked of God: yet will he have this to remain
stable lest his majesty should decay amongst his subjects. In the mean
season he does not consider what may follow thereof. Wherefore we are taught by
this example that there is no virtue so rare in kings as modesty: and yet that
no virtue is more necessary. For the more authority that they have, the more it
becomes them to take heed that they follow not their own lust and pride,
neither that they think it lawful whatsoever it pleases them to decree.

13 Then au^swered they and said unto the king: this Daniel which is of the
children of the captivity of Judah, regards not thee O king, nor the decree
that thou have sealed, but makes his petition three times a day.

Now when these false accusers do see that the king is not at liberty to defend
Daniels cause, they open more plainly that which they kept close before. For
if they had begone at Daniel, their accusation might straight way either have
been reproved or answered. But after that this sentence was gotten out of the
kings mouth, that the word should stand stable, that the kings decrees
according to the law of the Persians and Medes should have their force, when
this is done, then come they to the person himself. Daniel (say they) who is
one of the captives of Judah, does not care for thee, nor for the law that thou
have made. When they say that Daniel is one of the captives of Judah, there is
no doubt but that they do it in despite, thereby to amplify the crime. For if
any of the Chaldees durst have despised the kings decree, his rash boldness
could not have been excused. But now when Daniel, who was of late a servant
and a captive amongst the Chaldees, dare despise the kings commandment, who
by right of arms and conquest was Lord over all Chaldea, that seems to be
more intolerable. It is therefore as if they should say: this fellow was of late
a captive unto thy servants: thou art now the Lord over these countries, and
the Lords unto whom he was subject are now under thy bondage because thou art
a conqueror over them: and see, this captive, this stranger, this aliant, this
slave by condition shows his pride against thee. We see then how they
labored to stir up ye kings mind by this circumstance, when they say that
he is one of the captives.

Now, their oration is not simple, but they labor by all means to stir the
king and kindle his wrath against Daniel: He regarded not thee O king: that is
to say, he did not regard who thou wast, and so thy majesty was despised of
him: Nor the decree which thou have sealed. This is an other amplification.
Therefore Daniel did neither regard thee nor thy law: and will thou suffer
this? At the length they rehearse the very fact, that is, that he prays
thrice every day. This had been the simple and plain declaration of the
matter: Daniel did not obey thy commandment, for he prayed unto his God. But
(as I have said) they amplify the crime whiles they accuse him of pride, and
contempt, and stubberne obstinacy. We see then by what crafty fetches Daniel
was oppressed by his adversaries.

14 When the king heard these words, he was sore displeased with himself, and
set his heart on Daniel to deliver him, and he labored til the sun went down
to deliver him.

15 Then these men assembled unto the king and said unto the king: understand O
king, that the law of the Medes and Persians is, that no decree nor statute
which the king confirms, may be altered.

Daniel does rehearse first, that the king was troubled when he knew the malice
of his nobles, which before he knew not. For he did not consider what their
purpose was, or what they went about. Now he sees that he is deceived and
inta^gled: therefore is he troubled. Hereby we are taught again, how much
kings ought to take heed of wicked counsel: because they are set about on
every side by wicked men, who purpose no other thing the^ either to get gain
by false accusations, or else to oppress sometimes their enemies, sometime
those of whom they look for some pray, and sometime to favor wicked causes.
Seeing then that kings are compassed about with so many trains, they must be so
much the more diligent to take heed of their subtilties. For in the end they
know that they are deceived, when now there is no remedy: partly because they
fear their own estate, and partly because they have such regard to their
honor and credit, and had rather offend GOD then that men should note them of
any lightness or inconstancy.

Because therefore that kings have such regard to their honor, it comes thus
to pass that they will go forward with things evil begone, although their
own conscience reprove them: and although equity and justice stand never so
clear before their eyes, yet this can not be a bridle strong enough when
ambition does carry them a contrary way, and they ca^ not abide their name to be
any whit impared before men. Such an example is set forth here unto us in
Darius. For first it is said, that he was heavy when he heard the matter, and
that he was careful unto the setting of the Sun, how he might deliver Daniel
from death He was desirous of this in deed, if his honor and estimation might
have stand safe and sound, and also if the nobles had been pleased. But whereas
of the one side he feared danger lest the conspiracy of the Princes might
breed some trouble, and of the other side he was moved with a foolish
shamefastnes, because he could not abide the reproach of inconstancy which he
feared: this is the cause that he being overcome, did obey the lusts of the
wicked. Although then he labored until the going down of the Sun to
deliver Daniel: yet that perverse shamefastnes which I have spoken of, and the
fear of danger prevailed. For whenever we do not rest upon the help of
God, we must of necessity always waver, although otherwise we be well affected
and disposed.

Thus Pilate would have delivered Christ, but he was afraid of the threatenings
of the people when they pronounced that Caesar would be offended. Ioh. 19.12.
And it is no marvel though there be such wavering where there is no belief
nor resting upon God: For faith only is the stable and sure stay, whereupon
when we rest we may do our office without fear, and may overcome all terrors.
But where faith fails, doubtful wavering carries us to and fro. And hereof
comes it that Darius fears the conspiracy of his nobles, and gives up
innocent Daniel to their cruelty. There was also in him a shamefastnes which I
have spoken of, yt he would not seem unadvised or unconstant which should
suddenly call back his decree, seeing that it was a law amongst the Medes and
the Persians, that that which proceeded from the king might not be repealed.
And Daniel speaks furthermore of this, saying: that those men gathered
themselves together, when they see that the king waxes doubtful and is ready,
to change his purpose: they rage and are ready, as it were, to fight with him.

Whereas they are named to have assembled themselves, it was to this purpose, to
make king Darius afraid. Know thou O king, say they. He knew it well enough,
neither do they teach him a thing unknown: but they propound this as a
threatening. What? do thou not see that the kings name shall be of no
authority hereafter, if this man shall violate thy commandment unpunished?
Will thou suffer thy self so to be mocked? To conclude, they signify that he
shall not be king, except he revenge the injury done against him by Daniel,
which had despised the kings commandment. Know thou therefore, O king, that
to the Medes and the Persia^s. He was ye king of ye Medes: but it is as much as
to say, what a rumor will be spread throughout all thy coasts? For thou know
that this has been hitherto amongst the Medes and Persians, that the king
should not change his statutes. If thou then show such an example, will not
all thy subjects straight way rise against thee? shall not thou be contemned
of them? We see then how the Princes rage against their king, and do fear him
from the changing of his counsel. And they do join the decree to the statute
that the king had established, to the intent that they may move him the more,
that he should not suffer that to be contemned, that he had decreed and again
established.

16 Then the king commanded, and they brought Daniel and cast him into the
de^ne of the Lions. Now the king spoke and said unto Daniel: thy God whom thou
always worshippest, even he will deliver thee.

The king (as I have said) being affrayd by the threatnyng and manacing of his
nobles, does appoint Daniel to die. And hereby we gather that the kings
themselves have that reward which their pride deserves, when they are
compelled to obey like slaves unto their flatterers. How was Darius deceived by
the craft of the Princes, even because he supposed, that his Empire should be
now established, if he could thus try the obedience of all men, that no man
should pray to any God for a whole month long? Therefore he thought, that he
should be both above God and man, if he had tried such an obedience in all his
subjects. Now we see how Princes do stubbernly rise against God, when they
dare threaten death, except men be obeyed.

We see then when kings do extol them selves over much, they set them selves
forth to open shame: in so much that they be the slaves of their servants.
And this is over common in earthly princes. They which get great authority and
favor at their hands, do flatter them in all things, and they worship the^ as
Gods. There is no kind of flattery which they do not inue^t to bring
themselves into favor. But in the mean season what liberty is there in those
Idols? For they are suffered to do nothing: no, they can not be familiare even
with their best and most faithful friends, whiles they are observed and watched
of their kepers. To conclude, if they be compared with those miserable persons
which are kept in most strayte prison, there is none shut up in so deep a
dongeon, although he have three or four kepers, which has not more liberty
then these kings. But (as I have said) this is the most just judgment and
vengeance of God. For seeing they can not contain them selves in the order and
degree of men, but will pearce even above the clouds, and be equal with God,
it is necessary that they be made a mocking stock. Hereof it comes that they
are servant to their servants, and dare speak nothing freely, neither have
they any man their friend, neither dare they call this or that man unto them,
nor grant unto this man or that man what they would. Thus they rule therefore
as servants in earthly kingdoms, because they remember not that they are of
the number of mortal men.

This came upon king Darius because he called Daniel, and by his commandment
was he cast into the den of Lions: and his nobles do compel him to this
wicked fact, and he obeys them against his will. But the cause hereof is to
be noted, that whiles he forgot that he was a mortal man, and would extorte
from God his dominion, as though he would pluck him down from heaven. For if
God be in heaven, he must be prayed unto. But Darius did forbid that any man
should be so bold as to pray: and this was to make God of no power, as much as
lay in him. But now is he compelled to obey even his subjects, although they
exercise against him despitefull tyranny.

Now Daniel adds, that the king spoke thus to him: Thy God whom thou seruest,
or whom thou worshippest, he will deliver thee: This may be read as it were a
wish or desire, and there is no doubt but Darius did so wish and desire: but it
may be taken also in this sense: thy God whom thou worshyppest will deliver
thee. As though he should say: I have no power now of my own self: I am
herein carried away as with a raging tempest: my nobles compel me against my
will to this wicked fact. Now therefore I resign thee and thy life into Gods
hand, because it is not in my power to deliver thee: as though he would now
make his crime the less by this excuse, because he leaves it in Gods power to
to preserve Daniel. This reason moves some me^ to praise the godlynes of the
king. But as I grant his pity and humanity to be showed by these words: so
is it plain that there was not one crumme of godlynes in him when he would
thus adorn him self with that which he robs from God. For superstitious
men although they do not fear God aright, yet are they kept in some secret
fear of his majesty: but this man would have brought to nothing all divine
power. What godlynes call you this? Wherefore pity or compassion may be praised
in Darius, but his cursed pride can by no means be excused.

Again, why did he show such humanity toward Daniel? Because he had proved
him to be a faithful servant. Wherefore this was a private love which moved
him to mercy. He would not have showed him self so favorable toward others.
If an hundredth or a thousand Jews had been accused before him, he would have
condemned them all without any care, because they had not obeyed this decree.
Therefore in that point he would have showed him self proud, stubborn,
wicked, and cruel. But he spared Daniel for his own private commodity:
again, because he had received him to his favor. But how soever his humanity
is praised, there appears no sign of godlynes in him. Yet he says, Thy God
whom thou do worship, he will deliver thee, even because he had known
before how Daniel had prophesied of the destruction of the Monarchy of the
Chaldees. Hereby he is co^uinced that the God of Israel does both know all
things before, and also that all things are at his appointement. But in the
mean season neither does he worship him neither suffer him to be worshipped of
others: for he had robbed God of his authority as much as in him lay. Although
then he do attribute here unto God the power to deliver, yet does he it not
from the bottom of his heart: and though he should so do, his wickedness is so
much the worse when he depriueth him of his authority whom he perceaueth to be
the true and only God and of most high power, and yet being but earth and
ashes dare set him self up in his place.

17 And a stone was brought and laid upon the mouth of the den, and the king
sealed it with his own signet and with the signet of his princes, that the
purpose might not be changed concerning Daniel.

There is no doubt but this was done by the counsel of God, that ye nobles
should seal the stone with their signets, whereby the mouth of the den was
shut, to the intent that the miracle should be the more manifest. For when on
the next day the king came, the seals were whole, that is, the signets did
remain perfect. Hereby it appears that the servant of God was saved, not by
man's cunning, but by the help and power of God. In the mean season we see how
boldly the nobles compelled the king to all their purposes. For he might seem
to have done more then enough, when he delivered unto them a faithful man that
was dear unto him, and when he commanded him to be cast into the den of
Lions: yet they be not content with this tractablenes of the king that is so
easily entreated, but they do force one thing further, that is, that the mouth
of the den should be shut: then do they all seal the stone, lest any man
should take Daniel away.

We see then when liberty is once taken away, there is no end: especially when
any man is made a servant or slave by his own fault, or has given him self
up to the will of wicked men. For at the first so great a bondage shall not
prevail, that he which seems to be free, should be compelled to do this or
that, or what soever is commanded: but when he has once given him self to
bondage and slavery (as I have said even now) he is compelled to sin again
and again, and without end and measure. For example: if any man have declined
and fallen from his duty either by ye fear of man or by flattery, or any
other corrupt affection, he will agree to this thing or that, when he shall not
be only entreated but by importunity compelled: but when he has once
altogether abandoned his liberty (as I have said) he shall be compelled even
to admit most shameful things at every man's pleasure. Let a man be a pastor
or preacher in the Church, let him once decline of the one side or the other
through ambition or the like vice: he that has brought him so far, will come
to him the second time and say: what? dare thou deny me this? have not I
obtained of thee yesterday and the other day this and that? So shall he be
compelled the second time to trespass for his favor to whom he has bound him
self, and the third time shall he be compelled to do so and to the end, yea
without end.

So also princes which are not only free but rule over other, if they suffer
them selves to be overcome with an evil conscience, they give away from them
selves all authority and are drawn every way as pleases their subjects.
Therefore this example is set before us in king Darius, who after that he had
appointed Daniel to unjust punishment, he adds this also: that the den
might be shut: and also, that the stone might be sealed. And to what end?
forsooth, that the decree might not be changed, that is, that he might not be
bold to attempt any thing about Daniel. We see therefore what great ignominy
and shame the king brings him self unto, for that his nobles do first take
from him all credit, as though they did deny that they would believe him
although he commanded Daniel to be cast into the den of Lions, but did
require an assurance, that he should not take him away: neither would they
suffer any thing to be attempted of him in that point. We see therefore how
shamefully they discredit their king. Again we see how they challenge
authority over him, that he should not take upon him to lift up the stone
which was sealed, unless he would be counted a false man, as one that breaks
public decrees and violateth public records, and has no truth in him.

This place therefore does admonish us that we give not up our selves to the
lusts of men and unto servile bondage. Let every man serve his neighbors as
much as charity binds him and as their necessity requires. But in the
mean season let no man by corrupt conscience be turned this way or that way:
for when he cease to be at liberty, he shall be compelled to bear all manner
of shame and ignominy, and to obey most filthy commandments: like as we see
it come to pass in baudes and other wicked persons which serve the lusts and
covetousness of their princes, or their ambition and cruelty. For when they are
brought once into bondage, they are most miserable slaves, neither can they
avoid extreme vilanyes, but they must serve with shame, and provoke both God
and man a hundredth times against them.

18 Then the king went into his palace, and remained fasting, neither were the
instruments of music brought before him, and his sleep went from him.

Here Daniel declares the over late repentance of the king: because although
he was in great mournyng, yet he did not correct his fault. And this comes to
pass in many which are not altogether hardened in the contempt of God and
wickedness, but are drawn thereunto by others: who though they be sorry for
their faults, yet go they forth in the^. Would to God there were more rare
examples of this kind of sin: but we see it every where before our eyes.

Wherefore Darius is set forth here unto us as one in a mean state betwixt the
wicked reprobates, and the upright and constant worshippers of God. The wicked
doubt not to provoke God against them, and they are dissolute in their lusts
and concupiscence, casting of all shame and fear. But they that are governed
by the fear of God, although they suffer great battayles with the flesh, yet
do they bridle themselves and restrain their wicked lusts. There be other of
a mean state (as I have said) which are not yet hardened in their malice,
neither do delight in their corruptions: yet do they follow the^ still as though
they were bound with cords. Of this sort was Darius. For where he ought
constantly to have reproved the false accusation of the nobles, and should
boldly have withstand them, and rebuked them that they so abused his gentleness:
when he saw himself entangled by them, he was so far from so doing, that he
rather obeyed their fury. In the mean time he mourns in his palace, he
abstayneth from meat and all delites. Thus he utters that this wickedness did
not please him, which yet he himself had taken upon him do do.

We see then, that it is not sufficient that our conscience do bite us and
wring forth some sorrow out of our hearts when we do sin: but we must go
farther, so that this sorrow may bring us to repentance, as Paul teaches. 2.
Cor. 7.10
But Darius did stick as it were in the mire: when he mourned he labored not
to amend the fault that he had committed. He had the beginning of repentance,
and but only the beginning. Wherefore we must endeavor our selves that he which
is gilty in any fault, do stir up himself to repentance, and when he
feels any prick of sorrow, let him quicken it, and give himself no truce nor
rest until he have forsaken his sin. This is to be learned by this present
example, where Daniel says that Darius mourned all that night.

19 Then the king arose early in the morning, and went in all have unto the
den of Lions.

20 And when he came to the den, he cried with a lamemtable voice unto
Daniel: and the king spoke and said to Daniel: O Daniel the servant of the
living God, is not thy God (whom thou always seruest) able to deliver thee from
the Lions?

Here the king begins to deal more boldly when he comes to the den.
Before he was so afraid that he gave place to his nobles, and forgetting his
kingly majesty, he yielded himself unto them like a slave: but now does he not
so fear their malice and wicked words. He comes therefore to the den of
the Lions in the morning early before the Sun did rise, and came in have.
Thus do we see that he was stricken with a marvelous sorrow, which overcame all
the former fear. He might yet have feared his state if he had not forgotten
that most terrible threatening: Thou can not now enjoy thine Empire unless
thou aduenge the contempt of thy decree. But (as I have said) sorrow overcomes
that fear. And yet can we neither commend in him either godlynes or courage:
for although he come to ye den and call upon Daniel with a lamentable voice,
he is not yet angry with his nobles, until that he see the servant of God
safely preserved. Then does he gather more courage, and yet continues he in
his infirmity and is, as it were in that mean degree betwixt the wicked
contemners and the constant worshippers of God, which do follow that which they
know to be just, with an upright heart.

The Prayer.
Grant almighty God, seeing that thou have showed us by the example of thy
servant Daniel, with how great consta^cy we should persevere in the pure
worship of thy name: that we may grow up to the true strength of mind, and
that we may so give our selves unto thee, that we do not turn this way or
that way for men's pleasures, but that we may remain in thy holy vocation: and
so ouercoming all perils, in the end we may come to the fruit of our victory,
even that blessed immortality which is laid up for us in the heaven, through
Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

The king came unto the grave and says: Daniel, the servant of the living
God, thy God whom thou always worshippest, can he not deliver thee? Darius
names the God of Israel, ye living God. But if there be one living God, he
shuteth out all the imagined and feigned Gods which men have devised by their
own brain. For of necessity there can be but one Godhead: and this principle
profane me^ also have confessed. And though every one do fall afterward after
his own dreams, yet they all agree in this, that there can not be many Gods.
They divide God, as it were into parts: but they can not deny this, that there
is one only God. Darius therefore when he gives this title to the God of
Israel, he confesses all other Gods to be mere fantasies: but he does not
understand this point (as I have said) that profane do hold this principle,
but yet vanish away afterward in their own imaginations. Therefore this place
does not prove, as some think, that king Darius was truly converted, so that
he received and embraced true piety and Godlynes. For he always worshipped his
Idols: but he thought that this was sufficient, that he left the highest place
for the God of Israel. But, as we know, Isay. 42.8
God can suffer no companion, for he is zealous of his glory. It was a fond
thing therefore, that Darius did acknowledge that God which Daniel did worship,
to excel all other Gods. For where God reigns, of necessity all Idols come
to naught: as it is said also in the Psalm: God reigns, let all the Gods of
the nations fall. Therefore Darius had not so much profited that he would give
himself to ye true and only God: albeit he was compelled to give the greatest
honor to the God of Israel: yet in the mean season he always stood drowned
in his own superstitions whereunto he was accustomed.

Afterward he adds: Thy God whom thou worshyppest always, could not he
deliver thee from the Lions? He speaks here doubtfully, as unbelievers are
wont to do, which seem to them selves to believe, but they have nothing stable
nor sound in their minds. Prayer is natural (that I might so speak:) that
is, a certain secret motion does drive men naturally to fly unto God: but
because scarce the hundredth man does rest upon the word of God, hereby it
comes that they call upon God at adventure. Therefore they will try whether
God will help them or aid their necessities: in the mean season (as I have
said) there is no sure persuasion in their hearts. Such was ye affection of
king Darius: Could not God deliver thee, says he? as though the power of God
were to be doubted of. If he should have said: has God delivered thee? this
had been tolerable. For God is not bound by any law to deliver his servants
always from death, as it is well enough known: but that is in his hand whether
he will do it or no. Therefore when he leaves his servants to ye lust of the
wicked, his power is not therefore diminished because it hangs of his mere
will whether he will deliver them. But as concerning his power it ought in no
wise to be called into doubt. Therefore we see that Darius was never truly
converted: for he knew nothing distinctly of the true and only God, but was
taken with a blind fear, whereby, whether he would or not, he was compelled
to give the chief honor unto the God of Israel. But this was not a willing
confession, but rather forced.

21 Then said Daniel unto the king: O king live for ever.

22 My God has sent his Angel and has shut the Lions mouths that they have
not hurt me: for my justice was found out before him, and unto thee O king, I
have done no hurt.

Here Daniel answers the king modestly and gently: and yet by his
commandment he was cast into the den. He might worthily have been angry
and have chidden with him, for that he was so wickedly forsaken. For king
Darius had tried him a faithful servant: he used his service profitably. When
he saw him to be oppressed with unjust sclaunders, he did not set him self so
stoutely as he ought against them: yea at the length he being overcome with the
threatenings of his nobles, commanded Daniel to be cast into the den.
Therefore Daniel might (as I have said) complained of the cruelty and
unfaithfulness of the king. He does not so, but dissembleth this injury, because
it was sufficient that the glory of God was made manifest by his deliverance.
For the holy Prophet did seek no other thing: yea he prays for the king. And
although he use the common manner of speech, yet he speaks with all his heart
when he says: O king live for ever, that is, God prolo^g thy life and bless
thee for ever. Many do lightely and unadvisedly salute their kings, and also
their fellows after that sort: but there is no doubt but that Daniel wished
with all his heart both a long and a happy life unto the king.

Afterward, says he: My God has sent his angel and has shut the mouths of
the Lions. Here we see plainly by Daniel that the office of helpyng is
distributed to the angels, but yet so that the whole power remains with God.
Therefore he says that he was delivered by the hand and ministry of the
angel: but he expresses that the angel was the minister of his deliverance,
not the author. Therefore, says he, It is God which has sent his angel. We
have seen before, that ye Chaldees have spoken some time confusedly when there
was any mention made of God: for they referred it to many, and called them the
holy Gods. But here Daniel does ascribe to the only God his whole and perfect
glory: neither does he set forth a company of Gods, as the opinion has been
always amongst the heathen. Therefore he first sets forth the unity of
God, and afterward he adds that the angels are ready to help his servants:
but yet they so do it as they were commanded. So the whole praise of all
safety does belong to God alone: because the angels do not help whom they
will, neither are they moved by their own will, but only obey Gods
commandment.

We must note that thing also which follows: That God did stop the mouths of
the Lions. For the Prophet teaches by these words, that both Lions and the
most cruel beasts are in Gods power, and are ruled by his secret bridle, so
that they do not rage nor do any harm but as God permits. Let us therefore
know that cruel beasts are therefore hurtful unto us, because God would
humble our pride. In the mean season let us also know that there is no beast
so cruel, which can hurt either with teeth or nail, but as far as God
loses the bridle. And this doctrine is very profitable to be known: because
we tremble at every light danger, yea at the noise of the leaf that falls.
And because we must needs behold many dangers on every side (for we are set
about with an hundredth deaths) we should be vexed with most miserable
unquietness, if we had not this before our eyes, that not only our life is kept
of God, but that there is nothing that may hurt us, which he does not direct
after to his good will and pleasure.

And this must also be extended even to the very devils, reprobrates, and
wicked persons. For we know that the devil always is diligent to destroy us,
and is like a roaryng Lion. 1. Pet. 5.5.
For he runs about and seeks for a pray which he may devour, as Peter
says in his first Epistle. We see also how all the wicked do imagine our
destruction every moment, and how furiously they rage against us. But God which
can stop the mouths of the Lions, will also bridle the devil and all the
wicked, that they shall not in any wise hurt us but by his permission. Yea
experience does teach us that the devil and all the wicked are repressed by
his hand. For we should perish every moment, but that God by his power turns
away innumerable dangers which hang over our heads. Let us therefore know that
it is by the singular benefit of God, that we remain safe even one day in so
great rage and madness of our enemies.

Moreover Daniel says, that the Lions did him no hurt at all, because
righteousness before God was found in him. By the which words he signifies
that he was therefore preserved, because God would maintain his glory and
worship which he had commanded by his law. Neither does the Prophet here
proudly extol his justice, but rather shows that he was therefore delivered,
because God would testify by a certain and evident declaration that that
worship was allowed, for the which Daniel did fight even unto death. We see
therefore how Daniel refers all things to the setting forth of the true
worship of God. The sum is, that he was the patron of a holy and godly cause,
and that he was ready to suffer death, not by any foolish imagination, or
sudden motion, or confused zeal: but because he was surely persuaded that he
worshipped the living God. Therefore because he was the mainteiner of a holy and
godly cause, he says that he was preserved. This is the sum.

Hereby we may easily gather how foolish the Papists are, which by this place
and such like go about to set up the justice and merits of works. Daniel (say
they) was preserved because justice was found in him before God: therefore God
gives to every one according to the merits of his works. But first we must
mark ye purpose of Daniel. For he does not boast of his merits (as I have
said): but he would that ye deliverance offered him from heaven should be a
witness of the true and pure worship of God, that he might make king Darius
ashamed, and that he might show that all superstitions are wicked, especially
that he might admonish him of that sacrilegious decree, whereby he did arrogate
unto him self ye highest dominion, so that he abolished as much as lay in him,
the whole deity. Therefore that the Prophet might admonish the king hereof, he
says that his cause was just.

And that the solution may be the more easy, we must note that there is a
difference betwixt eternal salvation and special deliueraunces. God does
deliver us from eternal death, and does choose us unto the hope of eternal
life, not because he finds any righteousness in us, but because he has
chosen us freely: and therefore does he make perfect in us his work without any
respect of works. Therefore for as much as belongs to eternal salvation,
there can be no respect of justice, because when God will search us, he shall
find nothing but cause of damnation. But as concerning particulare
deliueraunces, there God can look on every man's justice: not that it is our
own: but whom he governs with his spirit that they may obey his vocation,
to the^ also he reaches forth his hand, and if they be in ieoperdy for that
they study to obey him, he delivers the^. This is as if a man should say,
that God favors good causes: but this pertains nothing to merits.
Therefore as concerning this place, the Papists dote over childishly, which do
thereby gather merits. For Daniel means no other thing but to maintain the
pure worship of the only God: as though he should say, that God did not only
make a count of him, but that there was an other cause of his deliverance,
that is, because God would show in deed and by experience that his cause was
just.

He adds: and also before thee O king I have committed no wickedness. It is
certain that the Prophet did violate the kings commandment. Wherefore then
does he not willingly confess this? yea why does he affirm that he had not
trespassed against the king? Verily because he had faithfully behaved himself
and served the king justly and uprightly in all things, he might purge
himself of the sclaunder wherewith he was charged, that he had despised the
kings commandment. For Daniel was not so bound unto the king of the
Persians, but that God might challenge unto himself that which can not be taken
from him.

We know that earthly Empires are ordained of God, but under this condition, yt
he should lose nothing of his right, but that he alone should have the
preeminence above all other, and that all Maiestrates and rulers, and
whatsoever is high in the world, should be brought under and be subject to his
glory. Because therefore Daniel might not obey the kings decree unless he
denied God (as we have seen before) he trespassed not againct the king when he
went forward constantly in that exercise of holiness whereunto he had
accustomed himself, that is, in praying unto God thrice a day. And that this
may be more evident, that sentence of Peter must be remembered: fear God,
honor the king. These two are joined together, so that the one can not be
separate from the other. Wherefore the fear of God must go before, that kings
may obtain their authority. For if any man begin at the reverence of an
earthly prince, setting God aside, he does wickedly: for this were to pervert
the whole order of nature. Therefore let God be feared first of all: the^ let
earthly Princes enjoy their authority: yet in such sort that God be preferred
above all (as I have said). Daniel therefore does defend himself by Gods
right, that he had committed no trespass against the king, even because he
being compelled to obey the commandment of God, despised that which the king
commanded on the contrary. For earthly Princes deprive themselves of all
authority when they rise up against God, yea they are unworthy to be counted
amongst the company of men. We ought rather to spit in their faces, then to
obey them when they deal so proudly and stubbernly, that they will spoil God
of his right, and as it were occupy his throne, as though they could pluck him
down from heaven. This is the sense of this place.

23 Then was the king excedyng glad for him, and commanded that they should
take Daniel out of the den: so Daniel was brought out of the den, and no
manner of hurt was found upon him, because he believed upon his God.

Daniel confirms that which he spoke before of the affection of king Darius.
Therefore as he returned sorrowful into his palace, abstained from meat and
drink, and cast away all pleasures and delicates: so also he rejoiced when he
heard that the holy servant of God was so maruelously delivered from death

Afterward he adds: and by the commandment of the king, Daniel was brought
out of the den, and no manner of hurt was found on him. This could not be
ascribed to fortune. Therefore God did declare his power, that Daniel escaped
so safe that the Lyo^s did not touch him. Doubtless he should have been torn in
pieces if God had not shut the Lions mouths: but this also did make very much
for the amplifiyng of the miracle, that no hurt was found upon his body nor any
sign that ye Lions had once touched him. Therefore that the Lions did so spare
him, it was done by the secret counsel of God. And this was also more
manifestly known when his false accusers were cast into the den, because
they were straight way torn in pieces and devoured of the Lions, as we will
show hereafter.

But the reason is to be noted which is added: that he was preserved, because
he did believe in his God. For many times we see that some man maintayneth a
good cause, and yet it has very evil success, because he takes in hand to
do that by his own wisdom, policy, and industry, which otherwise were worthy
some commendation. It is no marvel then though they be many times destitute
of good success, which yet undertake to maintain good causes: as appears in all profane persons. For the histories of all ages do show that often times
even they which have taken in hand good quarrels, have perished: which came to
pass by the wicked confidence that they had in themselves, even because they
were not bent to serve God, but rather sought praise and worldly fame:
Wherefore, as ambition carried them away, so also they flattered themselves in
their own counsels.

And hereof came that saying of Brutus, that virtue was but a vain thing,
because he thought that he was evil entreated when he had fought for the
maintenance of the liberty of the people of Rome, and yet found the Gods not
favorable but angry against him. As though forsooth that God were bound to
help him, which neither trusted in him nor craved his help. For we know what
a proud stomach that man had. I bring forth one example: but if we diligently
weigh what has caused all profane men so stoutly to fight even in good
causes, we shall find that ambition was the chief cause that moved them. No
marvel then though God did forsake them at the very pinch, because they were
unworthy to feel his help. Thus Daniel expresses that he was preserved safe
because he believed in his GOD. And the Apostle did mean this in the eleventh
chapter to the Hebrews, when he says that some were saved or delivered from
the mouth of the Lions by faith. Therefore he notes the cause why Daniel was
preserved, and he stirs us up unto faith.

But here must we learn what force is in ye word of Beleuyng, and what it does
contain in it. For the Prophet does not simply say that he was preserved
because that he believed the God of Israel to be ye true and only God, the
maker of heaven and earth: but because he committed his life unto God, because
he rested wholly upon his grace, because he assured him self most certainly,
that he could have none other but a happy end if he served him. Because
therefore that Daniel was certainly persuaded that his life was in the hand of
God, and that he did not trust in him in vain, and that he did ieopard him
self boldly and without all fear for the true worship of God: therefore he
says, that he believed in God. We see therefore yt this word of Believing is not
taken so barely as the Papists do dream: for hereof came that fond
imagination of their implicate and intricate faith, and of the dead faith, or
faith without form: for they suppose that faith is nothing else but a confused
conceiuyng of the Godhead. When we conceive then that there is a God, the
Papists do count it to be faith. But the holy ghost does teach us far
otherwise. For we must remember that saying of the Apostle, that we do not
believe God aright, unless we be persuaded that he is the rewarded of all that
seek him. Wherefore this persuasio^ is included in faith, Heb. 11.
that God does not deceive his worshippers.

Now we must mark the manner of seking God. God therefore is sought not by any
foolish arrogance, as though we could by our merits bind him unto us: but he
is sought by faith, he is sought by humility, he is sought by prayer. Therefore
when we know this, that God is the rewarder of all those that seek him: and
that we know how he must be sought, this is ye true faith. So Daniel doubted
not but ye God would be his deliverer, because he was fully persuaded of that
true Religion which he had learned of a child, and whereunto he fully trusting,
called upon God continually. This was then the cause of his deliverance. In
the mean time, it is certain yet that Daniel did not believe God as though he
had been already instructed of the end and success. For he rather commits
his life unto God, because he was ready to dye. Therefore Daniel could not know
this before he was cast into the den and delivered unto the Lions, whether
God would deliver him, as we have also seen before in his fellows: God if he
will, can deliver us, but if not we are ready to worship him, and we will not
obey thy commandment. And if Daniel had been taught before of that which did
come to pass afterward, his constantnes had been worthy of no great praise: but
because he would boldly suffer death for the true worship of his God, and
could deny him self and renounce the world, this is a true and undoubted
proof of his faith and constancy. Therefore he believed in God, not that he
hoped for such a miracle: but because he knew that he should be happy if he
remained steadfast in the pure worship of God: Even as Paul says: Christ is to
me advantage both in life and death. Phil. 1.21.
Therefore Daniel rests wholly upon the help of God, and shuts his eyes
as concerning the end that should follow: neither was he over careful for his
life, but because his mind was lifted up to the hope of a better life,
therefore although he should have dyed an hundredth deaths, yet would not he
cease to believe. For our belefe extends it self beyond the bounds of this
transitory and corruptible life, as is well known to all the godly.

24 And by the commandment of the king these men which had accused Daniel
were brought, and were cast into the den of Lions, eue^ they, their children
and their wives, and the Lions had the mastry of the^ and brake all their bones
in pieces or ever they came at the ground of the den.

By this circumstance the power of God did shine forth more manifestly in
saving Daniel, because they were straightway torn in pieces of the Lions which
had wickedly accused him. But if any man should say that the Lions were full,
or that there was some other cause why Daniel was not torn in pieces: wherefore
then, when he was drawn forth, were the beasts straightwayes so mad that they
did tear and devour, not only one man, but a great company? Of many nobles,
none escapes safe. Then are their wives like wise cast into them, and also
their children: but the Lions could scarce be able to devour so many, and yet
every one of them perish both great and small. How then escaped Daniel? We see
that God by this comparison would make manifest his power, lest any man should
object that Daniel was forsaken of the Lions because they were now full, and did
not desire the pray: For then they would have been contented with three or
four men: but now they devour both men, women and children. Hereby then it
appears that the mouths of the Lions were bridled by God, seeing that Daniel
was safe a whole night, and they were killed as soon as they were cast into
the den: because we see again that the beasts were driven to a sudden rage
that they did not tarry till they came to the ground, but did tear them as
they were falling.

The Prayer.
Grant almighty GOD, seeing that we are created by thee and placed in this
world, and that we are also nourished by thy liberality, to this end that our
life should be consecrated unto thee: grant we beseech thee, that we may be
ready both to live and to die unto thee, and that we seek none other thing but
to maintain the pure and sincere worship of thy name. Furthermore that we may
so rest upon thine only help, that we doubt nothing to break through all
dangers, and to offer our selves to present death as often as it shall please
thee: being comforted not only with thy promise which is eternal, but by so
many experimentes which thou have given of old, that we at this day should
know thy power to be still of such force that thou will be our deliverer
howsoever it be, whether we do live or die, that yet we remaining in steadfast
faith and confession of thy name, may be blessed, whiles we be gathered in the
end into thy heavenly kingdom, which thou have purchased with the blood of
thine only begotten Son Amen.

We have seen before how the enemies of Daniel which had wickedly and cruelly
accused him through envy, as soon as they were cast into the den of Lions,
were torn in pieces, with their wives and children: whereby the miracle did
more manifestly appear, as we have said. Now therefore let us learn again
that the Lions are so governed by the power of God, that they do not exercise
their cruelty every where, nor against all men: but when God armeth the^. For
as it is said in the Psalm: Psalm. 91.13.
thou shall walk upon the Lion and Scorpion and tread upon the Lion and
Dragon. So also of the contrary part, God does pronounce upon the wicked by the
Prophet, Amos. 5.
that the Lions will come to meet them if they go out of their house. We see
then how God does swage the cruelty of the Lions when it seems good unto him:
but he stirs them up to rage when he will punish men.

And whereas the wives and their children were cast into the den, we must not
curiously dispute whether this was a just punishment or no. For it seems that
this is a certain rule of equity, that the punishment should not extend to the
giltles, especially when it stands upon the loss of life. For although at
all times this was received in well ordered Cities, that many punishments were
laid upon the children together with the parents, like as in murder and in
treason, where all the goods were publicly sold: and also in criminal
judgments the infamy of the parents did redounde unto their children: yet
this is more strait and severe, to kill the children together with their
parents, seeing they can not be gilty of the same crimes. But although this be
not very usual, yet is it not lawful for us simply to condemn it. We see how
God commands whole families to be utterly destroyed, to show how much sin
is to be detested and abhorred: and God as he is a just judge, does always keep
a measure in his severity. Therefore this example can not be precisely
condemned, but it is better to leave this at liberty. For we know that the
kings of the East part did exercise cruel and barbarous dominion or rather
tyranny toward their subjects. Therefore there is no cause why any man should
contend much about this question. It grieved king Darius that he was so
deceived. Therefore he does not execute punishment upon the wicked accusers,
only because Daniel was wickedly oppressed of them, but because they did him
injury. He would therefore rather revenge himself then Daniel: and he was not
content to recompense them with equal punishment, but he punished even their
children also.

25 Afterward king Darius wrote unto all people, nations, and languages that
dwelt in all the world: peace be multiplied unto you.

26 I make a decree, that in all the dominion of my kingdom, men tremble and
fear before the God of Daniell: for he is the living God and remains for
ever: and his kingdom shall not perish, and his dominion shall be everlasting.

27 He rescueth and delivers, and he works signs and wonders in heaven and
in earth, who has delivered Daniel from ye power of ye Lions.

Here Daniel adds the decree of the king which he caused to be published: and
by this decree and proclamation he testifies that he was so moved with the
deliverance of Daniel, that he gave the most high glory to the God of Israel.
Yet do I not think that the king is sufficiently proved hereby to be of sound
religion, as many interpreters do here commend king Darius above measure, as
though he had been wholly converted and had received the true worship prescribed
in the law of Moses. No such thing can be gathered of the words of the decree:
and the matter it self does declare, that his dominion and kingdom was never
purged from superstitions. For king Darius suffered his subjects to serve
Idols, and he himself ceased not to be polluted with such filthiness: but he
would place the God of Israel in the hiest degree, as though he could couple
together fire and water: of the which thing we have spoken before. For the
profane men think that they do their duty to the true God, if they do not
altogether contemn him, but appoint him some place: but especially when they
prefer him above all the Idols, they think that they have satisfied God. But
this is foolish. For except all superstitions be abolished, God has not his
right, for he suffers no companions. Therefore this place does not show that
there was any true or sincere Religion in king Darius: but we may only gather
hereby, that he was moved with this miracle, to this end that he should
celebrate throughout all nations that were subject unto him, the glory and name
of the God of Israel.

To conclude, as it was but a particulare motion of king Darius: so he went not
beyond this particulare affection: neither did he thoroughly acknowledge the
power and goodness of God: but took hold of that only which was before his
eyes. Therefore he could not generally know ye God of Israel, that he might give
him self to true and sincere piety: but (as I have said) he would have him to
remain among the other Gods, and to be over them: but so that he should not be
alone. But God does refuse this half worship. Therefore there is no cause why
Darius should so much be praised. Yet shall he condemn all those by his
example, which at this day do profess them selves either Catholic kings, or
Christians, or defenders of the faith, and in the mean season do not only
oppress true Religion, but also as much as in them lies, do overthrow the
whole worship of God, and would willyngly abolish his name out of the world:
exercisyng tyranny against all the godly, and establishyng wicked superstitions
thorough their cruelty. Darius shall be a worthy judge unto them: and this
decree which Daniel rehearses shall suffice to condemn all such.

Now he says: That this decree was written to all people, nations and
languages that dwelled in all the earth. We see that Darius would not only
have the power of GOD known to the people which were nere him, but he did
study to declare it far and wide. Therefore he did not only publish it in
writing thoroughout all Asia and Chaldea, but even amongst the Medes and
Persians. Albeit he never reigned in Persia: but because his son in law had
taken him into the society of the Empire, his authority did also extend so
far. And thus ought it to be understand when he says, through the whole
earth. For it is not spoken of the whole world, but of that Monarchy which was
spread almost throughout the East. For the Medes and Persians bare rule from
the Sea unto Egypt. Seeing then the Empire was so large, Daniel does not
without cause say that the decree was proclaimed throughout the earth.

Peace be multiplied unto you. We know that kings do thus faune upon their
subjects, and use gentle prefaces that they may more easily obtain their
purposes, and also that they may have them more obedient subjects. And this is
a thing that costeth them naught, to wish peace to their subjects. And in the
mean time (as I have said) by this bayte they do often times seek favor to
prepare their subjects to further bondage. By the name of peace it is well
known that a prosperous state is understand: as though he should say, I wish
you to do well and prosperously.

Afterward he adds: That a decree is made in his presence, that is to say,
that he of his authority does comman^de all his subjects: that they all do
fear and tremble before the God of Daniel. By the which fear and tremblyng he
understands nothing but reverence and worship. But thus use all profane me^
to speak, which are afraid at the naming of God. Yet it seems that he would
express that ye power of the God of Israel was evident, which ought to move
them all to reverence and worship him, and that with fear and trembling. And
this manner of speech seems to be taken of a true principle: because God is
never truly worshipped but when men are humbled and brought down. Therefore God
names him self many times terrible: not that he would drive his servants to
worship him by fear: but because (as I have said) the minds of men can never
be well prepared to due reverence, unless they fully perceive the power of
God, so that they are afraid of his judgment. But if fear only should have
place in the minds of men, he could not frame them to true holiness. For that
sentence of the Psalm Psalm. 130.
is to be considered: There is mercy with thee, that thou may be feared. God
can not therefore be rightly worshipped or feared, unless we be persuaded that
he will be entreated, and that we be sure that he will be merciful unto us. Yet
is it necessary that fear and tremblyng go before, which may humble and bring
down the pride of the flesh. This is signified by these words: That all may
fear and tremble before the God of Daniel. The king calls him the God of
Daniel, not that Daniel had made him, but because he worshipped him. We may
rightly say that Jupiter is the God of the Grecians, because he was made a God
by their foolishnes, and thereby gate his name and authority in the residue of
the world. And so Jupiter and Minerua and that multitude of the false Gods take
their names of their original.

There is an other cause why king Darius calls him the God of Daniel whom
Daniel worshipped: because he reveled him self to Daniel: as he is called the
God of Abraham, because he reveled him self unto Abraham. But to explicate
this thing more manifestly: why is he called the God of Daniel, rather then
the God of the Babylonians? Doubtless because Daniel, as he had learned by the
law of Moses, so did he worship God purely, which had made his conuenaunt with
Abraham and the holy fathers, and which had adopted the Israelites for a
peculiare people unto him self. This did therefore depend of the worship
prescribed in the law, and the worship did depend of ye covenant. Wherefore the
name of Daniel is not put here as though he had liberty to feign or imagine a
God: but because he worshipped that God that had reveled him self by his word.
Finally this manner of speech must be thus understand, that all me^ must fear
that God that has made his covenant with Abraham and his posterity, and
which has chosen that nation as a peculiar people to him self, who has
taught the manner and form of the true and right worship, and has declared it
by his law, and whom also Daniel worshipped.

Therefore let us learn to discern the true God from all Idols and men's
fantasies, if we desire to have our service and worship allowed before him. For
many imagine that they worship God which yet do wander in all kind of errors
and are not addicted to one true God. This is a wicked thing, yea it is nothing
but a profanation of true Religion so confusedly to worship God. Therefore we
must mark this difference which I have spoken of, that our minds may ever be
kept within the bounds of the word (lest we err from the true God) if so be
we covet to retain him and to follow the Religion that he allows. I say,
that we must abide within the bounds of the word, and may neither decline
hither nor thither: for we shall fall into innumerable deceites of the devil,
unless the word keep us, as it were fast bound unto it. As concerning Darius,
he did know that there was one most high God: but (as is said before) he did
not cast away his feigned and wicked Religion whereunto he was accustomed. But
such mixture of Religion is intolerable before God.

He adds: Because he is the living God and remains for ever. Here he seems
to bring all the false Gods to nothing. But (as I said) all profane men do so
lift up their minds to the most high God, that yet by and by after they vanish
away. Therefore if they did acknowledge the true God aright, they would
immediately exclude all feigned Gods. But they think it enough if God have the
first place, and in the mean season they join lesser Gods to him, that he may
lie hid as it were amongst the number, and yet have some kind of preeminence.

Such was the reason and such was the purpose of Darius: for he understood
nothing purely and sincerely of the only essence of God, but supposed the most
hye power to be in the God of Israel, how soever other nations worshipped their
Gods. So do we see that he departed not from the superstitions which he had
received in his childhode. Wherefore there is no cause why we should praise his
godlynes, save only in this particular action. Yet God does wrast forth of his
mouth a confession, wherein his nature is described unto us. He calls him the
living God, not only because he has life in him self but also of himself,
and because he is the fountain and original of life. Wherefore this adjective
must be taken actiuely, because God does not only live, but he has life also
of him self: again, he is the cause of life, because there is no life beside
him or without him.

Afterward he adds: That he remains for ever: and so does he disseuer him
from all creatures, amongst whom there is nothing stable nor steadfast. For we
do know that not only every thing which is under the heaven is subject to
chaunges, but also the heaven it self. In this point therefore does God
differ from all creatures, that he suffers no change, but is always in one
state.

He adds: That his kingdom is not corrupted, and that his domination is for
ever. Here does he more clearly express that which he spoke before of the
constant stabilitie of God, that he does not only remain in his own essence,
but that he exercises his power throughout the world, and that he governs
the world by his power and susteineth all things. For if he had said no more
but ye God remains for ever, as we are wicked, and also weak of
understanding, we should only conceive this opinion of God, that in his own
essence he is subject to no change: but his power which is spread in every
place, we should not understand. This explication then is worthy to be noted
when Darius does plainly express, that the kingdom of God is not corrupted,
but his dominion is for ever.

Again, he calls GOD the deliverer. They that take hold of this word as an
excellent, testimony of godlynes, say that Darius spoke like an Evangelist, and
that he was a preacher of Gods mercy: but (as I have said) Darius never
received generally that which the Scripture teaches, that is to say, that God
does mercyfully cherish all his and helps them, because he is merciful and
because he bestows upon them his fatherly favor. King Darius understood not
this cause. The deliverance of Daniel was known, which was a particular
document of Gods grace.

Thus did Darius only perceive in particular, that God was merciful to his
servants and ready to save and to deliver the^. But this were but a slender
matter unless ye cause were also adjoined, that God is therefore a deliverer,
because he has vouchedsafe to choose his servants and because he has
testified that he will be a father unto the^, because he is favorable and
merciful, and pardons them when they have sinned. Unless therefore that the
hope of the deliverance be grounded in the free adoption of God and in his
mercy, it will be but a particular knowledge without force. Darius then does
not here speak as one truly and purely instructed of the mercy of God, but he
only says that he is the deliverer of the^ that be his. In deed he rightly
concludes this general sentence: that God is a deliverer, because he has
delivered Daniel from the power and rage of the Lions. For of one example he
deriueth a more large doctrine, that it is in Gods power to save and to deliver
his as often as he pleases: and in the mean time, he knowledgeth the visible
power of God in one act and miracle, but he knows not the principal cause
nor the fountain, which was that God embraced Daniel like as the other
children of Abraham, and of his fatherly favor preserved him.

Wherefore that this doctrine may be profitable unto us, and may move our
minds effectually, that God is the deliverer: first let us firmly trust, that
we are received into his favor of this condition, that he will pardon us our
faults, and not treat us as we deserve, but for his infinite mercy will favor
us as children. This the^ must be remembered. Last of all he says: that God
does work miracles and wonders in heaven and in earth. This must be referred
to the Empire and dominion whereof he spoke a little before. But Darius always
does remain in the present miracle before his eyes. He had seen that Daniel
remained safe amongst the Lyo^s: he had seen al ye other torn in pieces.
These were manifest tokens of Gods power. He says therefore not without cause,
that he wrought miracles and wonders. And there is no doubt but that Darius was
admonished also of other signs and wonders which were done before that he
obtained that Monarchy. For he had heard doubtless, all that was done to the
king Nebuchadnezer, and to king Beltsazar, whom Darius himself slew to have his
kingdom. Wherefore he collecteth more testimonies of Gods power by this
occasion, that he had set forth his glory in that work when he delivered
Daniel. To conclude, if Darius had renounced his superstitions, this had been a
pure, true, and also a full confession of true religion: but because he ceased
not to worship false Gods, and did still stick to his accustomed filthynes,
therefore can not his godliness be commended, neither can a true and earnest
conversion be collected by this decree. This is the matter to be conshdered.

28 But Daniel prospered in the kingdom of Darius and in the kingdom of Cyrus
the Persian.

Here is an antithesis secretly touched betwixt the state of Daniel under the
two Monarchies, the Persians and the Chaldees. For Daniel did sometimes rise up
under Nebuchadnezer, and in the end when this Monarchy was at the point of
destruction, he began to be known again: but all that time that ye Chaldees
reigned, he was unknown and despised. All men had heard that he was an
excellent Prophet: but he was cast forth of the Court: and though he sometime
had sitten at the kings gate and was in great dignity: yet was he now and then
sent away. Wherefore so long as the Monarchy of the Chaldees endured, Daniel
was in no hie honor that lasted any space: but under the Monarchy of the
Persians and Medes he prospered and was in continual honor. For Cyrus and
Darius were not so negligent to forget how meruailously God had wrought by him.
So was he in honor not only with Darius, but also with Cyrus. And it is
evident that he left Babylon and went to some other place. Although it is not
like that he was long amongst the Medes, for Darius or Cyaxeres died shortly
after, and because he wanted an heir male, all his authority came to Cyrus
alone, who was his nephew, the son of his sister, and also his son in law
by the marriage of his daughter.

There is no doubt but that Daniel here commends the grace of God and his
favor toward him. For this was no small comfort in his banishment, that he
found such favor amongst strange and barbarous nations, and that he was in
such hie honor that all men did reverence him. God did mitigate the sorrow of
his banishment and captivity with this comfort. Again Daniel does not here
regard himself only as a private person, but the end of his honor. For God
would have his name to be renowned and praised throughout all those countries
where Daniel was well known. For no man could cast his eyes upon Daniel but the
glory and power of the God of Israel did appear. This would Daniel note. In
the mean time there is no doubt of the other side, but that the want of his
country was bitter and grievous unto him: not as it is wont to be to others,
but because the land of Canaan was the peculiar heritage of the people of God.

When Daniel therefore was carried away from thence, and afterward was carried
farther, even unto the Medes, and in the end to the Persians, so that there was
no hope of return: there is no doubt but that he mourned continually. For that
great honor that he had amongst profane men, was not so much esteemed of him,
but that he preferred that pledge of Gods favor and fatherly adoption, that is
to say, the land of Canaan. Doubtless he had that graven in his heart which was
written before by David: Psalm. 48.
I had rather to be a door keeper in the courts of the Lord, then to be in the
greatest wealth of the wicked. Again: I had rather to be in the house of God,
then to dwell in the tents of the wicked. So was Daniel taught. And Ezechiel
Ezech. 14.
does not name him in vain amongst the three most holy me^ which have been
from the beginning of the world. This was a most hie commendation that he was
joined with Job and Noah, even when he was a young man, or at the least in his
middle age, so that he should be the third in so rare and incredible holiness.
Seeing then he was such a one, there is no doubt but that he was stricken with
most grievous sorrow when he did see that he was appointed to perpetual
banishment, so that he had no hope of his return, that he might worship God in
his temple and offer sacrifices with the residue. Yet lest he should be
unthankful unto God, he would here testify that he felt Gods singular favor,
that whereas he was an exile and banished from his country, and was also
spitefully drawn away amongst other captives, he was yet honorably entreated
of ye Medes and the Persians. This is ye full meaning. For it is certain yt
Cyrus after Darius was dead (as I have said) was ye successor of ye whole
Monarchy, and we shall see afterward yt Daniel dwelt with Cyrus, who reigned
almost 30. years: and so there was a long time betwixt his death and the death
of Darius.

Wherefore this came not to pass without ye meruaylous counsel of God, that
the change of the kingdoms did not shake the state of Daniel, as it is often
seen. For new Empires (as we know) are as it were the alteration of ye world.
But Daniel stood still in his degree, that the goodness of God might be
evidently seen in him: and that whether soever he should go, he should carry
with him some testimony of Gods favor.

The Prayer.
Grant almighty God, seeing it has pleased thee to testify thy power unto us
by man that is wrapped in many errors: that we be not blind at this day in so
great a light which is offered unto us by the son of righteousness Christ
Jesus: and in the mean season also that we be not ashamed to take profit of
the words of a profane man which was not instructed in thy law, but only
admonished by one miracle did so mightily magnify thy name. Grant therefore
that we may learn by his example, not only to knowledge thee the most hie
God, but also the only God. And like as thou have bound us unto thee when thou
made thy covenant with us in the blood of thy only begotten son that we
should cleave unto thee by true faith, and so renounce all clouds of errors,
grant that we may always behold that light unto the which thou call us, and
by the which thou leadest us, whiles that we come to the contemplation of thy
glorious majesty, that we being made like unto thee, may in the end have the
full fruition of that glory which we now do only behold in part and a far
of. Amen.

Faults escaped.
In the 5. leaf of the Preface, the first page, line 9. for quite read quiet.
In the 2. leaf of the book 2. page, line 8. for Belteshar, read Beltsazar,
and in the next line for Abdenego, read Abednego, in some books.

In the 104. leaf, first page, line 30. for a shamefastnes, read that
shamefastnes.

In the 97. leaf, first page, line 18. for graund, read grant.

emblematic printer's device of John Day, featuring an old man displaying a
skeleton on an ornate tomb to a younger one; from the skeleton issues a tree;
in the background is a coastal town (McKerrow 128) ETSI MORS, INDIES ACCELERAT

VIVET TAMEN POST FVNERA VIRTUES



Imprinted at London by John Day, dwelling over Aldersgate. 1570.

These books are to be sold at his shop under the gate.


